Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem,
and the Statistical Query Model

AVRIM BLUM, ADAM KALAI, AND HAL WASSERMAN
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania


Abstract. We describe a slightly subexponential time algorithm for learning parity functions in the
presence of random classification noise, a problem closely related to several cryptographic and coding
problems. Our algorithm runs in polynomial time for the case of parity functions that depend on only
the first O(log n log log n) bits of input, which provides the first known instance of an efficient noise-
tolerant algorithm for a concept class that is not learnable in the Statistical Query model of Kearns
[1998]. Thus, we demonstrate that the set of problems learnable in the statistical query model is a
strict subset of those problems learnable in the presence of noise in the PAC model.
    In coding-theory terms, what we give is a poly(n)-time algorithm for decoding linear k × n codes
in the presence of random noise for the case of k = c log n log log n for some c > 0. (The case of
k = O(log n) is trivial since one can just individually check each of the 2k possible messages and
choose the one that yields the closest codeword.)
    A natural extension of the statistical query model is to allow queries about statistical properties that
involve t-tuples of examples, as opposed to just single examples. The second result of this article is to
show that any class of functions learnable (strongly or weakly) with t-wise queries for t = O(log n)
is also weakly learnable with standard unary queries. Hence, this natural extension to the statistical
query model does not increase the set of weakly learnable functions.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: F.2.0 [Analysis of Algorithms and Problem Complexity]:
General; G.3 [Probability and Statistics]; I.5.0 [Pattern Recognition]: General
General Terms: Algorithms, Theory
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computational learning theory, machine learning, statistical
queries


1. Introduction
An important question in the study of machine learning is: “What kinds of functions
can be learned efficiently from noisy, imperfect data?” The statistical query (SQ)
framework of Kearns [1998] was designed as a useful, elegant model for addressing
this issue. The SQ model provides a restricted interface between a learning algorithm
and its data, and has the property that any algorithm for learning in the SQ model can
automatically be converted to an algorithm for learning in the presence of random


Authors’ address: Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave.,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, e-mail: {avrim,akalai}@cs.cmu.edu; Halwass@aol.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or direct commercial
advantage and that copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the
full citation. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute
to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or
a fee. Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 1515 Broadway, New York,
NY 10036 USA, fax: +1 (212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
°C 2003 ACM 0004-5411/03/0700-0506 $5.00



Journal of the ACM, Vol. 50, No. 4, July 2003, pp. 506–519.
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                       507

classification noise in the standard PAC model. (This result has been extended to
more general forms of noise as well [Decatur 1993, 1996].) The importance of
the Statistical Query model is attested to by the fact that, before its introduction,
there were only a few provably noise-tolerant learning algorithms, whereas now it
is recognized that a large number of learning algorithms can be formulated as SQ
algorithms, and hence can automatically be made noise-tolerant.
   The importance of the SQ model has led to the open question of whether there
are problems learnable with random classification noise in the PAC model but
not learnable by statistical queries. This is especially interesting because one can
characterize information theoretically (i.e., without complexity assumptions) what
kinds of problems can be learned in the SQ model [Blum et al. 1994]. For example,
the class of parity functions, which can be learned efficiently from non-noisy data
in the PAC model, provably cannot be learned efficiently in the SQ model under
the uniform distribution. Unfortunately, no efficient non-SQ algorithm for learning
them in the presence of noise is known either (this is closely related to the problem
of decoding random linear codes [MacWilliams and Sloane 1977]).
   In this article, we describe a polynomial-time algorithm for learning the class
of parity functions that depend on only the first O(log n log log n) bits of input,
in the presence of random classification noise of a constant noise rate. This class
provably cannot be learned in the SQ model, and thus is the first known example of
a concept class learnable with noise but not via statistical queries. Our algorithm
has recently been shown to have applications to the problems of determining the
shortest lattice vector [Ajtai et al. 2001] and its length [Kumar and Sivakumar
2001], to cryptanalysis [Wagner 2002], and to various other analyses of statistical
queries [Jackson 2000].
   An equivalent way of stating this result is that we are given a random k × n {0, 1}
matrix A, as well as an n-bit vector ỹ produced by multiplying an unknown k-bit
message x by A, and then corrupting each bit of the resulting codeword y = x A with
probability η < 1/2. Our goal is to recover y in time poly(n). For this problem,
the case of k = O(log n) is trivial because one could simply try each of the 2k
possible messages and output the nearest codeword found. Our algorithm works
for k = c log n log log n for some c > 0. The algorithm does not actually need A
to be random, so long as the noise is random and there is no other codeword within
distance o(n) from the true codeword y.
   Our algorithm can also be viewed as a slightly subexponential time algorithm for
learning arbitrary parity functions in the presence of noise. For this problem, the
brute-force algorithm would draw O(n) labeled examples, and then search through
all 2n parity functions to find the one of least empirical error. (A standard argument
can be used to say that with high probability, the correct function will have the lowest
empirical error [Angluin and Laird 1988].) In contrast, our algorithm runs in time
2 O(n/ log n) , though it also requires 2 O(n/ log n) labeled examples. This improvement
is small but nonetheless sufficient to achieve the desired separation result.
   Our algorithms, unfortunately, do not have polynomial dependence on 1/
(1/2 − η). An open problem left by our work is whether these results can be
extended to high noise rates such as η = 1/2 − 1/n.
   The second result of this article concerns a k-wise version of the Statistical Query
model. In the standard version, algorithms may only ask about statistical properties
of single examples (e.g., what is the probability that a random example is labeled
positive and has its first bit equal to 1?) In the k-wise version, algorithms may
508                                                                    A. BLUM ET AL.


ask about properties of k-tuples of examples (e.g., what is the probability that two
random examples have an even dot-product and have the same label?) Given the
first result of this article, it is natural to ask whether allowing k-wise queries, for
some small value of k, might increase the set of SQ-learnable functions. What we
show is that for k = O(log n), any concept class learnable from k-wise queries
is also (weakly) learnable from unary queries. Thus, the seeming generalization
of the SQ model to allow for O(log n)-wise queries does not close the gap we
have demonstrated between what is efficiently learnable in the SQ and noisy-PAC
models. Note that this result is the best possible with respect to k because the results
of Blum et al. [1994] imply that for k = ω(log n), there are concept classes learnable
from k-wise queries but not unary queries. On the other hand, ω(log n)-wise queries
are in a sense less interesting because it is not clear whether they can in general be
simulated in the presence of noise.
   1.1. MAIN IDEAS. The standard way to learn parity functions without noise is
based on the fact that if an example can be written as a sum (mod 2) of previously
seen examples, then its label must be the sum (mod 2) of those examples’ labels
[Helmbold et al. 1992]. So, once one has found a basis, one can use that to deduce
the label of any new example (or, equivalently, use Gaussian elimination to produce
the target function itself).
   In the presence of noise, this method breaks down. If the original data had noise
rate 1/4, say, then the sum of s labels has noise rate 1/2 − (1/2)s+1 . This means we
can add together only O(log n) examples if we want the resulting sum to be correct
with probability 1/2 + 1/poly(n). Thus, if we want to use this kind of approach,
we need some way to write a new test example as a sum of only a small number of
training examples.
   Let us now consider the case of parity functions that depend on only the first
k = log n log log n bits of input. Equivalently, we can think of all examples as
having the remaining n − k bits equal to 0. Gaussian elimination will in this case
allow us to write our test example as a sum of k training examples, which is too
many. Our algorithm will instead write it as a sum of k/ log k = O(log n) examples,
which gives us the desired noticeable bias (that can then be amplified).
   Notice that if we have seen poly(n) training examples (and, say, each one was cho-
sen uniformly at random), we can argue existentially that for k = c log n log log n,
one should be able to write any new example as a sum of just O(log log n) training
examples, since there are n Ä(log log n) À 2k subsets of this size and these sub-
sets are pairwise independent. So, while our algorithm is finding a smaller subset
than Gaussian elimination, it is not doing best possible. If one could achieve, say,
a constant-factor approximation to the problem “given a set of vectors, find the
smallest subset that sums to a given target vector” then this would improve the
value of k we can handle in polynomial time from O(log n log log n) to O(log2 n).
Equivalently,
    √
                this would allow one to learn parity functions over n bits in time
2 O( n) , compared to the 2 O(n/ log n) time of our algorithm.


2. Definitions and Preliminaries
A concept is a boolean function on an input space, which in this article will gen-
erally be {0, 1}n . We will be considering the problem of learning a target concept
in the presence of random classification noise [Angluin and Laird 1988]. In this
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                                      509

model, there is some fixed (known or unknown) noise rate η < 1/2, a fixed (known
or unknown) probability distribution D over {0, 1}n , and an unknown target con-
cept c. The learning algorithm may repeatedly “press a button” to request a labeled
example. When it does so, it receives a pair (x, `), where x is chosen from {0, 1}n
according to D and ` is the value c(x), but “flipped” with probability η. That is,
` = c(x) with probability 1 − η, and ` = 1 − c(x) with probability η. The goal of
the learning algorithm is to find an ²-approximation of c: a hypothesis function h
such that Prx←D [h(x) = c(x)] ≥ 1 − ².
   A concept class is a set of concepts. We say that a concept class C is efficiently
learnable in the presence of random classification noise under distribution D if
there exists an algorithm A such that for any ² > 0, δ > 0, η < 1/2, and any
target concept c ∈ C, the algorithm A with probability at least 1 − δ produces an
²-approximation of c when given access to D-random examples which have been
labeled by c and corrupted by noise of rate η. Furthermore, A must run in time
polynomial in n, 1/², and 1/δ.1
   A parity function c is defined by a corresponding vector c ∈ {0, 1}n ; the parity
function is then given by the rule c(x) = x · c (mod 2). We say that c depends
on only the first k bits of input if all nonzero components of c lie in its first k
bits. So, in particular, there are 2k distinct parity functions that depend on only the
first k bits of input. Parity functions are especially interesting to consider under the
uniform distribution D, because under that distribution parity functions are pairwise
uncorrelated.

   2.1. THE STATISTICAL QUERY MODEL. The Statistical Query (SQ) model can
be viewed as providing a restricted interface between the learning algorithm and the
source of labeled examples. In this model, the learning algorithm may only receive
information about the target concept through statistical queries. A statistical query
is a query about some property Q of labeled examples (e.g., that the first two bits are
equal and the label is positive), along with a tolerance parameter τ ∈ [0, 1]. When
the algorithm asks a statistical query (Q, τ ), it is asking for the probability that
predicate Q holds true for a random correctly labeled example, and it receives an
approximation of this probability up to ±τ . In other words, the algorithm receives a
response P̂ Q ∈ [PQ −τ, PQ +τ ], where PQ = Prx←D [Q(x, c(x))]. We also require
each query Q to be polynomially evaluable (i.e., given (x, `), we can compute
Q(x, `) in polynomial time).
   Notice that a statistical query can be simulated by drawing a large sample of
noiseless data and computing an empirical average, where the size of the sample
would be roughly O(1/τ 2 ) if we wanted to assure an accuracy of τ with high
probability.
   A concept class C is learnable from statistical queries with respect to distribution
D if there is a learning algorithm A such that for any c ∈ C and any ² > 0, A
produces an ²-approximation of c from statistical queries; furthermore, the running
time, the number of queries asked, and the inverse of the smallest tolerance used
must be polynomial in n and 1/².

1
  Typically, one would also require polynomial dependence on 1/(1/2 − η)—in part because typically
this is easy to achieve (e.g., it is achieved by any statistical query algorithm). Our algorithms run in
polynomial time for any fixed η < 1/2, but have a super-polynomial dependence on 1/(1/2 − η).
510                                                                     A. BLUM ET AL.


   We also want to talk about weak learning. An algorithm A weakly learns a
concept class C if for any c ∈ C and for some ² < 1/2 − 1/poly(n), A produces
an ²-approximation of c. That is, an algorithm weakly learns if it can do noticeably
better than guessing.
   The statistical query model is defined with respect to nonnoisy data. However,
statistical queries can be simulated from data corrupted by random classification
noise [Kearns 1998]. Thus, any concept class learnable from statistical queries is
also PAC-learnable in the presence of random classification noise. There are several
variants to the formulation given above that improve the efficiency of the simulation
[Aslam and Decatur 1998a, 1998b], but they are all polynomially related.
   One technical point: we have defined statistical query learnability in the “known
distribution” setting (algorithm A knows distribution D); in the “unknown dis-
tribution” setting, A is allowed to ask for random unlabeled examples from the
distribution D. This prevents certain trivial exclusions from what is learnable from
statistical queries.

   2.2. AN INFORMATION-THEORETIC CHARACTERIZATION. It is proven in [Blum
et al. 1994] that any concept class containing more than polynomially many pairwise
uncorrelated functions cannot be learned even weakly in the statistical query model.
Specifically,
   Definition 1 [Blum et al. 1994, Def. 2]. For concept class C and distribution
D, the statistical query dimension SQ-DIM(C, D) is the largest number d such that
C contains d concepts c1 , . . . , cd that are nearly pairwise uncorrelated: specifically,
for all i 6= j,
                 ¯                                               ¯
                 ¯ Pr [ci (x) = c j (x)] − Pr [ci (x) 6= c j (x)]¯ ≤ 1 .
                   x←D                       x←D                     d3
   THEOREM 1 [BLUM ET AL. 1994, THM. 12]. In order to learn C to error less
than 1/2 − 1/d 3 in the SQ model, where d = SQ-DIM(C, D), either the number of
queries or 1/τ must be at least 12 d 1/3 .
   Note that the class of parity functions over {0, 1}n that depend on only the first
O(log n log log n) bits of input contains n O(log log n) functions, all pairs of which
are uncorrelated with respect to the uniform distribution. Thus, this class cannot
be learned (even weakly) in the SQ model with polynomially many queries of
1/poly(n) tolerance. But we now show that there nevertheless exists a polynomial-
time PAC-algorithm for learning this class in the presence of random classification
noise.

3. Learning Parity with Noise
  3.1. LEARNING OVER THE UNIFORM DISTRIBUTION. For ease of notation, we
use the “length-k parity problem” to denote the problem of learning a parity function
over {0, 1}k , under the uniform distribution, in the presence of random classification
noise of rate η.
   THEOREM 2. Let a and b be positive integers such that ab ≥ k. Then the
length-k parity
              a
                  problem can be solved with sample-size and total computation time
         1
poly(( 1−2η )2 , 2b ).
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                          511

   COROLLARY 3. The length-k parity problem, for noise rate η equal to any
constant less than 1/2, can be solved with sample-size and total computation-time
2 O(k/ log k) .
   PROOF. Plugging in a = 12 log k and b = 2k/ log k into Theorem 2 yields the
desired 2 O(k/ log k) bound for constant noise rate η.
   Thus, in the presence of noise we can learn parity functions over {0, 1}n in time
and sample size 2 O(n/ log n) , and we can learn parity functions over {0, 1}n that only
depend on the first k = O(log n log log n) bits of the input in time and sample size
poly(n).
   We begin our proof of Theorem 2 with a simple lemma about how noise becomes
amplified when examples are added together. For convenience, if x1 and x2 are
examples, we let x1 + x2 denote the vector sum mod 2; similarly, if `1 and `2 are
labels, we let `1 + `2 denote their sum mod 2.
  LEMMA 4. Let (x1 , `1 ), . . . , (xs , `s ) be examples labeled by c and corrupted by
random noise of rate η. Then `1 + · · · + `s is the correct value of (x1 + · · · + xs ) · c
with probability 12 + 12 (1 − 2η)s .

  PROOF. Clearly true when s = 1. Now assume that the lemma is true for s − 1.
Then the probability that `1 + · · · + `s = (x1 + · · · + xs ) · c is
          µ                     ¶      µ                      ¶
            1 1                           1 1                         1 1
  (1 − η)     + (1 − 2η)    s−1
                                   +η      − (1 − 2η)     s−1
                                                                  = + (1 − 2η)s .
            2 2                           2 2                         2 2
The lemma then follows by induction.
   The idea for the algorithm is that, by drawing many more examples than the
minimum needed to learn information-theoretically, we will be able to write basis
vectors such as (1, 0, . . . , 0) as the sum of a relatively small number of training
examples—substantially smaller than the number that would result from straight-
forward Gaussian elimination. In particular, for the length O(log n log log n) parity
problem, we will be able to write (1, 0, . . . , 0) as the sum of only O(log n) ex-
amples. By Lemma 4, this means that, for any constant noise rate η < 1/2, the
corresponding sum of labels will be polynomially distinguishable from random.
Hence, by repeating this process as needed to boost reliability, we may determine
the correct label for (1, 0, . . . , 0), which is equivalently the first bit of the target
vector c. This process can be further repeated to determine the remaining bits of c,
allowing us to recover the entire target concept with high probability.
   To describe the algorithm for the length-k parity problem, it will be convenient
to view each example as consisting of a blocks, each b bits long (so, k = ab) where
a and b will be chosen later. We then introduce the following notation.
  Definition 2. Let Vi be the subspace of {0, 1}ab consisting of those vectors
whose last i blocks have all bits equal to zero. An i-sample of size s is a set of s
vectors independently and uniformly distributed over Vi .
   The goal of our algorithm will be to use labeled examples from {0, 1}ab (these
form a 0-sample) to create an i-sample such that each vector in the i-sample can be
written as a sum of at most 2i of the original examples, for all i = 1, 2, . . . , a − 1.
We attain this goal via the following lemma.
512                                                                            A. BLUM ET AL.


   LEMMA 5. Assume we are given an i-sample of size s. We can in time O(s)
construct an (i + 1)-sample of size at least s − 2b such that each vector in the
(i + 1)-sample is written as the sum of two vectors in the given i-sample.

     PROOF. Let the i-sample be x1 , . . . , xs . In these vectors, blocks a −i +1, . . . , a
are all zero. Partition x 1 , . . . , xs based on their values in block a − i. This results in
a partition having at most 2b classes. From each nonempty class p, pick one vector
x j p at random and add it to each of the other vectors in its class; then discard x j p .
The result is a collection of vectors u 1 , . . . , u s 0 , where s 0 ≥ s − 2b (since we discard
at most one vector per class).
     What can we say about u 1 , . . . , u s 0 ? First of all, each u j is formed by summing
two vectors in Vi which have identical components throughout block a −i, “zeroing
out” that block. Therefore, u j is in Vi+1 . Second, each u j is formed by taking some
x j p and adding to it a random vector in Vi , subject only to the condition that the
random vector agrees with x j p on block a − i. Therefore, each u j is an independent,
uniform-random member of Vi+1 . The vectors u 1 , . . . , u s 0 thus form the desired
(i + 1)-sample.
   Using this lemma, we can now prove our main theorem.
   PROOF OF THEOREM 2. Draw a2b labeled examples. Observe that these qualify
as a 0-sample. Now apply Lemma 5, a−1 times, to construct an (a−1)-sample. This
(a − 1)-sample will have size at least 2b . Recall that the vectors in an (a − 1)-sample
are distributed independently and uniformly at random over Va−1 , and notice that
Va−1 contains only 2b distinct vectors, one of which is (1, 0, . . . , 0). Hence, there
is at least a 1 − 1/e chance that (1, 0, . . . , 0) appears in our (a − 1)-sample. If this
does not occur, we repeat the above process with new labeled examples. Note that
the expected2 number of repetitions is constant (it is at most 1/(1 − 1/e)).
   Now, unrolling our applications of Lemma 5, observe that we have written the
vector (1, 0, . . . , 0) as the sum of at most 2a−1 of our labeled examples—and we
have done so without examining their labels. Thus, the label noise is still random,
and we can apply Lemma 4. Hence, the sum of the labels gives us the correct value
                                                                    a−1
of (1, 0, . . . , 0) · c with probability at least 12 + 12 (1 − 2η)2 .
   We can amplify our success probability by repeating the above process using new
                                                                                     a
labeled examples each time and taking majority vote. If we do this poly(( 1−2η  1
                                                                                   )2 , b)
times, Hoeffding bounds guarantee that we will determine (1, 0, . . . , 0) · c with
probability of error exponentially small in ab. This gives us the first bit of c. By
cyclically shifting all examples, we can use the same method to find every bit
of c. Since we use a2b samples per round, this means that with high probabil-
ity we can determine c using a number of examples and total computation-time
                 a
         1
poly(( 1−2η   )2 , 2b ).
   3.2. EXTENSION TO OTHER DISTRIBUTIONS. While the uniform distribution is
in this case the most interesting, we can extend our algorithm to work over any
distribution, just as parity without noise can be learned for an arbitrary distribution
[Helmbold et al. 1992]. We give two methods: the first follows the same lines as

2
 Standard techniques can be used to convert an algorithm with polynomial expected runtime into one
with polynomial runtime that works with high probability.
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                     513

the uniform distribution algorithm above; the second views learning as an online
process and gives a mistake-bounded algorithm.
   3.2.1. Version 1: Pairing Similar Examples. In the case of the uniform distri-
bution, we were able to write the vector (1, 0, 0, . . . , 0) as the sum of at most 2a
labeled examples, where each k-bit example was divided into a blocks of width
b. We repeated that process several times and took majority vote. Here, we cannot
necessarily do that—for instance, it could be that all examples in the support of our
distribution D have a 0 in the first coordinate.
   Instead, with high probability, we are able to write a random vector from D
as the sum of at most 2a vectors. Again, we do this repeatedly and take majority
vote. This will allow us to generate a polynomial-size noiseless data set from D
and use standard noiseless parity learning algorithms. Note that, in the noiseless
case, one cannot always find the exact parity function since the function might be
underdetermined. Instead, one finds a parity function that agrees with all of the
training data, and with high probability this will be correct on nearly all of D.
   The basic primitive is similar: we repeatedly write an example as the sum of at
most 2a labeled examples.
   LEMMA 6. Given an example x drawn from D and m additional examples also
from D, with probability at least 1 − a2a+b /m, we can write x as the sum of at most
2a of the labeled examples, in time poly(m, k).
  PROOF. First, let the multiset S be the union of {x} with the additional random
examples. As above, we think of each k-bit example as divided into a blocks of
width b. Do the following:
(1) Pick two examples from S that agree on their last nonzero block.
(2) Remove these two examples from S and replace them by their sum.
(3) Repeat until there are no more such pairs.
   When the above procedure halts, we will have a number of 0 vectors and at
most a(2b − 1) other vectors, because there can be at most one vector for each of
the 2b − 1 possible nonzero blocks in a positions. Each vector will be the sum of
at most 2a original examples because the “tree” of additions producing any given
vector has depth at most a. Thus, all but at most a2a+b examples will be in sets of
size at most 2a that sum to 0. Any example in one of the sets that sum to 0 can be
written as the sum of the remaining ≤2a − 1 examples. Since we included x as a
random member of S, by symmetry the probability that x is not written as the sum
of ≤2a − 1 examples is at most 1 − a2a+b /m.
   Note that if we wanted to be slightly more efficient and more similar to the
previous section, we could group the examples into equivalence classes in Step (1)
and subtract a single example from all the others in its class. However, the above
lemma is enough to show,
   THEOREM 7. The length-k parity problem over an arbitrary distribution D,
for constant noise rate η < 1/2, can be solved with number of samples and total
computation-time 2 O(k/ log k) .
  PROOF. We use a standard noiseless parity learning algorithm that with prob-
ability 1 − δ/3 returns a parity function that is correct to within 1 − ² over D.
Suppose this algorithm requires t = poly(k, 1/², 1/δ) examples.
514                                                                      A. BLUM ET AL.


  We draw t unlabeled examples and s noisy data sets of size m. By the above
lemma, with probability at least 1−(st)a2a+b /m, we can write each of the unlabeled
examples as the sum of at most 2a noisy examples from each of the s data sets.
Thus, we succeed in doing this with probability at least 1 − δ/3, provided that
                                     3(st)a2a+b
                                   m≥           .
                                          δ
Now, consider a single unlabeled example. We decide its label by majority vote over
the s independent ways we have of representing it as a sum of at most 2a examples.
                                                                                  a
By Lemma 4, each one will be correct with probability at least 12 + 12 (1 − 2η)2 .
By Chernoff bounds, our majority will be correct with probability at least 1 − 3tδ ,
provided that
                                             2t
                                           3 log
                                   s≥        δ .
                                      (1 − 2η)2a+1
Thus, for the above m and s, our probability of being off by more than ² is at
most δ/3 + δ/3 + tδ/(3t) = δ, where the three terms are for the failure of parity
learner, failure to write some example as sum of 2a noisy examples, and the failure of
majority to be correct on some example. Again, using a = 12 log k and b = 2k/ log k
gives s, m in poly(1/², 1/δ, 2k/ log k ) for constant noise rate η.
   3.2.2. Version 2: Online Block Gaussian Elimination. We now give an alterna-
tive proof that requires a bit more notation, but is in some sense cleaner because it
works in the online mistake-bound setting [Littlestone 1988, 1989]. That is, we dis-
pense with the distribution altogether, and allow an adversary to present the learner
with an arbitrary sequence of examples, one at a time. Given a new test example,
the algorithm will output either “I don’t know” or a prediction of the label. In the
former case, the algorithm is told the correct label, flipped with probability η. The
claim is that the algorithm will, with high probability, be correct in all its predic-
tions, and furthermore will output “I don’t know” only a small fraction of the time.
In the coding-theoretic view, this corresponds to producing a 1 − o(1) fraction of
the desired codeword, where the remaining entries are left blank. This allows us to
recover the full codeword so long as no other codeword is within relative distance
o(1).
   The algorithm is essentially a form of Gaussian elimination, but where each entry
in the matrix is an element of the vector space Fb2 rather than an element of the field
F2 (again k = ab). We will form a matrix M with a process to be described later,
but it will have the following properties. Let x[ j] denote the jth block of vector x,
so x has length ab and x[ j] has length b. The matrix M has rows Mi,v indexed by
two parameters, 1 ≤ i ≤ a and v ∈ {0, 1}b , where Mi,v is a length ab vector with
the properties:
           Mi,v [ j] = 0   for    j = 1, 2, . . . , i − 1,   and   Mi,v [i] = v
Once we have such an M, given any vector x, we can write it as the sum of examples
from M as follows. Let x0 = x and
                                 xi = xi−1 + Mi,xi−1 [i] ,                          (1)
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                                 515

for 1 ≤ i ≤ a, so that xa = 0. Unravelling, we have written x as the sum of a
vectors from M. Notice that xi has all 0’s for the first i blocks.
   Instead of forming a single matrix M, we form N such matrices, M (1) , M (2) , . . . ,
   (N )
M , as follows. Each matrix begins empty. For each new example x we get, we
try to write x as the sum of elements of matrix M (1) according to Eq. (1). If we fail,
                                              (1)
this means that for some 1 ≤ i ≤ a, Mi,x         i−1 [i]
                                                         is still empty in M (1) . In this case, we
use xi−1 to fill in that entry in the matrix, which is valid because xi−1 has 0’s for
the first i − 1 blocks.
   If we are successful in writing x as the sum of entries from M (1) , we apply the
same to M (2) , M (3) , . . . , M (N ) stopping as soon as we find a matrix for which we
cannot do our Gaussian elimination and outputting “I don’t know.” If we do not
stop, then we will successfully have written x as the sum of exactly a entries from
each of the matrices. Note that each matrix element Mi,v is in turn the sum of at
most 2i−1 examples that we have seen so far. Therefore, we choose the label of x
according to the sum of the labels corresponding to these examples (which we can
simply store along with Mi,v ), and output the majority vote over all N sums. By
doing this, we observe the following:
   LEMMA 8. The following hold for the above procedure:
(1) “I don’t know” is output at most N a2b times.
(2) The probability of ever erring on a prediction is at most:
                                    µ                   ¶
                                        N          2a+1
                              2 exp − (1 − 2η)
                               k
                                                          .
                                        2
   PROOF. Every time we output “I don’t know,” we fill in one matrix entry, and
each of the N matrices has a2b entries Mi,v because there are a possibilities for i
and 2b possibilities for v.
   Now, suppose we make a prediction on some example x. Then we have written x
as the sum of a entries from each matrix, with one entry for each 1 ≤ i ≤ a. Since
each Mi,v is the sum of at most 2i−1 previous examples, we have written x as the
sum of at most 2a entries N times and taken a majority. By Lemma 4, each sum is a
                                                    a
correct prediction with probability 12 + 12 (1−2η)2 . Thus the majority of N of these,
                                                                                      a+1
by Chernoff bounds, is incorrect with probability at most exp(− N2 (1 − 2η)2 ).
Finally, there are only 2k different possible x’s. All predictions for the same x will
be the same. This gives the quantity in the lemma.                                     √
   Again, choosing a = 12 log k and b = 2k/ log k allows us to have N = 2 O( k)
log 1δ and have no errors with probability at least 1 − δ. However, we would say “I
don’t know” up to N a2b = 2 O(k/ log k) log 1δ times. Thus, the number of examples
we need in order to give a correct answer on a 1 − ² fraction is 2 O(k/ log k) ( 1² log 1δ ).

4. Limits of O(log n)-wise Queries
We return to the general problem of learning a target concept c over a space of
examples with a fixed distribution D. A limitation of the statistical query model
is that it permits only what may be called unary queries. That is, an SQ algo-
rithm can access c only by requesting approximations of probabilities of form
Prx [Q(x, c(x))], where x is D-random and Q is a polynomially evaluable predi-
cate. A natural question is whether problems not learnable from such queries can
516                                                                                A. BLUM ET AL.


be learned, for example, from binary queries: that is, from probabilities of form
Prx1 ,x2 [Q(x1 , x2 , c(x1 ), c(x2 ))]. The following theorem demonstrates that this is
not possible, proving that O(log n)-wise queries are no better than unary queries,
at least with respect to weak-learning.
   We assume in the discussion below that all algorithms also have access to indi-
vidual unlabeled examples from distribution D, as is usual in the SQ model. Also,
for a k-tuple of examples xE = x1 , x2 , . . . , xk , let c(Ex ) = (c(x1 ), c(x2 ), . . . , c(xk )).
   THEOREM 9. Let k = O(log n), and assume that there exists a poly(n)-time al-
gorithm using k-wise statistical queries that weakly learns a concept class C under
distribution D. That is, this algorithm learns from approximations of probabilities
of form PrxE [Q(Ex , c(Ex ))], where Q is a polynomially evaluable predicate, and xE is a
k-tuple of examples. Then there exists a poly(n)-time algorithm that weakly learns
the same class using only unary queries, under D.
   PROOF. We consider each k-wise query Q(Ex , c(Ex )) employed by the original
algorithm. We will argue that either we can approximate it to within the required
accuracy τ , or we can weak learn c to within error 1/2 − ², where ² = τ/2k+2 .
The first thing our algorithm will do is use Q to construct several candidate weak
hypotheses. It then uses unary statistical queries to test whether each of these
hypotheses is in fact noticeably correlated with the target. If none of them appear
to be good, it uses this fact to estimate the value of the k-wise query. We prove that
for any k-wise query, with high probability we either succeed in finding a weak
hypothesis or we output a good estimate of the k-wise query. In either case, we
succeed in our goal of weakly learning c using only unary queries.
   Without loss of generality, let us assume that Prx [c(x) = 1] ∈ [1/2 − ², 1/2 + ²].
Otherwise, weak-learning is easy by just predicting all examples are positive or
all examples are negative. This assumption implies that if a hypothesis h satisfies
|Prx [h(x) = 1 ∧ c(x) = 1] − 12 Prx [h(x) = 1]| ≥ ², then either h(x) or 1 − h(x) is
a weak hypothesis. To see this, the error of h(x) is,
Prx [h(x) 6= c(x)] = Prx [c(x) = 1] + Prx [h(x) = 1] − 2Prx [h(x) = 1 ∧ c(x) = 1].
The first term in the right-hand side is in [1/2 − ², 1/2 + ²] while the rest of the
right-hand side has absolute value at least 2², giving an error 6∈ [1/2 − ², 1/2 + ²],
so h or 1 − h is a weak hypothesis.
   For conciseness, we use the following notational shortcuts, where x is an example
and Ez = z 1 , . . . , z k is a k-tuple of examples:
                                   Ez a...b = z a , z a+1 , . . . , z b
                                       Ez xi = z 1...i−1 , x, z i+1...k .
   We now generate a set of candidate hypotheses by choosing one random k-tuple
of unlabeled examples Ez . For each 1 ≤ i ≤ k and È ∈ {0, 1}k , we define candidate
hypotheses h Ez ,i, È as follows:
                       h Ez ,i, È(x) = 1   if    Q(Ez xi , È), 0    otherwise,
and then use a unary statistical query to tell if h Ez ,i, È(x) or 1 − h Ez ,i, È(x) is a successful
weak hypothesis for c. As noted above, we will have found a weak hypothesis if
                ¯                                                        ¯
                ¯ £                         ¤ 1 £                       ¤¯
                ¯Prx Q(Ez x , È) ∧ c(x) = 1 − Prx Q(Ez x , È) ¯ ≥ ².
                ¯         i
                                                  2                i     ¯
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                                  517

In this case, we say the ith coordinate matters. We repeat this process for O(1/²)
randomly chosen k-tuples Ez . We now consider two cases.
   Case I. Suppose that the ith coordinate matters to the k-wise query Q for some
i and È. By this, we mean there is at least an ² chance of the above inequality
holding for random Ez . Then, with high probability, we will discover such a Ez and
thus weak learn.
   Case II. Suppose, on the contrary, that for no i or È does the ith coordinate
matter, that is, the probability of a random z satisfying the above inequality is less
than ². This means that
                 ·¯                                               ¯¸
                  ¯ £                       ¤ 1 £                ¤¯
             EEz ¯Prx Q(Ez i , ) ∧ c(x) = 1 − Prx Q(Ez i , ) ¯¯ < 2².
                  ¯        x  È                           x  È                   (2)
                                                2
Consider the following quantity for any bE ∈ {0, 1}i−1 :
    ·¯                                                                                   ¯¸
     ¯ £                                        ¤ 1 £                                   ¤¯
 EEz ¯Prx Q(Ez xi , ) ∧ c(Ez 1...i−1 , x) = b, 1 − Prx Q(Ez xi , ) ∧ c(Ez 1...i−1 ) = b ¯¯ .
     ¯             È                       E                   È                    E
                                                  2
We can see that the above quantity is smaller than the left-hand side of (2) and
thus less than 2² by considering it as an average over various Ez . For those Ez
                           E the terms are the same, and for the rest of the terms,
for which c(Ez 1...i−1 ) = b,
the above quantity is 0. Next, because |E[R]| ≤ E[|R|] for any random variable R,
                      ¯ ·
                      ¯       £                                        ¤
                      ¯EEz Prx Q(Ez x , È) ∧ c(Ez 1...i−1 , x) = b,
                                                                   E 1
                      ¯             i
                                                                    ¸¯
                           1 £                                     ¤ ¯
                         − Prx Q(Ez xi , ) ∧ c(Ez 1...i−1 ) = b ¯¯ < 2².
                                           È                    E
                           2
Since z i and x are from the same distribution,
     ¯                                                                                ¯
     ¯                                        1                                       ¯
     ¯PrEz [Q(Ez , È) ∧ c(Ez 1...i ) = b,                                         E ¯ < 2².
                                        E 1] − PrEz [Q(Ez , È) ∧ c(Ez 1...i−1 ) = b]
     ¯                                        2                                       ¯

By a straightforward inductive argument on i, we conclude that for every bE ∈ {0, 1}k ,
           ¯                                                   ¯     µ       ¶
           ¯                                                   ¯
                                        E − 1 PrEz [Q(Ez , È)]¯ < 4² 1 − 1 .
           ¯PrEz [Q(Ez , È) ∧ c(Ez ) = b]
           ¯                                2k                 ¯          2k
This fact now allows us to estimate our desired k-wise query PrEz [Q(Ez , c(Ez ))]. In
particular,
                                        X
                PrEz [Q(Ez , c(Ez ))] =   PrEz [Q(Ez , È) ∧ c(Ez ) = È].
                                         È∈{0,1}k

We approximate each of the 2k = poly(n) terms corresponding to a different È by us-
ing unlabeled data to estimate 21k PrEz [Q(Ez , È)]. Adding up these terms gives us a good
estimate of PrEz [Q(Ez , c(Ez ))] for the chosen ² = τ/2k+2 , with high probability.
  4.1. DISCUSSION. In the above proof, we saw that either the data is statistically
“homogeneous” in a way that allows us to simulate the original learning algorithm
with unary queries, or else we discover a “heterogeneous” region that we can exploit
with an alternative learning algorithm using only unary queries. Thus any concept
518                                                                     A. BLUM ET AL.


class that can be learned from O(log n)-wise queries can also be weakly learned
from unary queries. Note that Aslam and Decatur [1998a] have shown that weak-
learning statistical query algorithms can be boosted to strong-learning algorithms,
if they weak-learn over every distribution. Thus, any concept class which can be
(weakly or strongly) learned from O(log n)-wise queries over every distribution
can be strongly learned over every distribution from unary queries.
    It is worth noting here that k-wise queries can be used to solve the length-k parity
problem. One simply asks, for each i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, the query: “what is the probabil-
ity that k random examples form a basis for {0, 1}k and, upon performing Gaussian
elimination, yield a target concept whose ith bit is equal to 1?” Thus, k-wise
queries cannot be reduced to unary queries for k = ω(log n). On the other hand,
it is not at all clear how to simulate such queries in general from noisy examples.


5. Conclusion
In this article, we demonstrate a separation between the set of problems efficiently
learnable from noisy data, and the set of problems learnable in the Statistical Query
model. We do this by producing a slightly sub-exponential time algorithm for
learning parity functions in the presence of random noise. By scaling down the size
of the functions, we get a specific parity problem that can be PAC-learned from
noisy data in time poly(n), as compared to time n Ä(log log n) for the best SQ algorithm.
Even though this separation is small, it suggests the possibility of interesting new
noise-tolerant PAC-learning algorithms which go beyond the SQ model.
   Corollary 3 demonstrates that we can solve the length-n parity learning problem
in time 2o(n) . However, it must be emphasized that we accomplish this by using
2 O(n/ log n) labeled examples. From the point of view of coding theory, it would be
useful to have an algorithm that takes time 2o(n) but uses only poly(n) or even O(n)
examples. We do not know if this can be done. Also of interest is the√ question of
whether our time-bound can be improved from 2 O(n/ log n) to, say, 2 O( n ) .
   It would also be desirable to reduce our algorithm’s dependence on η. The
dependence comes from Lemma 4, with s = 2a−1 . For instance, consider the
problem of learning parity functions that depend on the first k bits of input for
k = O(log n log log n). In this case, if we set a = d 12 log log ne and b = O(log n)
in Theorem
        √        2, the running time is polynomial in n, with dependence
                                                                     √           on η of
    1
( 1−2η ) log n . This allows us to handle η as large as 1/2 − 2− log n and still have
polynomial running time. While this can be improved slightly, we do not know
how to solve the length-O(log n log log n) parity problem in polynomial time for η
as large as 1/2 − 1/n or even 1/2 − 1/n ε . What makes this interesting is that it is
an open question (Kearns, personal communication) whether noise tolerance can
in general be boosted; this example suggests why such a result may be nontrivial.
   In the second half of this article, we examine an extension to the SQ model in
which one is allowed queries of arity k. We have shown that for k = O(log n), any
concept class learnable in the SQ model with k-wise queries is also (weakly) learn-
able with unary queries. On the other hand, the results of Blum et al. [1994] imply
this is not the case for k = ω(log n). An interesting open question is whether every
concept class learnable from O(log n log log n)-wise queries is also PAC-learnable
in the presence of classification noise. If so, then this would be a generalization of
the first result of this paper.
Noise-Tolerant Learning, the Parity Problem, and the SQ Model                                               519

REFERENCES
AJTAI, M., KUMAR, R., AND SIVAKUMAR, D. 2001. A sieve algorithm for the shortest lattice vector
  problem. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM, New York.
ANGLUIN, D., AND LAIRD, P. 1988. Learning from noisy examples. Mach. Learn. 2, 4, 343–370.
ASLAM, J. A., AND DECATUR, S. E. 1998a. General bounds on statistical query learning and PAC learning
  with noise via hypothesis boosting. Inf. Comput. 141, 2 (Mar.), 85–118.
ASLAM, J. A., AND DECATUR, S. E. 1998b. Specification and simulation of statistical query algorithms
  for efficiency and noise tolerance. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 56, 2 (Apr.), 191–208.
BLUM, A., FURST, M., JACKSON, J., KEARNS, M., MANSOUR, Y., AND RUDICH, S. 1994. Weakly learning
  DNF and characterizing statistical query learning using fourier analysis. In Proceedings of the 26th
  Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (May). ACM New York, pp. 253–262.
DECATUR, S. E. 1993. Statistical queries and faulty PAC oracles. In Proceedings of the 6th Annual ACM
  Workshop on Computational Learning Theory. ACM, New York.
DECATUR, S. E. 1996. Learning in hybrid noise environments using statistical queries. In Learning from
  Data: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics V, D. Fisher and H.-J. Lenz, Eds. Springer-Verlag, New York.
HELMBOLD, D., SLOAN, R., AND WARMUTH, M. 1992. Learning integer lattices. SIAM J. Comput. 21, 2,
  240–266.
MACWILLIAMS, F., AND SLOANE, N. 1977. The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. North-Holland,
  Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
JACKSON, J. 2000. On the efficiency of noise-tolerant PAC algorithms derived from statistical queries.
  In Proceedings of the 13th Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory.
KEARNS, M. 1998. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. J. ACM, 45, 6 (Nov.), 983–
  1006.
KUMAR, R., AND SIVAKUMAR, D. 2001. On polynomial approximations to the shortest lattice vector
  length. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Symposium on Discrete Algorithms.
LITTLESTONE, N. 1988. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: A new linear-threshold
  algorithm. Mach. Learn. 2, 285–318.
LITTLESTONE, N. 1989. From online to batch learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual ACM Conference
  on Computational Learning Theory. ACM, New York, pp. 269–284.
WAGNER, D. 2002. A generalized birthday problem. In Proceedings in Advances in Cryptology—
  CRYPTO 2002. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2442. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 288–304.

RECEIVED OCTOBER 2000; REVISED NOVEMBER 2002; ACCEPTED NOVEMBER 2002




                                                                    Journal of the ACM, Vol. 50, No. 4, July 2003.
