                                           Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving
                                                   and measure-preserving functions
                                                                          Patrick Lutz and Benjamin Siskind
arXiv:2305.19646v3 [math.LO] 5 Apr 2024




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                    Martin’s Conjecture is a proposed classification of the definable functions on the Turing de-
                                                grees. It is usually divided into two parts, the first of which classifies functions which are not
                                                above the identity and the second of which classifies functions which are above the identity.
                                                Slaman and Steel proved the second part of the conjecture for Borel functions which are order-
                                                preserving (i.e. which preserve Turing reducibility). We prove the first part of the conjecture
                                                for all order-preserving functions. We do this by introducing a class of functions on the Turing
                                                degrees which we call “measure-preserving” and proving that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds
                                                for all measure-preserving functions and also that all non-trivial order-preserving functions are
                                                measure-preserving. Our result on measure-preserving functions has several other consequences
                                                for Martin’s Conjecture, including an equivalence between part 1 of the conjecture and a statement
                                                about the structure of the Rudin-Keisler order on ultrafilters on the Turing degrees.


                                          Contents
                                          1 Introduction                                                                                             2
                                            1.1 Statement of Martin’s Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         3
                                            1.2 Prior work on Martin’s Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4
                                            1.3 Measure-preserving functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
                                            1.4 Technical Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
                                            1.5 Notation and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         7

                                          2 How to Prove Instances of Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture                                                   8
                                            2.1 The basic strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        8
                                            2.2 Finding pointed perfect trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         9
                                            2.3 Ordinal invariants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       12

                                          3 Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Measure-Preserving Functions                                           13
                                            3.1 Proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions . . . . . . . .              13
                                            3.2 An alternate proof that works in AD ` DCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            15
                                            3.3 Application to part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16

                                          4 Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Order-Preserving Functions                                             19
                                            4.1 A theorem on perfect sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        19
                                            4.2 Order-preserving functions are measure-preserving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            23
                                            4.3 A proof for Borel functions that works in ZF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
                                            4.4 Application to the theory of locally countable Borel quasi-orders . . . . . . . . . . . .            28

                                          5 Ultrafilters on the Turing Degrees                                                                       29
                                            5.1 Measure-preserving functions and the Martin measure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              30
                                            5.2 The Rudin-Keisler order on ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             31
    5.3 The Lebesgue and Baire ultraﬁlters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
    5.4 Additional facts about the Martin measure and the Rudin-Keisler order . . . . . . . .            35

6 Generalizations and Counterexamples                                                                   37
  6.1 Other degree structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     37
  6.2 Non-invariant functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     39
  6.3 Ideal-valued functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    40
  6.4 ZFC counterexamples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     41

7 Questions                                                                                             43


1     Introduction
Martin’s Conjecture is a proposed classiﬁcation of the deﬁnable functions on the Turing degrees, very
roughly stating that every such function is either eventually constant, eventually equal to the identity
function, or eventually a transﬁnite iterate of the Turing jump (see [20] for a survey). It is traditionally
divided into two parts. The ﬁrst states that every function is eventually constant or eventually above
the identity; the second states that every function which is eventually above the identity is eventually
equal to some transﬁnite iterate of the jump.
    The conjecture was introduced by Martin in the 1970s. It remains open, but several special
cases have been proved by Martin, Lachlan [12], Steel [27], and Slaman and Steel [24]. In particular,
Slaman and Steel proved that part 2 of the conjecture holds when restricted to Borel functions which
are “order-preserving” (i.e. which preserve Turing reducibility).
    In this paper, we will prove that part 1 of the conjecture holds when restricted to order-preserving
functions. When combined with Slaman and Steel’s result, this almost completes the proof of Martin’s
Conjecture restricted to order-preserving functions.
    We will also prove that part 1 of the conjecture holds when restricted to a class of functions which
we call “measure-preserving”. This class of functions has been implicitly considered by Martin, but,
to the best of our knowledge, has not been explicitly identiﬁed before. A central thesis of this paper
is that this is a natural class of functions and that studying it provides useful insight into Martin’s
Conjecture.
    We will give two lines of evidence for this thesis. First, the class of measure-preserving functions
has a few diﬀerent equivalent characterizations in terms of concepts related to Martin’s Conjecture.
In particular, there is an ultraﬁlter on the Turing degrees known as the Martin measure, which is
closely related to Martin’s Conjecture and measure-preserving functions are exactly those functions
which are measure-preserving for the Martin measure in the sense of ergodic theory. We will discuss
this more thoroughly in section 5.1.
    Second, that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for measure-preserving functions has several
interesting consequences.

    • We will show that every order-preserving function is either constant on a cone or measure-
      preserving, so it implies part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions (see sec-
      tion 4.2).
    • It implies a special case of part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture (see section 3.3).
    • It implies that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is equivalent to a statement about the structure of
      ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees (see section 5.2).
    We will also show that the proof is quite general: it works in other degree structures (for example,
for the arithmetic degrees and the hyperarithmetic degrees), for functions on 2ω which are not required
to be Turing-invariant (and thus do not induce a function on the Turing degrees) and for functions
which take values in the set of all Turing ideals.


                                                     2
   For the rest of this introduction, we will explain the statement of Martin’s Conjecture and mention
some past work on it, give a deﬁnition of the class of measure-preserving functions on the Turing
degrees, and provide background material necessary for some of our proofs.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to John Steel, Vittorio Bard, James Walsh, Andrew Marks, Takayuki Kihara, Raphaël Carroy,
William Chan and especially Ted Slaman and Gabe Goldberg for useful conversations, suggestions
and references.

1.1    Statement of Martin’s Conjecture
Before we can give the formal statement of Martin’s Conjecture, there are a few things we need to
explain. First, a caveat: for technical reasons, the conjecture is usually stated in terms of Turing-
invariant functions on 2ω rather than functions on the Turing degrees. Second, we must explain what
it means for two Turing-invariant functions to be “eventually equal” or for one to be “eventually
above” the other. Third, the conjecture is false in ZFC and is usually instead stated in the theory
ZF ` AD ` DCR , which we will brieﬂy introduce.

Turing-invariant functions
A function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is Turing-invariant if for all x, y P 2ω ,

                                     x ”T y ùñ f pxq ”T f pyq.

The point is that any Turing-invariant function induces a function on the Turing degrees, but functions
on the reals are easier to analyze from a descriptive set theoretic point of view.

Eventual equality
When we say that one Turing-invariant function is “eventually equal” to another we mean that they
are Turing equivalent on a cone of Turing degrees and when we say that one Turing-invariant function
is “eventually below” another we mean that the ﬁrst is Turing reducible to the second on a cone. Here,
a cone of Turing degrees (also sometimes just called a cone) is a set of the form

                                     Conepaq “ tx P 2ω | x ěT au

for some a P 2ω . Such a set is also called the cone above a and a is called the base of the cone.
    More formally, for Turing-invariant functions f, g : 2ω Ñ 2ω , f is equal to g on a cone if for all
x in some cone, f pxq ”T gpxq (note that there is a slight abuse of terminology here since f and g are
not literally equal on a cone, but merely Turing equivalent on a cone). Likewise, f is below g on a
cone if for all x in some cone, f pxq ďT gpxq. We will also say f is constant on a cone if it is equal
to a constant function on a cone.
    If f is equal to g on a cone then we will write f ”M g and say that they are Martin equivalent.
Likewise, if f is below g on a cone, we will write f ďM g and say f is Martin below g. Note that
ďM forms a quasi-order on Turing-invariant functions, sometimes called the Martin order.

The Axiom of Determinacy
We have said that Martin’s Conjecture is stated in the theory ZF ` AD ` DCR . Here, DCR denotes
the Axiom of Dependent Choice on 2ω and AD denotes the Axiom of Determinacy. The Axiom
of Determinacy is a strong axiom of set theory which is inconsistent with the Axiom of Choice
but equiconsistent with a certain large cardinal principle (the existence of inﬁnitely many Woodin
cardinals [11]).

                                                   3
    One reason for stating Martin’s Conjecture under AD is that restricted versions of the axiom are
true for various classes of deﬁnable sets under much weaker hypotheses. For example, Martin proved
that a version of AD for Borel sets (known as Borel Determinacy) is provable in ZF and a version for
Π11 sets is provable from the existence of a measurable cardinal [19, 18]. Thus one might hope that
a proof of Martin’s Conjecture under AD would yield a ZF proof of Martin’s Conjecture restricted to
Borel functions and a proof for analytic functions assuming the existence of a measurable cardinal.
    Another key reason to use determinacy is that we have the following theorem, which makes it at
least plausible that we might be able to classify Turing-invariant functions by their behavior on a
cone.
Theorem 1.1 (ZF ` AD; Martin’s Cone Theorem [17]). Every set of Turing degrees either contains
a cone or is disjoint from a cone.
   It is often useful to restate this theorem in a diﬀerent form.
Definition 1.2. A set A Ď 2ω is cofinal in the Turing degrees (also sometimes just cofinal) if
for every a P 2ω there is some x P A such that a ďT x.
   Note that a set of Turing degrees is coﬁnal if and only if its complement does not contain a cone.
Thus Martin’s Cone Theorem is equivalent to the statement that every coﬁnal set of Turing degrees
contains a cone. This form is useful because it means that to prove that some property holds on a
cone, it is enough to prove that it holds coﬁnally.

Formal statement of Martin’s Conjecture
We can now give the formal statement of Martin’s Conjecture.
Conjecture (Martin’s Conjecture). Assuming ZF ` AD ` DCR , both of the following hold:
 (1) Every Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is either constant on a cone or above the identity
     function on a cone.
 (2) The Martin order restricted to Turing-invariant functions which are above the identity on a cone
     is a prewellorder in which the successor of any function f is the jump of f (i.e. the function
     x ÞÑ f pxq1 ).
   The second part of the conjecture can be interpreted as stating that every Turing-invariant function
which is above the identity on a cone is equal to some transﬁnite iterate of the Turing jump on a cone,
the idea being that a function with ordinal rank α in the Martin order is the αth iterate of the Turing
jump.

1.2    Prior work on Martin’s Conjecture
We will now state a few special cases of Martin’s Conjecture which are already known. First we must
state some more deﬁnitions.
Definition 1.3. A Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is:
  • regressive if for all x, f pxq ďT x (i.e. f is below the identity).
  • order-preserving if for all x, y P 2ω
                                        x ďT y ùñ f pxq ďT f pyq.

  • uniformly invariant (or uniformly Turing-invariant) if there is a function u : N2 Ñ N2 such
    that for all x, y P 2ω , if i and j are indices for Turing functionals witnessing that x ”T y—i.e.
    Φi pxq “ y and Φj pyq “ x—then upi, jq is a pair of indices for Turing functionals witnessing that
    f pxq ”T f pyq.

                                                   4
Theorem 1.4 (ZF`AD; Slaman and Steel [24]). Martin’s Conjecture holds for all regressive functions—
i.e. if f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a regressive Turing-invariant function then either f is constant on a cone or f
is above the identity on a cone.
Theorem 1.5 (Slaman and Steel [24]). Part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all Borel order-
preserving functions f : 2ω Ñ 2ω .
Theorem 1.6 (ZF`AD; Steel [27], Slaman and Steel [24]). Martin’s Conjecture holds for all uniformly
Turing-invariant functions.
   As we have mentioned, we will prove that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all order-
preserving functions, complementing Slaman and Steel’s result above. We will also prove that part 1
of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all measure-preserving functions, a class of functions which we will
now deﬁne.

1.3    Measure-preserving functions
A measure-preserving function is a function on the Turing degrees which eventually gets above every
ﬁxed degree (which you might also think of as a function which “goes to inﬁnity in the limit”). This
is made precise in the following deﬁnition.
Definition 1.7. A Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving if for every a P 2ω ,
there is some b P 2ω such that
                                     x ěT b ùñ f pxq ěT a.
In other words, for every a, f is above a on a cone.
    One of the earliest results on Martin’s Conjecture is a proof by Martin that Martin’s Conjecture
holds for regressive measure-preserving functions. We will give this proof in section 2.2 as an example
of some of the techniques we will use in our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-
preserving functions.
    Note that any function which is above the identity on a cone is measure-preserving. Thus, restrict-
ing to the class of measure-preserving functions does not change the statement of part 2 of Martin’s
Conjecture.

Measure-preserving functions and the Martin order
It is also possible to deﬁne the class of measure-preserving functions in terms of the Martin order. We
omit the simple proof.
Proposition 1.8. A Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving if and only if f is
Martin above every constant function.
   This characterization of measure-preserving functions allows us to ﬁt our result on part 1 of
Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions into a developing picture of what the Martin
order looks like under AD.
   It is relatively easy to use determinacy to show that if a Turing-invariant function is Martin below
a constant function then it must be constant on a cone. Thus the constant functions form an initial
segment of the Martin order isomorphic to the partial order of the Turing degrees.
   This initial segment has a natural upper bound, the identity function. Martin’s result on regressive
measure-preserving functions shows that it is a minimal upper bound: any function which is below
the identity but above every constant function must be equivalent to the identity. Our result on
part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions shows that it is actually a least upper
bound: any function which is an upper bound for all the constant functions must be above the
identity. Furthermore, Slaman and Steel’s result on regressive functions shows that it is not above
any non-constant function.

                                                  5
                     Part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture
                              Empty (this paper)                       rids”M
                                Empty (Martin)


                                                                 DT
                                               Unknown



                    Figure 1: A picture of what’s known about the Martin order.


    Thus our picture of the Martin order under AD is as follows: there is an initial segment isomorphic
to the Turing degrees, consisting of the constant functions. This initial segment has a least upper
bound, the identity function, which additionally is not upper bound for any non-constant function.
The remaining case of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is to rule out functions which are “oﬀ to the side”
of the constant functions in the Martin order—for example, functions which are incomparable to all
nonzero constant functions. This is illustrated in Figure 1.

1.4    Technical Preliminaries
We will now review some technical material that we will need throughout the paper.

Pointed perfect trees
A key technical tool in a lot of work on Martin’s Conjecture is the notion of a pointed perfect tree.
Definition 1.9. A pointed perfect tree is a perfect tree T such that for every x P rT s, T ďT x.
   The key property of pointed perfect trees is that they contain a representative of every Turing
degree in some cone. The idea is that if T is a perfect tree then any x P 2ω can be thought of as
describing a path through T : at each branching point in T we use the next bit of x to decide whether
                                                          r. By construction, T ‘ x can compute x
the path should go left or right. Call the resulting path x                                         r.
But T ‘ xr can also compute x by checking whether x   r goes left or right at each branching point. If
x ěT T and T is pointed (so xr ěT T ), then x ”T xr. This is summarized by the following proposition.
Proposition 1.10. If T is a pointed perfect tree, then for every x P ConepT q there is some x
                                                                                            r P rT s
such that x ”T x
               r.
    There is also a strengthening of Martin’s cone theorem that works for arbitrary sets of reals rather
than sets of Turing degrees and gives pointed perfect trees rather than cones. The proof is more or
less identical to the proof of the cone theorem and is also due to Martin.
Theorem 1.11 (ZF ` AD; [16]). If A Ď 2ω is cofinal in the Turing degrees then there is some pointed
perfect tree T such that rT s Ď A.
    The lesson of this theorem is that, under AD, if you want to ﬁnd a pointed perfect tree whose paths
all have some property, then it is enough to ﬁnd a coﬁnal set whose elements all have that property.

Variants of the Axiom of Choice and the Axiom of Determinacy
The Axiom of Determinacy is inconsistent with the Axiom of Choice, but it is consistent with several
weak forms of the Axiom of Choice. We will need to use a few of these so we will review them here.
The following axioms are listed in order of increasing logical strength.


                                                   6
  • The Axiom of Countable Choice for reals, CCR : This axiom states that every countable
    collection tAn unPω of nonempty subsets of 2ω has a choice function. This is implied by AD.
  • The Axiom of Dependent Choice for reals, DCR : This axiom states that if R is a binary
    relation on 2ω such that for every x P 2ω there is some y P 2ω for which Rpx, yq holds then there
    is some countable sequence of reals tan unPω such that for each n, Rpan , an`1 q holds. Whether
    this is provable in ZF ` AD is open, but ZF ` AD ` DCR is equiconsistent with ZF ` AD.
  • Uniformization for sets of reals, UniformizationR : This axiom states that if R is a binary
    relation on 2ω such that for each x there is some y for which Rpx, yq holds then R can be
    uniformized—i.e. there is some function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that for each x, Rpx, f pxqq holds.
    This is not provable in ZF ` AD and ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR is not equiconsistent with
    ZF ` AD, but the consistency of ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR is provable from suﬃciently strong
    large cardinal principles.
    Martin’s Conjecture is typically stated in the theory ZF ` AD ` DCR but many results related
to Martin’s Conjecture only need CCR , not DCR (and thus are provable in ZF ` AD). In this paper
we will sometimes use UniformizationR and thus some of our results are proved in the theory ZF `
AD ` UniformizationR . For some of these results, the proof can be made to work with DCR instead
of UniformizationR but for a few, this is not apparent (in particular, our results on ultraﬁlters on the
Turing degrees discussed in section 5).
    Throughout the paper, we will also occasionally refer to the theory ZF ` AD` . This theory is a
strengthening of ZF`AD due to Woodin which does not imply UniformizationR but which implies many
consequences of AD ` UniformizationR (including DCR ). In particular, all of the results in this paper
which are proved in the theory ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR can also be proved in the theory ZF ` AD` .
This may seem like an obscure technical point, but it is signiﬁcant for the following reason. Unlike
AD ` UniformizationR , it follows from suﬃciently strong large cardinal principles that AD` holds in
LpRq. Thus, assuming those same large cardinal principles, any instance of Martin’s Conjecture that
holds under AD` also holds for all functions in LpRq (which constitute a very generous notion of the
class of “deﬁnable functions”).

1.5    Notation and conventions
A number of times in this paper we will need to go back and forth between a real and its Turing degree
or a Turing-invariant function on the reals and the function on the Turing degrees that it induces. To
help make such transitions clearer, we will use the following notation.
  • DT denotes the Turing degrees, 2ω { ”T .
  • For x P 2ω , degT pxq denotes the Turing degree of x.
  • Lightface letters denotes reals and boldface letters denote Turing degrees. E.g. a, b, x, y refer to
    elements of 2ω and a, b, x, y refer to elements of DT .
  • If a lower case letter denotes a Turing-invariant function from 2ω to 2ω , then the corresponidng
    upper case letter denotes the function on the Turing degree it induces. E.g. if f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a
    Turing-invariant function then F : DT Ñ DT denotes the function F pdegT pxqq “ degT pf pxqq.
  • id denotes the identity function on 2ω and j denotes the Turing jump as a function on 2ω .
Sometimes our slippage between Turing-invariant functions and functions on the Turing degrees will
cause abuses of terminology. For example, we will often say that a Turing-invariant function is constant
on a cone when it is really the induced function on the Turing degrees that is constant on a cone, and
we will say that two Turing-invariant functions are equal on a cone when they are really just Turing
equivalent on a cone.
   We will also use the following other conventions.

                                                   7
    • Unless explicitly stated otherwise, all results hold in ZF and all results which are proved for all
      functions in ZF ` AD hold for all Borel functions in ZF.
    • A Turing functional is a program with an oracle. If Φ is a Turing functional and x P 2ω then
      Φpxq denotes the element of 2ω computed by Φ when using x as an oracle and Φpx, nq denotes
      the output of Φ when using x as an oracle and when given input n (so Φpxq “ n ÞÑ Φpx, nq).
    • We will think of a Turing functional Φ as a partial function on 2ω deﬁned by x ÞÑ Φpxq, where
      x is in the domain of the function whenever Φpxq is total.
    • We will assume we have a ﬁxed computable enumeration Φ0 , Φ1 , Φ2 , . . . of Turing functionals.
    • We will use Φpx, nqrms to denote the program Φ run with oracle x on input n for up to m steps
      and Φpσq (where σ P 2ăω ) to denote the result of running Φ and using σ to answer oracle queries
      (and when Φ asks a question about the oracle past the length of σ, the program diverges).
    • If T is a tree and σ is a node in T then Tσ is the tree consisting of all nodes in T which are
      compatible with σ, i.e. Tσ “ tτ P T | τ Ď σ or σ Ď τ u.


2     How to Prove Instances of Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture
In this section we will describe a strategy which can be used to prove instances of part 1 of Martin’s
Conjecture. In other words, a strategy for proving that a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is
either constant on a cone or above the identity on a cone. We will use this strategy in section 3 to
prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions.

2.1     The basic strategy
The main idea underlying our strategy is actually just the computability theory version of a basic
topological fact.

       Basic topological fact: If f : X Ñ X is a continuous, injective function on a compact,
       Hausdorﬀ space, then f has a continuous inverse f ´1 : rangepf q Ñ X.

       Computability theory version: If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a computable, injective function, then
       for each x, f pxq can compute x.

The point is that if a function on 2ω is computable and injective then it is automatically above the
identity. Hence one way to prove that a function f is above the identity is to ﬁnd a computable,
injective function g such that g is below f .
    In practice, it is often not possible to ﬁnd such a function which is deﬁned on all of 2ω , so we will
instead try to ﬁnd one which is deﬁned only on a pointed perfect tree. However, such functions are
not necessarily above the identity. Instead, they satisfy the following weaker property.

       If T is a perfect tree and g : rT s Ñ 2ω is computable and injective then for each x P rT s,
       gpxq ‘ T ěT x.
In other words, g is only above the identity after joining with a constant.
   All this suggests the following strategy for proving that a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is
above the identity on a cone:

 (1) Find a pointed perfect tree T and a computable, injective function g : rT s Ñ 2ω which is below
     f . This shows that for all x P rT s, x ďT f pxq ‘ T .
 (2) Show that for all x on a cone, f pxq ěT T .


                                                    8
 (3) Put these two facts together to show that for all x on a cone, x ďT f pxq.
The third step is easy and we take care of it below. If f is measure-preserving then the second step
also follows immediately. Thus, in our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving
functions, we don’t need to worry about this step. In our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for
order-preeserving functions we will take care of it by showing that all non-trivial order-preeserving
functions are measure-preserving.
    This leaves us with the question of how to carry out the ﬁrst step of the strategy: how can we ﬁnd
T and g with the necessary properties? In the next two sections we will introduce some techniques
which can help answer this question. But ﬁrst, we will prove the statement about computable, injective
functions on perfect trees mentioned above and show formally that if f is measure-preserving and we
can ﬁnd a function g with the properties listed above then f is above the identity on a cone.
Lemma 2.1. If T is a perfect tree and g : rT s Ñ 2ω is computable and injective then for each x P rT s,
                                            gpxq ‘ T ěT x.
Proof. Since g is computable, there is some Turing functional Φ such that for all x P rT s, Φpxq is total
and equal to gpxq. So it suﬃces to prove that for all x P rT s, Φpxq ‘ T ěT x. The main idea of the
proof is just a routine application of compactness.
   First, we will give an algorithm to compute x given Φpxq and T . Say we want to compute xæn.
For each σ in level n of T we do the following search (and we do all of these searches in parallel):
      Look for an m ą n such that for all descendants τ of σ on level m of T , Φpτ qrms disagrees
      with Φpxqæm.
Once all but one of these searches have terminated, we output the remaining element of level n of T
as our guess for xæn.
    Hopefully it is clear that this search will never terminate for xæn (since on every level above m ą n
there is a descendant of xæn in T , namely xæm, which will not make Φ disagree with Φpxq). So all we
really need to do is show that the search will terminate for every σ in level n of T which is not equal
to xæn.
    Suppose this is not the case and let σ be such a node in T . Then by König’s lemma we can ﬁnd
some y P rT s extending σ such that for all m, Φpyqrms does not disagree with Φpxq. However, we
know that Φ is total on y and injective on rT s, hence Φpyq and Φpxq must disagree somewhere, a
contradiction.
Lemma 2.2. Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is Turing-invariant and measure-preserving, T is a pointed perfect
tree and g : rT s Ñ 2ω is computable, injective and below f . Then for all x on a cone, f pxq ěT x.
Proof. Since f is measure-preserving, there is some cone on which f pxq is always above T . We may
also assume that this cone is high enough that all its elements are above T . Let x be any element of
                  r be an element of rT s in the same Turing degree as x (which must exist since T is
this cone and let x
a pointed perfect tree). We can then calculate
                  r ďT gpr
                  x      xq ‘ T                                by the previous lemma
                    ďT f pr
                          xq                       since g is below f and f pr
                                                                             xq ěT T .
Since x ”T x
           r and f is Turing-invariant, this implies that x ďT f pxq.

2.2    Finding pointed perfect trees
In the previous section, we outlined a general strategy to prove that a function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is above
the identity. A key step involved ﬁnding a computable, injective function g below f which is deﬁned
on a pointed perfect tree. In this section we will discuss some lemmas which are useful for ﬁnding
such a g and then give an example of using these lemmas to prove an instance of part 1 of Martin’s
Conjecture.

                                                   9
Finding pointed perfect trees using determinacy
Recall from the introduction the following theorem due to Martin, which is often useful for ﬁnding
pointed perfect trees under AD.
Theorem 2.3 (ZF ` AD; Martin; [16], Lemma 3.5). Suppose A Ď 2ω is cofinal in the Turing degrees.
Then there is a pointed perfect tree T such that rT s Ď A.
   The following consequence of Theorem 2.3 is also useful.
                                                                                             Ť
Corollary 2.4 (ZF ` AD). Suppose xAn ynPN is a countable sequence of subsets of 2ω such that n An
is cofinal in the Turing degrees. Then there is some n P N and some pointed perfect tree T such that
rT s Ď An .
Proof. It is enough to show that some An must be coﬁnal. Suppose not. So forÀ each n, there is some
xn P 2ω such that An is disjoint from theŤcone above xn . But then any y ěT  n xn cannot be in any
of the An ’s, contradicting the fact that n An is coﬁnal.
   There is a further very easy consequence of this corollary which has proved surprisingly useful.
This consequence is not new and has often been used implicitly in research on Martin’s Conjecture,
but we have found it helpful to formulate it as an explicit principle.

Lemma 2.5 (ZF ` AD; Computable uniformization lemma). Suppose R is a binary relation on 2ω
such that both of the following hold.
   • The domain of R is cofinal: for all a there is some x ěT a and some y such that px, yq P R
   • R is a subset of Turing reducibility: for every px, yq P R, x ěT y.
Then there is a pointed perfect tree T and a computable function f : rT s Ñ 2ω such that for all x P rT s,
px, f pxqq P R. In other words, f is a computable choice function for R on rT s.
Proof. For each n P N, let An be the set of x such that Φn pxq is total and Rpx,
                                                                            Ť Φn pxqq holds. For each
x in the domain of R, there must be some n for which this holds and thus n An “ dompRq is coﬁnal.
So by Corollary 2.4, there is some n and pointed perfect T such that rT s Ď An . By construction, T
and Φn satisfy the conclusion of the lemma.
   Later, we will need the following corollary of this lemma, which also shows how it is typically
used. The corollary says that any increasing function can be inverted by a computable function on a
pointed perfect tree. Note that the function f in the statement of the corollary is not required to be
Turing-invariant.
Corollary 2.6. If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a function such that f pxq ěT x for all x then there is a pointed
perfect tree T and a computable function g : rT s Ñ 2ω which is a right inverse for f on rT s. That is,
for all x P rT s, f pgpxqq “ x.
Proof. Let R be the binary function deﬁned as follows.

                                        Rpx, yq ðñ x “ f pyq.

Applying Lemma 2.5 to this relation gives us what we want. To show that we can apply the lemma,
we need to check that R is a subset of Turing reducibility and that its domain is coﬁnal. The former
is a consequence of the fact that f pyq ěT y for all y. For the latter, consider any a P 2ω . We need to
show that there is some x ěT a which is in the domain of R. For this, we can just take x “ f paq.




                                                   10
Refining pointed perfect trees
The next lemma is useful for building injective functions on pointed perfect trees. It is relatively
well-known but we include a proof anyway for the sake of completeness.
Lemma 2.7 (Tree thinning lemma). If T is a pointed perfect tree and f is a computable function
defined on rT s then one of the following must hold:
   • We can “thin out” T to make f injective: there is a pointed perfect tree S such that S Ď T and
     f is injective on rSs.
   • f is constant on a large set: there is a node σ in T such that f is constant on rTσ s.
In particular, f is either constant or injective on a pointed perfect subtree of T .
Proof. The idea is basically the same as in Spector’s construction of a minimal degree (i.e. Sacks
forcing). Suppose that the second condition does not hold—i.e. that f is not constant on Tσ for any
σ in T . We will show how to ﬁnd a pointed perfect tree S Ď T on which f is injective.
    Let Φ be a Turing functional such that for all x P rT s, Φpxq is total and agrees with f pxq. We will
deﬁne S in a series of stages. In stage 0, we let S0 consist of just the empty sequence (i.e. the root
node of T ). In stage n ` 1 we have a ﬁnite tree Sn Ď T which we want to extend to Sn`1 in a way
that makes sure that every leaf in Sn has two incompatible extensions in Sn`1 and Φ is injective on
the leaves of Sn`1 . This is actually pretty straightforward to do: for each leaf σ of Sn we know that
Φ is not constant on rTσ s so we can ﬁnd descendants τ1 and τ2 of σ in T and an m such that
                                   Φpτ1 qrms disagrees with Φpτ2 qrms
(i.e. there is a place where they both converge and are not equal). Put these τ1 and τ2 , along with all
their ancestors, into Sn`1 .
     Now deﬁne S as the union of all the Sn ’s. It is clear that if we construct S in this way then S
is a perfect tree, S Ď T , and Φ (and hence f ) is injective on S. To see that S is pointed, just note
that the above process was computable in T and so S ďT T . Since rSs Ď rT s and each element of rT s
computes T , we have that each element of rSs computes T and hence also computes S.

Example: Martin’s Conjecture for regressive, measure-preserving functions
We will now give an example of using the strategy outlined in the previous section, along with the
lemmas above, to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for some class of functions: namely, functions
which are both regressive and measure-preserving.
     As we mentioned in the introduction, this result was ﬁrst proved by Martin in the 1970s (though
he didn’t use the term “measure-preserving”). He didn’t publish his proof, but a proof was included
in a paper by Steel [27]. Later, Slaman and Steel proved that a modiﬁed version of this theorem is
still true even in ZFC [24].
Theorem 2.8 (ZF ` AD; Martin). Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant function which is both
regressive and measure-preserving. Then for all x on a cone, f pxq ěT x.
Proof. Since f is measure-preserving, Lemma 2.2 implies that it suﬃces to ﬁnd a pointed perfect tree
T and a computable, injective function g : rT s Ñ 2ω such that for all x P rT s, gpxq ďT f pxq. The idea
is that since f is regressive, we can just use g “ f .
    By applying the computable uniformization lemma (Lemma 2.5) to f itself (i.e. to the relation
tpx, yq | y “ f pxqu) we obtain a pointed perfect tree T such that f is computable on rT s. By the tree
thinning lemma (Lemma 2.7), either f is constant on a pointed perfect subtree of T or f is injective
on a pointed perfect subtree of T . In the latter case, we are done. So it suﬃces to prove that f cannot
be constant on any pointed perfect tree.
    Suppose that f is constant on a pointed perfect tree. Since a pointed perfect tree contains a
representative of every Turing degree on a cone, this means that f is constant on a cone. But that
contradicts the assumption that f is measure-preserving.

                                                    11
2.3     Ordinal invariants
Suppose that we have a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω and we are trying to ﬁnd a computable,
injective function below f which is deﬁned on a pointed perfect tree. Here’s a naive way we might go
about this. First, deﬁne a binary relation R on 2ω by

                                    Rpx, yq ðñ y ďT x and y ďT f pxq.

By the computable uniformization lemma applied to R, we get a computable function g which is below
f . We might then try to apply the tree thinning lemma to ﬁnd a pointed perfect tree on which g is
injective. But there is one problem: if g is constant on a cone (or more generally, on a pointed perfect
tree) then we cannot apply that lemma.
    One solution to this problem is to make the deﬁnition of R more restrictive to ensure that g cannot
be constant on a cone. In this section, we will introduce an idea which can help do this. Brieﬂy stated,
here’s the idea: identify some function α from Turing degrees to ordinals and modify R to

                          Rpx, yq ðñ y ďT x and y ďT f pxq and αpxq “ αpyq.

Then when we apply the computable uniformization lemma to R, we get a function g which is not
only computable and below f , but also preserves α. As long as α is not constant on any cone, neither
is g. We will refer to such a function α as an ordinal invariant1 .
    Of course, to make this work we need to choose α so that the domain of the relation R deﬁned
above is coﬁnal (otherwise we cannot use the computable uniformization lemma). But if we can do
this, then the argument sketched above is valid and we will use it in section 3.2. In the remainder of
this section, we will formally introduce ordinal invariants, note a few of their properties and formalize
the argument sketched above.
Definition 2.9. An ordinal invariant is a Turing-invariant function α : 2ω Ñ Ord (where Ord
denotes the class of ordinals), i.e. a function α : 2ω Ñ Ord such that if x ”T y then αpxq “ αpyq.
Example 2.10. The quintessential example of an ordinal invariant is the function x ÞÑ ω1x , i.e. the
function mapping a real x to the least ordinal with no presentation computable from x.
    At ﬁrst it may seem that the notion of an ordinal invariant is much too general to be interesting,
but it turns out that, assuming determinacy, it is possible to prove quite a lot about them.
    For example, Martin has shown that, under ZF ` AD, the function x ÞÑ ω1x is the least nontrivial
ordinal invariant: for every ordinal invariant α, either α is constant on a cone, or αpxq ě ω1x on a
cone.
    Under AD`DC (or AD` ), it is easy to show that the relation “αpxq ď βpxq on a cone” prewellorders
the ordinal invariants. The theorem of Martin just mentioned implies that x ÞÑ ω1x has rank ω1 in
this prewellorder. Steel, in [27], has calculated the rank of a number of other ordinal invariants.
    It is also possible to show that every ordinal invariant is order-preserving on a cone.
Proposition 2.11 (ZF ` AD). If α is an ordinal invariant, then α is order-preserving on a cone—i.e.
for all x and y in some cone
                                   x ďT y ùñ αpxq ď αpyq.
Proof. Deﬁne αmin : 2ω Ñ Ord by

                                       αmin pxq “ mintαpyq | y ěT xu.

The claim that α is order-preserving on a cone is equivalent to the claim that αpxq “ αmin pxq on a
cone. For each x, there is some y ěT x such that αpyq “ αmin pxq and hence αpyq “ αmin pyq. In other
words, αpxq “ αmin pxq holds coﬁnally. By determinacy, this means αpxq “ αmin pxq on a cone.
   1 Such functions are often studied in work on Martin’s Conjecture and determinacy more generally, but the term

“ordinal invariant” is not standard and our use of them is somewhat different from their usual role.


                                                       12
Lemma 2.12 (ZF ` AD). Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant, measure-preserving function
and α : 2ω Ñ Ord is an ordinal invariant such that α is not constant on any cone and for cofinally
many x, there is some y such that
 (1) y ďT x,
 (2) y ďT f pxq, and
 (3) αpxq “ αpyq.
Then f is above the identity on a cone.
Proof. By Lemma 2.2, it suﬃces to show that there is a pointed perfect tree T and a computable,
injective function g : rT s Ñ 2ω which is below f . We will ﬁnd g as described above.
    First, deﬁne a binary relation R by

                           Rpx, yq ðñ y ďT x and y ďT f pxq and αpxq “ αpyq.

Note that by our assumption about α, the domain of R is coﬁnal. Thus there is a pointed perfect
tree T and a computable function g : rT s Ñ 2ω uniformizing R on rT s. In particular, for all x P rT s,
gpxq ďT f pxq and αpxq “ αpgpxqq.
    By the tree thinning lemma, g is either constant or injective on a pointed perfect subtree of T . If
g is injective on a pointed perfect tree then we are done. So it suﬃces to show that it is not constant
on any pointed perfect subtree of T . Suppose it was. Then on the set of paths x through this tree,
αpxq “ αpgpxqq would also be constant. Since any pointed perfect tree contains a representative of
every Turing degree on some cone, this would contradict our assumption that α is not constant on
any cone.


3      Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Measure-Preserving Func-
       tions
In this section, we will prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions. Actually,
we will give two proofs: ﬁrst, a relatively straightforward proof that works in ZF`AD`UniformizationR
and then a somewhat more complicated proof (a modiﬁcation of the ﬁrst proof) that works in ZF `
AD ` DCR . Both proofs follow the basic strategy explained in section 2; the second proof also uses
the idea of ordinal invariants from section 2.3. We will ﬁnish the section by giving an application of
our result to part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture.

3.1      Proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving func-
         tions
We will now give our ﬁrst proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions.2
The proof follows the strategy outlined in section 2: given a measure-preserving function f , we will
ﬁnd a function deﬁned on a pointed perfect tree which is computable, injective and below f . To do so,
we will ﬁrst associate to any measure-preserving function f a family of functions called increasing
moduli for f , which are essentially Skolem functions witnessing that f is measure-preserving. We
will then show:
 (1) Every measure-preserving function f has an increasing modulus, g.
 (2) Every such g has a computable right inverse, h, deﬁned on a pointed perfect tree.
 (3) Every such h is computable, injective and below f .
    2 Assuming AD ` Uniformization                   `
                                     R , though AD       would also suffice.


                                                                13
Thus h satisﬁes the properties required by Lemma 2.2 and so f is above the identity on a cone.
    The second and third steps of this proof are straightforward: to ﬁnd h, we will invoke Corollary 2.6
on ﬁnding right inverses for increasing functions; the fact that h is computable, injective and below f
will follow fairly directly from the deﬁnition of “increasing modulus.” Finding g, however, is trickier.
We will construct g using UniformizationR , which is not provable in ZF ` AD (this is the only part of
the proof that cannot be carried out in ZF ` AD). We do not know if it is possible to prove that every
measure-preserving function has a modulus in ZF ` AD.
Definition 3.1. Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a measure-preserving function. A modulus for f is a function
g : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that for all x and all y ěT gpxq we have f pyq ěT x. Note that g is not required to
be Turing-invariant.
    Here’s the idea behind the deﬁnition of modulus. If f is measure-preserving then for all a P 2ω ,
there is some b P 2ω such that on the cone above b, f pxq is always above a. A function g is a modulus
for f if for each a we can take b “ gpaq.
    For convenience, we will only use moduli which are above the identity. We will call such a modulus
an increasing modulus.
Definition 3.2. If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a measure-preserving function then a modulus g for f is an
increasing modulus for f if for all x, gpxq ěT x.
   As mentioned above, it is not clear how to show in ZF` AD that every measure-preserving function
has a modulus. However, this is easy to prove in ZF ` UniformizationR .
Lemma 3.3 (ZF ` UniformizationR ). If f is a measure-preserving function then f has an increasing
modulus.
Proof. Let Rpx, yq be the binary relation deﬁned by

                           Rpx, yq ðñ x ďT y and @z ěT y pf pzq ěT xq.

Since f is measure-preserving, we know that for each x, the set ty | Rpx, yqu is nonempty. Finding
an increasing modulus for f just means ﬁnding a function g such that for each x, Rpx, gpxqq holds—
in other words, a function g which uniformizes R. Since we are assuming UniformizationR , we are
done.
   We can now prove the main theorem of this section.
Theorem 3.4 (ZF ` UniformizationR ). If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant, measure-preserving
function then f is above the identity on a cone.
Proof. Suppose f is a measure-preserving function. By Lemma 3.3 we can ﬁnd an increasing modulus
g for f . By Corollary 2.6 we can invert g on a pointed perfect tree—that is, there is a pointed perfect
tree T and a computable function h deﬁned on rT s such that for each x P rT s, gphpxqq “ x. Now let’s
review what we know about this h.

  • Since h is a right inverse of g on rT s, h is injective on rT s.
  • h is below f on rT s: if x P rT s then since g is a modulus for f , f pgphpxqqq computes hpxq. And
    since gphpxqq “ x, this just means that f pxq computes hpxq.
Thus by Lemma 2.2, f pxq ěT x on a cone.




                                                    14
3.2     An alternate proof that works in AD ` DCR
In the previous section, we saw how to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving
functions in ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR . In this section we will see how to modify the proof so that it
works in the weaker theory ZF ` AD ` DCR .3 Recall that the reason we needed UniformizationR in the
previous section was to show that every measure-preserving function has a modulus. In this section
we will get around that diﬃculty by using an ordinal invariant (see section 2.3) to approximate the
role of the modulus in the previous proof.
    We will start by deﬁning something called a “modulus sequence,” which can be thought of as a
countable fragment of a modulus function for f .
Definition 3.5. Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a measure-preserving function and x P 2ω . A modulus
sequence for x is a sequence of reals x “ x0 ďT x1 ďT x2 ďT . . . which is increasing in the Turing
degrees and such that for all n P N and all y P 2ω ,

                                          y ěT xn`1 ùñ f pyq ěT xn .

In other words, x1 is large enough that f is above x on the cone above x1 , x2 is large enough that f
is above x1 on the cone above x2 , and so on.
    The idea is that if g is an increasing modulus for f then x, gpxq, gpgpxqq, . . . is a modulus sequence
for x, but that even when f does not have a modulus, it still has modulus sequences. It is easy to see
that the amount of choice required to prove that modulus sequences exist is much weaker than the
amount of choice that seems to be required to prove that modulus functions exist. This is expressed
by the following lemma.
Lemma 3.6 (ZF ` DCR ). Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant function which is measure-
preserving. Then for all x P 2ω , there is a modulus sequence for x.
Proof. Let x be an arbitrary real. Note that a sequence x0 , x1 , x2 , . . . is a modulus sequence for x as
long as x0 “ x and for each n, xn`1 satisﬁes a certain condition with respect to xn . It is easy to
see that since f is measure-preserving, no matter what xn we have picked, there is some xn`1 which
satisﬁes this condition with respect to it. Thus we can use DCR to pick a modulus sequence for x.
    We can now prove the theorem. Before we actually give the proof, let’s brieﬂy review how ordinal
invariants can be used to carry out the general strategy from section 2. Recall that to prove that
a measure-preserving function f is above the identity, it is enough to ﬁnd a computable function g
which is below f and which can be made injective on a pointed perfect tree. It is easy to use the
computable uniformization theorem to ﬁnd functions g which are computable and below f . But it
is hard to ensure that they are not just constant on a cone (and thus cannot be injective on any
pointed perfect tree). However, if we can ﬁnd an ordinal invariant, α, and a function g such that
αpxq “ αpgpxqq for all x then as long as α is not constant on a cone, g cannot be constant on a cone.
    Thus the goal of the proof below is to come up with an ordinal invariant α which is not constant
on a cone and for which we can ﬁnd a computable function g which is both below f and preserves α.
To do so, we will use Lemma 2.12, which gives a list of conditions on an ordinal invariant α which are
suﬃcient to guarantee that we can ﬁnd such a g.
Theorem 3.7 (ZF ` AD ` DCR ). If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant, measure-preserving function
then f is above the identity on a cone.
Proof. First we will deﬁne our ordinal invariant. Let α : 2ω Ñ Ord be the function deﬁned by

                       αpxq “ mintsupnPN ω1xn | xxn yn is a modulus sequence for xu.
   3 Though note that we really do use DC in the proof, rather than just CC , in contrast to most proofs of statements
                                         R                                 R
related to Martin’s Conjecture.


                                                         15
Observe that αpxq is always a countable ordinal which is at least ω1x and therefore αpxq is not constant
on any cone.
   By Lemma 2.12, it suﬃces to check that the following set A is coﬁnal:

                         A “ tx | Dy py ďT x and y ďT f pxq and αpyq “ αpxqqu.

So let x be an arbitrary real and we will ﬁnd an element of A which computes x. To do so, let
x “ x0 ďT x1 ďT x2 ďT . . . be a modulus sequence for x which witnesses the value of αpxq (i.e. such
that αpxq “ supn ω1xn ).
   We now claim that x1 is in A, as witnessed by x. By the deﬁnition of modulus sequence, it is clear
that x ďT x1 and x ďT f px1 q. So we just need to show that αpxq “ αpx1 q. First observe that αpx1 q
cannot be larger than αpxq because x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . is a modulus sequence for x1 and so

                       αpx1 q ď suptω1x1 , ω1x2 , . . .u “ suptω1x , ω1x1 , ω1x2 , . . .u “ αpxq.

Next observe that αpx1 q also cannot be smaller than αpxq because if x1 “ y0 ďT y1 ďT y2 ďT . . . is a
modulus sequence for x1 witnessing the value of αpx1 q then x, y0 , y1 , y2 , . . . is a modulus sequence for
x and so
                   αpxq ď suptω1x , ω1y0 , ω1y1 , . . .u “ suptω1y0 , ω1y1 , ω1y2 , . . .u “ αpx1 q.

What about Borel Functions?
In the previous section, we saw how to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving
functions using AD ` UniformizationR . A careful examination of that proof shows that when we
restrict to Borel functions, the proof requires Π11 determinacy. And the reason that the proof requires
Π11 rather than Borel determinacy is similar to the reason that the proof for all functions required
something more than just AD.
    In particular, to prove that every measure-preserving function f has a modulus, we had to uni-
formize the following relation:

                              Rpx, yq ðñ x ďT y and @z ěT y pf pzq ěT xq.

When f is Borel, this relation is Π11 and so the Kondô-Addison theorem says that it has a Π11
uniformization (but not necessarily a Borel uniformization). Thus every Borel measure-preserving
function has a Π11 modulus. Since the rest of the proof needs to apply determinacy to sets deﬁned
using the modulus, the fact that the modulus is only guaranteed to be Π11 rather than Borel causes
the proof to require Π11 determinacy rather than Borel determinacy.
    Above, we saw how to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions using
just AD ` DCR rather than AD ` UniformizationR . In light of the above discussion, it is reasonable
to ask whether this yields a proof for Borel functions that only requires Borel determinacy (and thus
works in ZF). Somewhat surprisingly, the answer seems to be “no.” That is, the proof in this section
seems to use more than Borel determinacy even when the functions considered are Borel. This is
because the deﬁnition of the ordinal invariant that we use in the proof is rather complicated and so
the set that we need to apply determinacy to in the proof is not Borel.
    This is interesting in part because it somewhat contradicts the idea that proofs of Martin’s Conjec-
ture should only use determinacy in a “local” way (that is, the proof for Borel functions should only
require Borel determinacy, and so on). It would be interesting to know whether part 1 of Martin’s
Conjecture for measure-preserving Borel functions can be proved using just Borel determinacy.

3.3    Application to part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture
In this section we will show that our result on part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving
functions can be applied to obtain a new result about part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture.


                                                          16
    Recall that part 2 of Martin’s Conjecture says that the Martin order is a prewellorder on Turing-
invariant functions which are above the identity and that the successor in this prewellorder is given by
the Turing jump. As a ﬁrst step towards proving this, we could try to show that all functions above
the identity are comparable in the Martin order. This would not show that the quotient of the Martin
order by Martin equivalence is a well order, but it would at least show it’s a linear order. We will
not even show this, but we will show that if we have two Turing-invariant functions f and g which
are above the identity and which satisfy an additional assumption then they are comparable in the
Martin order.
    To understand the idea of the proof, consider the following way that one might try to show any
two functions above the identity are comparable. Suppose we are given Turing-invariant functions f
and g and want to show f ďM g. Naively, we might try to “subtract” f from g and show that the
resulting function is above the identity. That is, we might try to deﬁne a function h as follows. Given
a real x, we ﬁrst try to ﬁnd a y such that f pyq “ x and then set hpxq “ gpyq. This h can be thought
of as the “diﬀerence” between g and f because for the y used to deﬁne hpxq, we have hpf pyqq “ gpyq.
If we could show that h is above the identity then it would be some indication that g is above f since
their “diﬀerence” is “positive.”
    There are a number of obvious problems with this strategy. First, there is no reason to expect
that any h we deﬁne this way will be Turing-invariant, much less amenable to known techniques for
proving functions are above the identity. And second, even if h is a Turing-invariant function above
the identity, it is not clear that this really implies that g is above f on a cone (for example, the y’s
we use to deﬁne h could all lie outside of some cone). The key insight of the proof below is that if f
and g satisfy a certain additional condition then all these problems disappear.
Theorem 3.8 (ZF ` AD ` DCR ). Suppose f, g : 2ω Ñ 2ω are Turing-invariant functions which are
above the identity and such that for all x, y P 2ω ,
                                   f pxq ”T f pyq ùñ gpxq ”T gpyq.
Then f ďM g.
Proof. We want to deﬁne a function h in the following way: given any real x, ﬁnd some real y such
that f pyq ”T x and then deﬁne hpxq “ gpyq. However, it may not be immediately obvious how to
formally deﬁne h. We can do so as follows.
    First, note that since f is above the identity, we can apply Corollary 2.6 to ﬁnd a pointed perfect
tree, T , and a (possibly non Turing-invariant) right inverse k for f deﬁned on rT s. Next, recall that in
section 1.4 we described a function x ÞÑ x r that takes any x P ConepT q to a Turing equivalent element
of rT s. We can then formally deﬁne h : ConepT q Ñ 2ω by
                                               hpxq “ gpkpr
                                                          xqq.
However, it is probably easier to think of h as deﬁned by the informal procedure described above.
Figure 2 below shows how h is deﬁned.

                                           x     h
                                                              hpxq “ gpyq
                                       k        f
                                                     g
                                           y

Figure 2: hpxq is deﬁned by ﬁnding some y such that f pyq “ x and then setting hpxq “ gpyq. The
real y can be found using k.

   First, we will show that h is Turing-invariant. Suppose x1 ”T x2 are in the domain of h. By
deﬁnition of h, there are reals y1 and y2 such that f py1 q ”T x1 , f py2 q ”T x2 , hpx1 q “ gpy1 q and

                                                         17
hpx2 q “ gpy2 q (formally, y1 “ kpr
                                  x1 q and y2 “ kpr
                                                  x2 q). Therefore f py1 q ”T f py2 q and so
                                        hpx1 q “ gpy1 q ”T gpy2 q “ hpx2 q
by our assumption about f and g.
    Note that this argument also implies that for any y for which f pyq is in the domain of h, hpf pyqq ”T
gpyq.
    Next, we will show that h is measure-preserving. Let a be an arbitrary degree. We want to show
that h gets above a on a cone. By determinacy, it is enough to show that it gets above a coﬁnally.
So let b be an arbitrary real, and we will show that h is above a on some degree above b. We claim
that f pa ‘ bq is one such degree. Since f is above the identity, f pa ‘ bq is above b. By the observation
we have already made about h, hpf pa ‘ bqq ”T gpa ‘ bq. Since g is above the identity, this implies
hpf pa ‘ bqq is above a.
    Since h is measure-preserving, Theorem 3.7 implies that h is above the identity on a cone4 . We
will now use this fact to show that f is below g on a cone. Let x be any degree in a cone on which h
is above the identity. Since f is above the identity, f pxq is above x. Since x was in a cone on which h
is above the identity, this implies that hpf pxqq ěT f pxq. Since hpf pxqq ”T gpxq, we have shown that
gpxq ěT f pxq, as desired.
    One might hope to use the theorem above to show that the Martin order is linear above the identity
by showing that for every pair of Turing-invariant functions f and g which are above the identity, the
relationship required by the theorem holds for f and g in some order (or at least, holds on a cone).
    At ﬁrst, this does not seem like such an unreasonable hope. It does hold for many pairs of
functions on the Turing degrees. For example, if two Turing degrees have the same Turing jump then
they also have the same ω-jump. Likewise, if they have the same ω-jump then they also have the same
hyperjump. But if we go just a little bit higher than the hyperjump, we can ﬁnd examples of pairs
of Turing-invariant functions which do not have this sort of relationship. We give one such example
below.
Example 3.9. Let f : 2ω Ñ 2ω be the hyperjump, i.e. f pxq “ Ox , and let g : 2ω Ñ 2ω be the function
deﬁned by                                             x
                                       gpxq “ pOx qpω1 q .
                                                x
The function g is well-deﬁned because ω1O is always strictly greater than ω1x and thus the ω1x -th jump
of Ox is well-deﬁned.
    On the one hand, it is easy to see that there are reals x and y such that gpxq ”T gpyq but
f pxq ıT f pyq. To ﬁnd such x and y we can take reals x   r and yr which are above Kleene’s O and not
                                      CK         CK
Turing equivalent but such that x  rpω1 q ”T yrpω1 q and then use hyperjump inversion to ﬁnd x and y
which are low for ω1CK such that Ox “ x  r and Oy “ yr.
    On the other hand, we can also ﬁnd reals x and y such that f pxq ”T f pyq but gpxq ıT gpyq. To
see why, let x be some real such that ω1x ą ω1CK . We can use hyperjump inversion to yﬁnd a real y
                                                                              x
such that ω1y “ ω1CK and Oy ”T Ox . Since ω1x ‰ ω1y , it is clear that pOx qpω1 q ıT pOy qpω1 q .
    Actually, without even bothering to construct these examples, it should have been apparent that f
and g cannot have the relationship required by the theorem above. Since f ăM g, we know that there
must be x and y such that gpxq ”T gpyq and f pxq ıT f pyq since otherwise the theorem would imply
that g is below f on a cone. On the other hand, if we look at the proof of the theorem we can also see
it provides reason to believe that there are reals x and y such that f pxq ”T f pyq and gpxq ıT gpyq. If
not, then the proof of the theorem would imply that there is a Turing-invariant function h such that
hpf pxqq “ gpxq on a cone. Such an h would have to be above every function of the form x ÞÑ xpαq for a
ﬁxed countable ordinal α, but also below the hyperjump. But it seems plausible that no such function
exists at all and it is known that such a function cannot be uniformly invariant or order-preserving so
we should not expect to be able to ﬁnd it so easily.
  4 One might object that Theorem 3.7 was stated for functions defined on all of 2ω while h is only defined on a cone.

However, the proof of that theorem works just as well for functions defined on a cone, or even a pointed perfect tree.


                                                         18
4     Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Order-Preserving Func-
      tions
In this section, we will prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions. We will
do so by ﬁrst proving that every order-preserving function is either constant on a cone or measure-
preserving and then obtain part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions as a corollary
to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions.
    Since our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Borel measure-preserving functions required
more determinacy than is provable in ZF (in particular, Π11 determinacy), this does not give us a
proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Borel order-preserving functions in ZF. We give such a
proof using an idea due to Takayuki Kihara combined with our result that nontrivial order-preserving
functions are measure-preserving (which is provable in ZF for Borel functions).
    We will ﬁnish this section with an application of our results to the theory of locally countable
Borel quasi-orders.

4.1    A theorem on perfect sets
A key step in our proof that order-preserving functions are either constant on a cone or measure-
preserving is a technical theorem about perfect sets, which we will prove below. The theorem was
inspired by, and is a strengthening of, a theorem proved by Groszek and Slaman in [5], which we will
state next.
Definition 4.1. Suppose that A is a perfect subset of 2ω and x P A. Say that x is eventually
constant in A if there is some n such that

                 @y P A pxæn “ yæn ùñ x ď yq or @y P A pxæn “ yæn ùñ y ď xq

where the ordering is the usual lexicographic ordering on 2ω .
    If you think of A as the set of branches through a perfect tree, this is saying that x eventually
either always goes to the left or always goes to the right in the tree.
Theorem 4.2 (Groszek and Slaman [5] lemma 2.2). Suppose that A is a perfect subset of 2ω , B is a
countable dense subset of A which contains no element which is eventually constant in A, and xci yiPN
is a countable sequence which contains every element of B. Then for every x there are y0 and y1 in
A such that                          ˜      ¸
                                       à
                                          ci ‘ y0 ‘ y1 ěT x.
                                           iPN

   The main shortcoming of Groszek and Slaman’s theorem for our purposes is that to compute x
you need to be able to compute the countable sequence xci yiPω . In the situation where we would like
to use the theorem we can only be assured of having some real which computes every element of the
sequence, but does not necessarily compute the sequence itself (i.e. it may compute the sequence in a
non-uniform way). The theorem we prove below was formulated to ﬁx this problem.
   To prove our strengthened version of Groszek and Slaman’s theorem, we use a proof that is
somewhat diﬀerent from theirs (and which is essentially a souped-up version of the coding argument
used in the ﬁrst author’s proof of Martin’s Conjecture for regressive functions on the hyperarithmetic
degrees [13]). This proof also allows us to get rid of the requirement that no element of xci y is eventually
constant in A (though this is mostly just a cosmetic improvement). Roughly speaking, here’s what is
diﬀerent about our proof. In Groszek and Slaman’s proof, they start with a real x which they want to
code using two elements of A. To do so, they code the bits of A into the sequence of decisions about
whether to turn left or right in the tree whose branches are A. In our proof, we instead essentially
code the bits of x into the Kolmogorov complexity of initial segments of the elements of A.


                                                     19
Theorem 4.3. Suppose that A is a perfect subset of 2ω , B is a countable dense subset of A, and c is
a real which computes each b P B. Then for every x there are y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 in A such that

                                          c ‘ y0 ‘ y1 ‘ y2 ‘ y3 ěT x.

Remark. The proof of this theorem is the kind of thing that is not that hard to explain on a
blackboard during a one-on-one conversation, but which looks quite complicated when all the details
are written down. In the proof below, we have tried as best we can to explain the idea of the
construction without getting lost in the messy details. If we have succeeded, then the construction
should not actually seem so complicated. If we have failed then we hope the reader will forgive us.
Proof. The basic idea here is to build up y0 , . . . , y3 by ﬁnite extensions and on each step code one
more bit of x. To use c together with y0 , . . . , y3 to compute x, we have to decode the results of this
coding process: ﬁgure out what happened on each step and recover the bits of x as a consequence.
    Perhaps you could imagine that we have two rooms which are completely separated from each
other. In the ﬁrst room, someone—let’s call them the coder—is given the real x (and whatever other
information they need) and tasked with building the yi ’s one bit at a time. In the other room, the
coder’s friend—let’s call them the decoder—is given c and then receives the bits of the yi ’s one at a
time, and needs to reconstruct what the coder did. So the coder needs to not only encode the bits of
x, but also encode enough extra information to allow the decoder to reconstruct the coding process.
Note, by the way, that the decoder’s process needs to be computable, but there is no such requirement
on the coder.
    There is also one more constraint: the coder needs to end up building elements of the set A. They
can accomplish this by making sure that on each step, the portions of the yi ’s that they have built so
far are each consistent with some element of B. This will ensure that each yi is the limit of a sequence
of elements of A, and thus each yi is in A since A is closed.
    The most natural way to describe all this is to describe how these two processes work together.
That is, describe what the coder is doing on a single step of the process, and, at the same time,
describe what the decoder is doing on the same step. In particular, we will assume that the decoder
has so far reconstructed all the steps correctly and see how they can also reconstruct the next step
correctly. Actually, the decoder will not completely reconstruct everything the coder does, but just
enough to decode the next bit of x and to allow the decoding process to continue on the next step.
We will now begin to describe what happens on a single step in both processes.
The situation after n steps. Suppose the coder has just ﬁnished the nth step of the coding process.
In other words, they have formed ﬁnite initial segments y0n , y1n , y2n , y3n of y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 , respectively. And
to make sure that the reals being built will end up in A, they have also picked elements bn0 , bn1 , bn2 , bn3
of B such that each yin is an initial segment of bni . They now want to code the pn ` 1qth bit of x by
extending each of y0n , y1n , y2n , y3n by a ﬁnite amount, making sure each one is still an initial segment of
some element of B (though perhaps not the same element as at the end of the nth step), while also
giving the decoder enough information to recover what happened on this step.
      Let’s now consider what things look like for the decoder. At the end of the nth step of the decoding
process, the decoder has a guess about exactly two of the bn0 , bn1 , bn2 , bn3 . In particular, if n is even then
the decoder has a guess about bn0 and bn1 and if n is odd then the decoder has a guess about bn2 and
bn3 .
      From now on, we will assume that n is even and thus that the decoder has a guess about bn0 and
b1 . This guess takes the form of two numbers, en0 and en1 . These should be thought of as indices for
 n

programs which use c to compute bn0 and bn1 , respectively. In other words, the decoder is guessing that
Φen0 pcq and Φen1 pcq are both total and are equal to bn0 and bn1 , respectively. Figure 3 below shows what
the coder has built and what the decoder knows and has guessed at the end of step n.
      We will now assume that the decoder’s guesses at the end of step n are correct, describe what
happens on the next step of the coding and decoding processes and argue that the decoder’s guess at
the end of this next step is still correct.


                                                         20
                  Coder’s view after step n.                   Decoder’s view after step n.
               Initial segment        Current target                 Known       Guesses
                      y0n                          bn0                 y0          bn0 “ Φen0 pcq
                      y1n                          bn1                 y1          bn1 “ Φen1 pcq
                      y2n                          bn2                 y2          bn2 “ ?
                      y3n                          bn3                 y3          bn3 “ ?

                     Figure 3: The coder and decoder’s view at the end of step n.


The decoding process. Let’s describe what happens on the decoding side ﬁrst. The decoder ﬁrst
does the following:
 (1) Look at more and more bits of y0 until they ﬁnd a place where y0 disagrees with Φen0 pcq—in
     other words, a place where y0 disagrees with bn0 . Let l0 be the ﬁrst such position.
 (2) Repeat this process with y1 and Φen1 pcq to ﬁnd the ﬁrst position l1 where they disagree.

   Next, the decoder uses l0 and l1 to determine guesses en`1
                                                           2    and en`1
                                                                      3  for bn`1
                                                                               2   and bn`1
                                                                                          3  . To pick
 n`1
e2 , the decoder takes the least e such that when Φe pcq is run for at most l1 steps, it converges and
agrees with y2 on all inputs less than l0 . In other words, the least e such that for all m ď l0 ,

                                              Φe pc, mqrl1 s Ó“ y2 pmq.

The decoder then picks en`1
                          3   in the same way.
    The decoder then extracts the pn ` 1qth bit of x by comparing en`1
                                                                   2   and en`1
                                                                            3   . If en`1
                                                                                      2   is smaller
       n`1                                      th
than e3 , the decoder guesses that the pn ` 1q bit of x is 0. Otherwise they guess that it is 1. The
entire decoding process is pictured in Figure 4 below.

                                        bn0
          y0
                                 l0
                                                  bn1
                                                                     en`1
                                                                      2   ă en`1
                                                                             3   ùñ xpn ` 1q “ 0
          y1
                                        l1                           en`1
                                                                      2   ě en`1
                                                                             3   ùñ xpn ` 1q “ 1
          y2
          y3
                      Compare to Φe pcqrl1 s æ l0 for each e
                      to ﬁnd en`1
                              2   and en`1
                                        3     .

                             Figure 4: Step n ` 1 of the decoding process.

   This completes our description of the decoding process. If we have done a good job, then the
reader should be able to ﬁll in all the details about the coding process for themselves. But we will
describe them here anyways for the sake of completeness.
The coding process. At the end of step n, the coder knows exactly what the decoder’s guesses are
(after all, they have access to all the same information as the decoder, so they can ﬁgure out exactly
what the decoder did on each previous step). The coder also knows the next bit of x that they need
to code.
    Suppose for convenience that the next bit is a 0. The coder will begin by choosing some value
which they will make sure is the decoder’s guess en`1
                                                   2    for bn`1
                                                             2   . One choice that works well enough is
                n`1
to simply let e2 be the ﬁrst e such that Φe pcq is total and equal to bn2 (which is guaranteed to exist

                                                         21
because bn2 ďT c by assumption). So the coder can simply set bn`1 2    to be bn2 (i.e. they will not change
 n
b2 on this step).
    Next, the coder wants to choose some value which they will ensure is the decoder’s guess en`1    3   for
b3 . In particular, since bit n ` 1 of x is a 0, the coder wants to make sure that en`1
 n`1
                                                                                         3   is larger than
en`1
 2   . This is also easy enough to accomplish. Since there are inﬁnitely many elements of B which
extend y3n but only ﬁnitely many programs less than en`1  2  , there must be some b P B such that the
least e for which Φe pcq “ b is greater than en`1
                                               2   . The coder then sets bn`13    to be such a b and sets
en`1
 3    to be the least e such that Φe pcq “ bn`1
                                            3   .
    Now the coder needs to make sure that the values l0 and l1 that the decoder recovers are large
enough that the decoder’s guesses en`12   and en`1
                                               3    are correct. To do so, the coder picks l0 to be large
               n`1        n`1
enough that e2      and e3    are the ﬁrst indices e and e1 for which Φe pcq and Φe1 pcq converge on all
inputs less than l0 and agree with bn`1
                                     2   and bn`1
                                              3   , respectively, on all such inputs. The coder can then
choose l1 to be large enough for Φen`1 pcq and Φen`1 pcq to both converge on all inputs less than l0 .
                                       2              3
    Next, the coder can choose bn`1 0    to be an element of B which has y0n as an initial segment and
agrees with b0 on the ﬁrst l0 bits, but which eventually disagrees with bn0 . They should retroactively
              n

increase the value of l0 to the ﬁrst position of disagreement between bn0 and bn`1
                                                                               0   , which may necessitate
increasing l1 as well (so that the programs en`1 2    and e n`1
                                                            3   are given enough time  to converge on the
ﬁrst l0 inputs).
    The coder can now choose bn`1  1    in a similar manner, to be some element of B which has y1n as
                                        n
an initial segment and agrees with b1 on the ﬁrst n bits, but eventually disagrees. They should then
retroactively increase l1 to this ﬁrst position of disagreement. Notice that increasing l0 and l1 in this
way is harmless.
    Now the coder deﬁnes

                                              y0n`1 :“ bn`1
                                                        0   æl0
                                              y1n`1 :“ bn`1
                                                        1   æl1
                                              y2n`1 :“ bn`1
                                                        2   æl0
                                              y3n`1 :“ bn`1
                                                        3   æl0 .

to make sure that y0n`1 , . . . , y3n`1 match bn`1
                                               0   , . . . , bn`1
                                                              3   for enough inputs for the decoder’s process to
work as the coder intends.
    That completes our description of the coding process. The main thing to notice is that we have
managed to describe actions for the coder which guarantee that if the decoder follows the decoding
process described above, then all of their guesses at the end of step n ` 1 are correct and they have
also correctly extracted the pn ` 1qth bit of x.

A Useful Corollary
We now prove a corollary of theorem 4.3 that will allow us to give a more streamlined proof that every
order-preserving function is either constant on a cone or measure-preserving.
Definition 4.4. A subset A of 2ω is countably directed for Turing reducibility if for all countable
subsets B Ď A, A contains an upper bound on the Turing degrees of the elements of B—i.e. there is
some x P A such that for all y P B, y ďT x.
Corollary 4.5. If A is a subset of 2ω which is countably directed for Turing reducibility and contains
a perfect set then A is cofinal.
Proof. We start with a set A which contains a perfect set and which is countably directed. Let P be a
perfect set contained in A and let B be a countable dense subset of P . Since A is countably directed,
we can ﬁnd some c in A which is an upper bound for B.



                                                      22
   Our goal is to show that A is coﬁnal. So we start with an arbitrary x and we want to ﬁnd some y
in A that computes x. By Theorem 4.3, we can ﬁnd reals y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 in P (and therefore also in A)
such that
                                    c ‘ y0 ‘ y1 ‘ y2 ‘ y3 ěT x.
Since A is countably directed, we can ﬁnd an upper bound for c, y0 , y1 , y2 , y3 in A. This upper bound
obviously computes x, so it is the y we are after.

4.2     Order-preserving functions are measure-preserving
In this section, we will prove that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all order-preserving functions.
We will do this by proving that every order-preserving function is either constant on a cone or measure-
preserving and then invoking Theorem 3.7, which states that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for
all measure-preserving functions.
    To prove that every order-preserving function is either measure-preserving or constant on a cone
we will use the theorem on perfect sets that we proved in the previous section, together with the fact
that, under AD, every set of reals is either countable or contains a perfect set (known as the perfect
set theorem, see [7], Theorem 33.3).
Theorem 4.6 (ZF ` AD). If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is an order-preserving function then f is either constant on
a cone or measure-preserving.
Proof. Before giving the proof in detail, here’s a sketch. Suppose that f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is an order-
preserving function. By the perfect set theorem, rangepf q is either countable or contains a perfect set.
We will show that if rangepf q is countable then f is constant on a cone and if rangepf q contains a
perfect set then f is measure-preserving.
   The case where rangepf q is countable is straightforward. In the case where rangepf q contains
a perfect set we will use the theorem on perfect sets that we proved in the previous section (more
speciﬁcally, we will use Corollary 4.5). The key point is that since f is order-preserving, its range is
countably directed for Turing reducibility.
Case 1: the range of f is countable. In this case, we can write 2ω as a countable union of sets
on which f is constant (i.e. the preimages of points in the range of f ). Since there are only countably
many of these sets, Corollary 2.4 implies that at least one of them contains rT s for some pointed
perfect tree T . Thus f is constant on rT s and hence constant on a cone.
Case 2: the range of f contains a perfect set. The main point here is that the range of an
order-preserving function is countably directed. To see why, suppose that x0 , x1 , . . . are all in the
range of f . Pick reals y0 , y1 , . . . such that f py0 q “ x0 , f py1 q “ x1 , and so on. Let y be the Turing join
of all the yi ’s. Since y computes each yi and f is order-preserving, f pyq computes each xi . In other
words, f pyq is an upper bound for tx0 , x1 , . . .u.
    Since rangepf q contains a perfect set and is countably directed, Corollary 4.5 implies that it is
coﬁnal. Now we want to show f is measure-preserving. In other words, we start with an arbitrary
a and we want to show that there is some b so that f sends everything in the cone above b into the
cone above a. Since the range of f is coﬁnal, there is some x ěT a in the range of f . Since x is in
the range of f , there is some y such that f pyq “ x. And since f is order-preserving, it takes the cone
above y into the cone above x and hence into the cone above a.
Remark 4.7. It will be useful later to note that if f is Borel then the above proof can be carried
out in ZF (with no extra determinacy hypotheses). To see why, observe that the proof only uses
determinacy in two places: ﬁrst, to conclude that rangepf q is either countable or contains a perfect set
and second, in case 1 (the case where rangepf q is countable) in the form of Corollary 2.4. If f is Borel
then rangepf q is analytic and hence it follows from the perfect set theorem for analytic sets (see [8],
Exercise 14.13) that rangepf q is either countable or contains a perfect set. Furthermore, Corollary 2.4


                                                        23
is applied to sets of the form f ´1 pxq and if f is Borel then so are these sets and hence Corollary 2.4
only requires Borel determinacy.
Theorem 4.8 (ZF`AD`DCR ). Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all order-preserving functions.
Proof. Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Turing-invariant function which is order-preserving. We want to
show that f is either constant on a cone or above the identity on a cone. By Theorem 4.6, f is either
constant on a cone or measure-preserving. If f is constant on a cone then we are done and if f is
measure-preserving then by Theorem 3.7 it is above the identity on a cone.

4.3    A proof for Borel functions that works in ZF
In the previous section, we proved part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions by
reducing to the case of measure-preserving functions. However, as discussed in section 3.2, we do not
currently know how to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Borel measure-preserving functions in
ZF, only in ZF ` Π11 ´ Det. Thus our proof in the previous section only implies that part 1 of Martin’s
Conjecture for order-preserving Borel functions holds in ZF ` Π11 ´ Det. In this section, we will prove
that it also holds in ZF.
   The key idea in this section is due to Kihara [10], building on an observation by Carroy. Kihara
observed that a theorem in descriptive set theory known as the Solecki dichotomy can be used to
prove a weak form of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions (earlier, Carroy
had suggested that the Solecki dichotomy and Martin’s Conjecture are related). In particular, Kihara
showed that if f is an order-preserving function then either
 (1) f pxq ďT x on a cone (in other words, f is regressive)
 (2) or there is some real a such that x1 ďT f pxq ‘ a on a cone.
    Furthermore, when combined with our results and a result of Slaman and Steel, the statement
obtained by Kihara can be used to prove the full part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving
functions. More precisely, in the ﬁrst case above, Slaman and Steel’s theorem on Martin’s Conjecture
for regressive functions shows that either f is constant on a cone or equal to the identity on a cone. In
the second case, our result that order-preserving functions are either constant on a cone or measure-
preserving shows that f pxq computes a on a cone (note that f cannot be constant on a cone in this
case) and thus that f pxq computes x1 on a cone.
    It is possible to check that if f is Borel then all parts of this argument—Kihara’s use of the Solecki
dichotomy, Slaman and Steel’s result and our result—can all be proved in ZF alone and thus this
yields a ZF proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving Borel functions. Moreover, the
whole proof also works in ZF ` AD when f is arbitrary (without needing DCR ).
    Instead of presenting Kihara’s original argument, we will use a simpliﬁed version, which is also
more self-contained. The simpliﬁed version of Kihara’s argument does not use the Solecki dichotomy,
but a more elementary statement which we will refer to as the “baby Solecki dichotomy” (ﬁrst proved
by Carroy in [2]). In the rest of this section, we will explain this statement, give a self-contained
proof of it and then explain how it can be used to give a ZF proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture
for order-preserving Borel functions.

The Solecki dichotomy and the baby Solecki dichotomy
Informally, the Solecki dichotomy states that for every suﬃciently deﬁnable function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω ,
either f is a countable union of continuous functions or the Turing jump (as a function on 2ω ) is
reducible to f . To state this formally, we need to give precise deﬁnitions of “a countable union of
continuous functions” and “the Turing jump is reducible to f .”
Definition 4.9. A function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is σ-continuous if there is a countable partition xAn ynPN of
2ω such that for each n, f æAn is continuous with respect to the subspace topology on An .

                                                   24
   Note that there is a small subtlety here: just because f æAn is continuous with respect to the
subspace topology on An does not mean that f æAn can be extended to a continuous function deﬁned
on all of 2ω . We will also refer to a partial function which is continuous with respect to the subspace
topology on its domain as a partial continuous function.
Definition 4.10. Given functions f, g : 2ω Ñ 2ω , f is continuously reducible5 to g, written f ďc g,
if there are partial continuous functions ϕ, ψ : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that for all x P 2ω , f pxq “ ψpgpϕpxqqq.
In other words, the following diagram commutes
                                                       g
                                                 2ω         2ω
                                                ϕ             ψ
                                                       f
                                                 2ω         2ω
Theorem 4.11 (Solecki dichotomy). For every Borel function f : ω ω Ñ ω ω , either f is σ-continuous
or j ďc f (where j denotes the Turing jump).
    Theorem 4.11 was ﬁrst proved by Solecki in [26] in the special case where f is of Baire class 1. It
was extended to all Borel functions by Zapletal in [29] and to all analytic functions by Pawlikowski
and Sabok in [21]. It is also known to hold for all functions under AD [29].
    Actually, the Solecki dichotomy as it is usually stated diﬀers from Theorem 4.11 above in two
ways. First, it is usually stated with the Turing jump replaced by a diﬀerent function known as the
Pawlikowski function. Since this function is continuously equivalent to the Turing jump, this does not
change the content of the theorem. Second, it is usually stated with continuous reducibility replaced by
a stronger reducibility notion known as topological embeddability. However, the distinction between
topological embeddability and continuous reducibility does not matter in Kihara’s proof so we will
ignore this diﬀerence.
    As we mentioned above, Kihara’s proof relies on the Solecki dichotomy, but can be modiﬁed to
rely on a more elementary statement in descriptive set theory, which we will refer to as the “baby
Solecki dichotomy.” Roughly speaking, this statement says that for every suﬃciently deﬁnable function
f : 2ω Ñ 2ω , either f is a countable union of constant functions or the identity function is reducible
to f . Just as the Solecki dichotomy characterizes those functions which the Turing jump is reducible
to, this statement characterizes those functions which the identity is reducible to.
Theorem 4.12 (Baby Solecki dichotomy). For every Borel function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω , either rangepf q is
countable or id ďc f .
    This theorem was ﬁrst proved by Carroy in [2, Proposition 2.1]. His proof works by invoking
Silver’s theorem that every analytic equivalence relation on 2ω either has countably many equivalence
classes or a perfect set of pairwise nonequivalent elements. However, it is also possible to give a proof
using a modiﬁed version of the perfect set game (essentially the “unfolded” perfect set game), which
is the proof we give below. To the best of our knowledge, this proof is new. Also, it can be easily
generalized to yield the same conclusion for all functions under ZF ` AD, whereas the generalization
of Carroy’s proof seems to require AD` .
Proof. Let us assume that rangepf q is not countable and prove id ďc f . First observe that it is
enough to show that there is a perfect set P such that f æP is both continuous and injective. Here’s
why. Any perfect set P Ď 2ω is homeomorphic to 2ω . Fix such a homeomorphism ϕ : 2ω Ñ P .
Furthermore, since f æP is a continuous, injective function on a compact set, it has a continuous left
inverse, ψ : rangepf q Ñ P . Thus for any x P 2ω , we have
             ϕ´1 ˝ ψ ˝ f ˝ ϕpxq “ ϕ´1 pψ ˝ f pϕpxqqq
                                  “ ϕ´1 pϕpxqq                        ψ is a left inverse of f æP
                                  “ x.
  5 This notion of reducibility has also been called strong continuous Weihrauch reducibility [1].




                                                      25
So the partial continuous functions ϕ and ϕ´1 ˝ ψ witness that id ďc f .
    Now let us show that such a set P exists. To do so, we will deﬁne a game, similar to the perfect
set game and show that if player 1 has a winning strategy in this game then there is a perfect set on
which f is continuous and injective and if player 2 has a winning strategy then rangepf q is countable.
Informal description of the game. We will ﬁrst give an informal description of the game. First,
player 1 plays two pairs of strings xσ0 , τ0 y and xσ1 , τ1 y such that σ0 , σ1 are incompatible and τ0 , τ1
are incompatible. These should be thought of as two diﬀerent options for initial segments of reals
x and y such that f pxq “ y. In other words, σ0 and τ0 are one option for initial segments of x
and y, respectively, and σ1 and τ1 are another option. The requirement that these two options are
incompatible is meant to witness injectivity of f .
   Next, player 2 picks either xσ0 , τ0 y or xσ1 , τ1 y. Suppose player 2 chooses xσ1 , τ1 y. Player 1 then
plays two more pairs of strings xσ01 , τ01 y and xσ11 , τ11 y such that
 (1) σ01 and σ11 both extend σ1 and τ01 , τ11 both extend τ1 ,
 (2) σ01 , σ11 are incompatible,
 (3) and τ01 , τ11 are incompatible.
and player 2 once again picks either xσ01 , τ01 y or xσ11 , τ11 y.
    More generally, on each turn, player 1 plays two pairs of strings which both extend the pair of
strings player 2 chose on the previous turn, making sure that the two pairs are incompatible with each
other. At the end of this game, the two players have together determined two sequences, x and y: x
formed from the σ’s of the pairs chosen by player 2 and y formed from the τ ’s of the pairs chosen by
player 2. Player 1 wins if f pxq “ y.
Formal description of the game. On turn n, player 1 plays two pairs of strings, xσ0n , τ0n y and
xσ1n , τ1n y, and then player 2 plays a bit bn P t0, 1u.

       player 1   xσ00 , τ00 y, xσ10 , τ10 y         xσ01 , τ01 y, xσ11 , τ11 y        . . . xσ0n , τ0n y, xσ1n , τ1n y        ...
       player 2                                 b0                                b1   ...                                bn   ...

Additionally, player 1’s plays must satisfy:
 (1) If n ą 1 then σ0n , σ1n both extend σbn´1
                                            n´1
                                                and τ0n , τ1n both extend τbn´1
                                                                            n´1
                                                                                .

 (2) σ0n , σ1n are incompatible

 (3) and τ0n , τ1n are incompatible.
                                         Ť          i
                                                                    Ť       i
Winning condition. Let x “                     iPN σbi and y “         iPN τbi . Player 1 wins if and only if f pxq “ y.

Case 1: player 1 wins. First suppose that player 1 has a winning strategy, γ. It can easily be seen
that the set of plays where player 1 plays according to γ is a perfect set on which f is continuous and
injective.
Case 2: player 2 wins. Now suppose that player 2 has a winning strategy, η. We will show that
rangepf q is countable. The idea is that we can tag each element of rangepf q by a unique position
in the game. Since there are only countably many positions in the game, this is suﬃcient. Suppose
y P rangepf q and p is a position in the game such that each player has made exactly n ` 1 moves so
far. Say that p avoids y if there is some x P 2ω such that the following hold:
 (1) f pxq “ y
 (2) all moves by player 2 so far have been following η



                                                                    26
 (3) all moves so far are consistent with x, y: for all i ď n, σbi i is an initial segment of x and τbii is an
     initial segment of y
 (4) and no matter what player 1 plays next, η will not pick a move consistent with x, y: for all initial
     segments σ of x extending σbnn and τ of y extending τbnn and all σ 1 , τ 1 such that xσ, τ y, xσ 1 , τ 1 y is
     a valid next move for player 1, η will choose xσ 1 , τ 1 y when given xσ, τ y, xσ 1 , τ 1 y and when given
     xσ 1 , τ 1 y, xσ, τ y.
To ﬁnish the proof, it is enough to show that any y P rangepf q is avoided by some position p and that
no distinct y, y 1 P rangepf q can be avoided by the same position.
    First let’s show that every y P rangepf q is avoided by some position. The idea is that if this is not
the case, then we can ﬁnd a way to defeat η. Fix y P rangepf q and x P 2ω such that f pxq “ y. Suppose
y is not avoided at any position. Then, in particular, y is not avoided by the starting position of the
game. Thus there are some initial segments σ of x and τ of y and strings σ 1 , τ 1 such that for at least
one of the two moves
   • xσ, τ y, xσ 1 , τ 1 y
   • xσ 1 , τ 1 y, xσ, τ y

by player 1, η will choose xσ, τ y. Consider playing this move for player 1. We are now at a position in
the game where each player has made one move, player 2 has played according to η and all moves so
far are consistent with x, y. By assumption, y is not avoided by this position either. So we can again
ﬁnd a move by player 1 so that η will still choose strings consistent with x, y. We can continue this
argument inductively to see that there is an inﬁnite play where player 2 always plays according to η
and all moves are consistent with x, y. Hence the sequences formed at the end of this play are x and
y themselves and since x was chosen so that f pxq “ y, this means player 1 wins. But this contradicts
the assumption that η is a winning strategy.
    Now let’s show that no distinct y, y 1 P rangepf q can be avoided by the same position. Suppose not.
In particular, suppose p is a position where each player has played n moves so far and p avoids both
y and y 1 , as witnessed by x and x1 , respectively. Since y ‰ y 1 (and consequently x ‰ x1 ), there are
incompatible initial segments τ of y and τ 1 of y 1 and incompatible initial segments σ of x and σ 1 of
x1 such that xσ, τ y and xσ 1 , τ 1 y both extend the last move of p. Now consider playing xσ, τ y, xσ 1 , τ 1 y as
player 1’s next move in the game after p. Since p avoids y as witnessed by x, η cannot choose xσ, τ y.
But since p also avoids y 1 , as witnessed by x1 , η cannot choose xσ 1 , τ 1 y either. But η must choose one
of these two options, so this is a contradiction.

Kihara’s proof
We will now explain how to prove part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for Borel order-preserving functions
in ZF, following Kihara’s idea. As discussed above, Kihara’s original proof used the Solecki dichotomy,
but we will instead use the baby Solecki dichotomy.
Theorem 4.13. Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture holds for all order-preserving Borel functions.
Proof. Since f is order-preserving, by Theorem 4.6 it is either constant on a cone or measure-preserving.
If it is constant on a cone then we are done, so we may assume it is measure-preserving. By the baby
Solecki dichotomy, either rangepf q is countable or id ďc f . We will show that in the former case, f is
constant on a cone and in the latter case, f is above the identity on a cone.
Case 1: rangepf q is countable. In this case, we can write 2ω as a countable union of Borel sets
such that f is constant on each one. Since there are only countably many of these sets, one of them
must contain the set of paths through some pointed perfect tree, T . Thus f is constant on rT s and
so f is constant on a cone.



                                                       27
Case 2: id ďc f . By deﬁnition, there are partial continuous functions ϕ and ψ such that for all
x P 2ω , ψpf pϕpxqqq “ x. Since every partial continuous function is (partial) computable relative to
some oracle, we can pick some a and b such that ϕ is computable relative to a and ψ is computable
relative to b.
    Now consider any x in the cone above a. Note that for such an x, ϕpxq ďT x. Since ψpf pϕpxqqq “ x,
x can compute some y (namely ϕpxq) such that f pyq ‘ b can compute x (via ψ). This seems pretty
close to saying that f pxq can compute x, and hence that f is above the identity, but there are a couple
problems.
 (1) We are using f pyq rather than f pxq to compute x.
 (2) To compute x from f pyq we also need to know b, but we would like to show that f pxq can
     compute x without any extra information.
The solution to the ﬁrst problem is to note that f is order-preserving and y is computable from x and
thus f pyq is computable from f pxq. The solution to the second problem is to use the fact that f is
measure-preserving, so on a high enough cone, f pxq computes b.
    Let’s put all of this more formally. Let x be large enough that x computes a and f pxq computes
b. Thus ϕpxq is computable from x and since f is order-preserving, this means that f pxq computes
f pϕpxqq. Since f pxq also computes b, f pxq computes ψpf pϕpxqqq “ x. So f pxq computes x on a
cone.
Remark 4.14. We will now verify that when f is Borel, the above proof can be carried out in ZF
alone. The proof begins by invoking Theorem 4.6, but as noted in Remark 4.7, if f is Borel then this
theorem is provable in ZF. The proof then uses the baby Solecki dichotomy. The proof we gave above
of this dichotomy only uses Borel determinacy and thus works in ZF. The proof of case 1 implicitly
uses determinacy in the form of Corollary 2.4, but as noted in Remark 4.7, when f is Borel this only
requires Borel determinacy. Finally, the proof of case 2 does not use determinacy at all.

4.4    Application to the theory of locally countable Borel quasi-orders
We will now discuss an application of our result on order-preserving functions to the theory of locally
countable Borel quasi-orders. In particular, we will show that Turing reducibility is not a universal
locally countable Borel equivalence relation.
    The motivation for this result comes from the theory of countable Borel equivalence relations (for a
survey of this theory, see [9]). Kechris has conjectured that Turing equivalence is a universal countable
Borel equivalence relation, which is known to contradict Martin’s Conjecture [4]. The result we prove
in this section refutes a natural strengthening of Kechris’s conjecture.
    Before proving our result, we begin by reviewing some deﬁnitions.
Definition 4.15. A quasi-order ďX on a Polish space X is Borel if it is Borel as a subset of X ˆ X
and locally countable if for every element x of X, the set of predecessors of x—i.e. ty | y ďX xu—is
countable.
   Note that Turing reducibility on 2ω is a locally countable Borel quasi-order.

Definition 4.16. If ďX is a Borel quasi-order on X and ďY is a Borel quasi-order on Y then ďX is
Borel reducible to ďY if there is a Borel function f : X Ñ Y such that for all x1 , x2 P X

                                   x1 ďX x2 ðñ f px1 q ďX f px2 q.

Definition 4.17. A locally countable Borel quasi-order is universal if every other locally countable
Borel quasi-order is Borel reducible to it.




                                                   28
    To show that Turing reducibility is not universal, we just need to exhibit a single locally countable
Borel quasi-order that is not reducible to it (the general question of which locally countable Borel
quasi-orders are reducible to Turing reducibility is explored more thoroughly in [6]). We will show
that if we take Turing reducibility and add one extra point which is not comparable with anything
else then the resulting quasi-order is not reducible to Turing reducibility.
    Here’s the main idea of the proof. If we have a Borel reduction from Turing reducibility plus a point
to regular Turing reducibility then by ignoring the extra point, we get an injective, order-preserving
Borel function on the Turing degrees. By the Borel version of the results of section 4.2, this function
must be measure-preserving. But this means that this function eventually gets above the image of
the extra point, which contradicts the fact that it is a reduction (since the extra point is supposed to
be incomparable to everything else).
    More formally, we can deﬁne a quasi-order as follows. Let 0 denote the element of 2ω whose bits
are all 0s and let ď˚T be the binary relation on 2ω deﬁned as follows.
                                               #
                                     ˚           x ďT y and x, y ‰ 0
                                 x ďT y ðñ
                                                  or x “ y “ 0.

In other words, ď˚T is exactly like Turing reducibility except that there is a special point, 0, which is
not comparable to anything else. It is easy to see that this is a locally countable Borel quasi order.
Theorem 4.18. The quasi order ď˚T is not Borel reducible to ďT .
Proof. Suppose for contradiction that f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a Borel reduction from ď˚T to ďT . Let f ˚ denote
the function f restricted to all the reals not equal to 0. By deﬁnition of “Borel reduction,” f ˚ is a
Borel order-preserving function which is injective on the Turing degrees (though not necessarily on
the reals). By Theorem 4.66 , either f ˚ is constant on a cone or measure-preserving. But since it is
injective on the Turing degrees it cannot be constant on a cone and thus must be measure-preserving.
    Since f ˚ is measure-preserving, its range is coﬁnal in the Turing degrees. Thus there is some x ‰ 0
such that f p0q ďT f ˚ pxq. But f ˚ pxq is just f pxq and hence we have f p0q ďT f pxq. Since f is a Borel
reduction, this implies that 0 ď˚T x, which contradicts the deﬁnition of ď˚T (since 0 is supposed to be
incomparable to all other elements).
Corollary 4.19. Turing reducibility is not a universal locally countable Borel quasi order.


5     Ultrafilters on the Turing Degrees
Several of the deﬁnitions, facts and theorems related to Martin’s Conjecture can be recast in the
language of ultraﬁlters. When recast in this language, our result on measure-preserving functions
allows us to show that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is equivalent to a statement about the structure
of the class of ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees. This equivalent statement suggests a few routes to
making progress on Martin’s Conjecture, one of which we will explore further.
    Central to this view of Martin’s Conjecture is the Martin measure, also known as the cone
measure, a countably complete ﬁlter on the Turing degrees.
Definition 5.1. The Martin measure on the Turing degrees is the class, UM , of all sets of Turing
degrees which contain a cone, i.e.

                                UM “ tA Ď DT | for some x, Conepxq Ď Au.

    The most important fact about the Martin measure is that, under AD, it is an ultraﬁlter.
   6 Note that that theorem was stated as a theorem of ZF ` AD, but when restricted to Borel functions, it is provable

in ZF. The key point is that the perfect set theorem used in the proof holds for all analytic sets in ZF.



                                                         29
Theorem 5.2 (ZF ` AD; Martin). The Martin measure is an ultrafilter on the Turing degrees.
   This theorem is simply a restatement of Martin’s cone theorem in terms of the Martin measure.
Likewise, several key deﬁnitions can be restated in terms of Martin measure. For example, the Martin
order and Martin equivalence can be deﬁned as follows.
  • f ďM g if and only if F pxq ďT Gpxq for UM -almost every x (where F and G are the functions
    on the Turing degrees induced by f and g, respectively).
  • f ”M g if and only if F pxq “ Gpxq for UM -almost every x.
We will now see that the class of measure-preserving functions on the Turing degrees also has a
natural deﬁnition in terms of the Martin measure: it is exactly the class of functions which are
measure-preserving for the Martin measure in the sense of ergodic theory (which is the reason that
we chose to call them “measure-preserving”). To explain this, we ﬁrst need to recall some deﬁnitions
from measure theory.
Remark 5.3. Several of the results in this section are proved in the theory ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR .
All of these results can also be proved in the theory ZF ` AD` . We don’t know whether they can be
proved in ZF ` AD ` DCR .

5.1    Measure-preserving functions and the Martin measure
Measure-preserving functions in general
Given a measure µ on a set X and a function f : X Ñ Y , there is a canonical way of getting a measure
on Y , called the pushforward of µ by f .
Definition 5.4. If µ is a measure on a space X and f : X Ñ Y is a function then the pushforward
of µ by f , denoted f˚ µ, is the measure on Y given by

                                        f˚ µpAq “ µpf ´1 pAqq.

Proposition 5.5. The pushforward of a measure is itself a measure.
   Note that for any functions f : X Ñ Y and g : Y Ñ Z, pg ˝ f q˚ µ “ g˚ f˚ µ. We can now deﬁne
what it means for a function to be measure-preserving (in the sense of ergodic theory).
Definition 5.6. If µ is a measure on a space X and f : X Ñ X is a function then f is measure-
preserving for µ, or sometimes is said to preserve µ, if f˚ µ “ µ.
    We will be mostly concerned with measures that are ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees. Recall that
an ultraﬁlter on a set X can be considered a t0, 1u-valued measure on X. The next proposition tells
us that we can talk about the pushforwards of ultraﬁlters without worrying about measures which are
not ultraﬁlters.
Proposition 5.7. The pushforward of an ultrafilter is itself an ultrafilter.
   Suppose that U is an ultraﬁlter on a set X, V is an ultraﬁlter on a set Y , f : X Ñ Y is any function
and we would like to determine whether f˚ U “ V . If we simply use the deﬁnition of pushforward, we
must check that for each A P V , f ´1 pAq P U and that for each A R V , f ´1 pAq R U . The following
lemma tells us that because U and V are ultraﬁlters, this condition can be simpliﬁed somewhat.
Lemma 5.8. If U is an ultrafilter on X, V is an ultrafilter on Y and f : X Ñ Y then f˚ U “ V if
and only if for all A P U , f pAq P V .




                                                  30
Proof. ( ùñ ) First, suppose that f˚ U “ V and let A be any set in U . By the deﬁnition of pushforward,
f pAq is in V if and only if f ´1 pf pAqq is in U . Since f ´1 pf pAqq clearly contains A and A is in U , we
can conclude that f pAq is in V .
( ðù ) Now suppose that for all A P U , f pAq P V . We need to show that for each B Ď Y , B P V if
and only if f ´1 pBq P U .
    First assume f ´1 pBq is in U . Then by our assumption, f pf ´1 pBqq is in V and therefore so is B
(since it is a superset of f pf ´1 pBqq).
    Now assume that f ´1 pBq is not in U . Since U is an ultraﬁlter, this means pf ´1 pBqqC “ f ´1 pB C q
is in U (where we use p¨qC to denote the appropriate relative complement of a set). By the reasoning
in the preceding paragraph, this means that B C is in V and hence that B is not.

Measure-preserving “ measure-preserving
We can now give our equivalent deﬁnition of the class of measure-preserving function on the Turing
degrees in terms of the Martin measure.
Proposition 5.9. A Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving if and only if the
function F : DT Ñ DT that it induces is measure-preserving for the Martin measure.
Proof. ( ùñ ) Suppose f is measure-preserving (in the sense of Deﬁnition 1.7). By Lemma 5.8, we
just need to show that if a subset A of the Turing degrees contains a cone then F pAq contains a cone.
By determinacy, it is enough to show that F pAq is coﬁnal in the Turing degrees. So let a be any
Turing degree and we need to show that there is some degree above a which is in F pAq. Since f is
measure preserving, there is some b such that for all x, x ěT b implies F pxq ěT a. And since A
contains a cone, we can ﬁnd some x P A such that x ěT b and hence F pxq ěT a.
( ðù ) Suppose F is measure-preserving for the Martin measure. Let a be any real. We need to ﬁnd
some real so that on the cone above that real, f is always above a. Since F preserves the Martin
measure, F ´1 pConepaqq must contain a cone. Let b be a base of such a cone. Then for any x ěT b,
F pdegT pxqq P Conepaq and hence f pxq ěT a.

5.2    The Rudin-Keisler order on ultrafilters on the Turing degrees
In the previous section we saw that measure-preserving functions can be deﬁned in terms of the
Martin measure. In this section we will see that our result on part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for
measure-preserving functions implies that, at least under AD ` UniformizationR , part 1 of Martin’s
Conjecture is equivalent to a statement about ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees.

The Rudin-Keisler Order
To explain the connection between part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture and ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees,
we ﬁrst need to give some background on the Rudin-Keisler order on ultraﬁlters.

Definition 5.10. Suppose U is an ultraﬁlter on a set X and V is an ultraﬁlter on a set Y . Then U
is Rudin-Keisler below V , written U ďRK V , if there is a function f : Y Ñ X such that

                                                f˚ V “ U.

Example 5.11. If U is a principal ultraﬁlter on a set X then U is Rudin-Keisler below every other
ultraﬁlter. To see why, suppose U concentrates on the point a P X and suppose V is an ultraﬁlter on
a set Y . It is easy to check that if f : Y Ñ X is the constant function x ÞÑ a then f˚ pV q “ U .
   Note that in the deﬁnition of ďRK , the function f is going in the opposite direction from what one
might naively expect. This makes more sense if one considers embeddings of ultrapowers: if U ďRK V


                                                    31
then for every structure M there is an embedding M X {U Ñ M Y {V . Also note that it is possible to
have distinct ultraﬁlters U and V such that U ďRK V and V ďRK U ; in other words, ďRK is only a
quasi-order rather than a partial order. In case this happens we will say that U and V are weakly
Rudin-Keisler equivalent.
Definition 5.12. Suppose U is an ultraﬁlter on a set X and V is an ultraﬁlter on a set Y . Then U
is weakly Rudin-Keisler equivalent to V , written U ”RK V , if U ďRK V and V ďRK U .
    Note that this deﬁnition is slightly diﬀerent than the usual deﬁnition of “Rudin-Keisler equivalent”
found in the literature (which is why we have added the word “weakly”). The usual deﬁnition is that
ultraﬁlters U on X and V on Y are Rudin-Keisler equivalent if there is a bijection f : X Ñ Y such
that f˚ U “ V . The two deﬁnitions are equivalent under ZFC, but not under ZF.
    If we restrict our attention to a ultraﬁlters on a single set and ignore the principal ultraﬁlters,
then the class of ultraﬁlters which are minimal in the Rudin-Keisler order often turns out to be an
important class with a natural characterization that does not mention the Rudin-Keisler order. We
must be slightly careful here about what we mean by “minimal.” We mean minimal in the sense of a
quasi-order, i.e. U is minimal if for all V ďRK U , V is weakly Rudin-Keisler equivalent to U .
Example 5.13. The minimal nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on ω are exactly the Ramsey ultraﬁlters.
Example 5.14. Every normal ultraﬁlter on a cardinal κ is Rudin-Keisler minimal among nonprincipal
ultraﬁlters on κ and every minimal nonprincipal ultraﬁlter on κ is Rudin-Keisler equivalent to either
a normal ultraﬁlter or to a Ramsey ultraﬁlter on ω (see chapter 9 of [3]).

Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture and the Rudin-Keisler Order
We will now show that, at least under AD ` UniformizationR (or AD` ), part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture
is equivalent to a statement about the position of the Martin measure in the Rudin-Keisler order on
nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees.
Theorem 5.15 (ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR ). Part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is equivalent to the
following statement: if V is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on DT such that V ďRK UM then V “ UM .
    Note that this is a bit stronger than saying that UM is minimal among the nonprincipal ultraﬁlters
on the Turing degrees (though it does imply that). In particular, this statement rules out the existence
of a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter V on DT which is weakly Rudin-Keisler equivalent, but not literally equal,
to UM .
Proof. Since we are working under UniformizationR , part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is equivalent to the
statement that every function F : DT Ñ DT is either constant on a cone or above the identity on a
cone (the point is that under UniformizationR every function on the Turing degrees is induced by a
Turing-invariant function on the reals). We have the following equivalences.
  • F is constant on a cone if and only if F˚ UM is a principal ultraﬁlter.
  • F is above the identity on a cone if and only if F is measure-preserving (one direction is clear
    from the deﬁnitions and the other follows from Theorem 3.4). By the equivalent deﬁnition of
    measure-preserving in terms of Martin measure, this means F is above the identity on a cone if
    and only if F˚ UM “ UM .
Thus F is either constant on a cone or above the identity on a cone if and only if F˚ UM is either a
principal ultraﬁlter or UM itself. By deﬁnition of ďRK , the latter statement holds for all F if and only
if no nonprincipal ultraﬁlter on DT besides UM itself is below UM in the Rudin-Keisler order.
   This equivalence suggests a few approaches to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture.



                                                   32
  • Use work on the Rudin-Keisler order from set theory. For example, we have mentioned
    that a normal ultraﬁlter on a cardinal κ is ďRK -minimal among nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on κ.
    Notably, Slaman and Steel’s theorem on Martin’s Conjecture for regressive functions can be seen
    as providing a kind of analogue of normality for Martin measure.
  • Study specific ultrafilters or classes of ultrafilters. Given a speciﬁc ultraﬁlter (or class of
    ultraﬁlters) on the Turing degrees, one could try to show that this ultraﬁlter is not Rudin-Keisler
    below the Martin measure. We will discuss this approach more in the next section.
  • Split part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture into two parts. By Theorem 5.15, to prove part 1 of
    Martin’s Conjecture it is enough to prove two things: if V is a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter on DT such
    that V ďRK UM then UM ďRK V (i.e. they are weakly equivalent) and if UM ďRK V ďRK UM
    then V “ UM . Perhaps one of these is easier to prove on its own than the full part 1 of Martin’s
    Conjecture. We will discuss a proposition relevant to the latter of these two parts in section 5.4.

5.3    The Lebesgue and Baire ultrafilters
It is possible to show that under AD, Lebesgue measure on 2ω induces an ultraﬁlter on the Turing
degrees. Likewise, under AD, the Baire ﬁlter (i.e. the class of comeager sets) on 2ω induces an ultraﬁlter
on the Turing degrees. In light of the discussion in the previous section, it would be interesting to
show that these two ultraﬁlters are not below the Martin measure in the Rudin-Keisler order. We
don’t know how to do that but we can show that neither of them is above the Martin measure in the
Rudin-Keisler order. This might sound like the wrong direction, but it’s not as bad as it sounds: it
shows that neither ultraﬁlter is weakly equivalent to the Martin measure.
    Note that Andrew Marks and Adam Day independently proved the results in this section several
years before we did and also asked whether the Lebesgue and Baire ultraﬁlters are below the Martin
measure in the Rudin-Keisler order (as well as other questions about the Rudin-Keisler order on
ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees) [15].

Lebesgue and Baire are ultrafilters
First, we deﬁne the Lebesgue and Baire ﬁlters on DT as follows.
  • The Lebesgue filter: let UL denote the class of subsets of DT with measure 1, i.e.

                                A P UL ðñ λptx P 2ω | degT pxq P Auq “ 1.

      where λ denotes the Lebesgue measure on 2ω .
  • The Baire filter: let UB denote the class of subsets of DT which are comeager, i.e.

                          A P UB ðñ tx P 2ω | degT pxq P Au is comeager in 2ω .

Note that both UL and UB are countably complete ﬁlters on DT .
   As we mentioned above, AD implies that both UL and UB are actually ultraﬁlters. This can be
proved using Kolmogorov’s zero-one law together with standard regularity properties implied by AD.
Definition 5.16. A set A Ď 2ω is closed under tail equivalence if for all x, y P 2ω which diﬀer at
only ﬁnitely many positions
                                       x P A ðñ y P A.
Theorem 5.17 (Kolmogorov’s zero-one law). Suppose A Ď 2ω is closed under tail equivalence.
 (1) If A is Lebesgue measurable then either λpAq “ 0 or λpAq “ 1.



                                                   33
 (2) If A has the Baire property (i.e. A is either meager or comeager in some basic open set) then A
     is either meager or comeager.
Theorem 5.18 (ZF ` AD). Every subset of 2ω is Lebesgue measurable and has the Baire property.
Proposition 5.19 (ZF ` AD). UL and UB are ultrafilters.
Proof. We will just provide a proof for UL since the proof for UB is almost identical. Let A be any set
of Turing degrees. We want to show that either A is in UL or DT r A is in UL . Since Turing degrees
are closed under tail equivalence, the set tx | degT pxq P Au is also closed under tail equivalence. AD
implies that it is Lebesgue measurable and thus by Kolmogorov’s zero-one law it either has measure
0 or measure 1. In the former case, DT r A P UL . In the latter case, A P UL .

Lebesgue and Baire are not above Martin
We will now prove that the Lebesgue and Baire ultraﬁlters are not Rudin-Keisler above the Martin
measure. Our strategy is as follows. Suppose F : DT Ñ DT is a function such that F˚ UL “ UM . By
composing F with the map x ÞÑ ω1x and then taking the pushforward of UL by this function, we get a
nonprincipal countably complete ultraﬁlter on ω1 . However, countably complete ultraﬁlters on ω1 are
rather constrained. In particular, they can only satisfy Fubini’s theorem if they are principal. Since
Lebesgue measure does satisfy Fubini’s theorem, we can use this to derive a contradiction.
Lemma 5.20 (ZF`AD). Every function f : 2ω Ñ ω1 is constant on a set of positive Lebesgue measure.
Proof. Suppose for contradiction that f is not constant on any set of positive measure. Note that for
every α P ω1 , AD implies that f ´1 pαq is Lebesgue measurable and so our assumption implies that it
has measure 0. By countable additivity of the Lebesgue measure, this implies that for any countable
set A Ď ω1 , f ´1 pAq has measure 0.
    Now let B be the subset of 2ω ˆ 2ω deﬁned by

                                      B “ tpx, yq | f pxq ď f pyqu.

Again, since we are working under AD, we know B is Lebesgue measurable. We will now use Fubini’s
theorem to compute the measure of B in two diﬀerent ways to arrive at a contradiction. By Fubini’s
theorem we have:
                             ż                       ż
                     λpBq “ λpty | px, yq P Buq dx “ λptx | px, yq P Buq dy.

Now note that for any y, we have

                                tx | px, yq P Bu “ f ´1 ptα | α ď f pyquq.

Since this is the inverse image under f of a countable set, its measure must be 0. Thus
                                 ż                         ż
                                   λptx | px, yq P Buq dy “ 0 dy “ 0.

On the other hand, for any x,

                                ty | px, yq P Bu “ f ´1 ptα | f pxq ď αuq.

Since this is the complement of the inverse image under f of a countable set, its measure must be 1.
Thus                            ż                         ż
                                  λpty | px, yq P Buq dx “ 1 dx “ 1.

Therefore we have calculated that the measure of B is both 0 and 1, a contradiction.

                                                   34
Corollary 5.21. Every function F : DT Ñ ω1 is constant on some set in UL .
Proof. This follows from the previous lemma together with Kolmogorov’s zero-one law.
Theorem 5.22 (ZF ` AD). The Lebesgue ultrafilter is not Rudin-Keisler above the Martin measure,
i.e. UM ęRK UL .
Proof. Suppose for contradiction that UM ďRK UL , as witnessed by some function F (so F˚ UL “ UM ).
Let G : DT Ñ ω1 be the map deﬁned by
                                           Gpxq “ ω1x .
It is straightforward to check that G˚ pUM q is a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter on ω1 . But by the lemma above,
G ˝ F is constant on a set of Lebesgue measure 1 and hence pG ˝ F q˚ pUL q is a principal ultraﬁlter on
ω1 . This is a contradiction since we have

                               pG ˝ F q˚ pUL q “ G˚ pF˚ pUL qq “ G˚ pUM q.

Theorem 5.23 (ZF ` AD). The Baire ultrafilter is not Rudin-Keisler above the Martin measure, i.e.
UM ęRK UB .
Proof. We can repeat the proof for the Lebesgue ultraﬁlter almost verbatim. In particular, Baire
category satisﬁes a version of Fubini’s theorem which is suﬃcient to carry out Lemma 5.20.
    In light of the results above, it would be very interesting to show that the Lebesgue and Baire
ultraﬁlters are not below the Martin measure in the Rudin-Keisler order. Note that Andrew Marks and
Adam Day have shown that under ADR , UL ďRK UM holds if and only if there is a Turing-invariant
function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that for all x, f pxq is x-random [15].
    Our results also suggest some questions which are less directly connected to Martin’s Conjecture.
For example, we showed that UL and UB are not Rudin-Keisler above the Martin measure. Is there
any ultraﬁlter on DT which is Rudin-Keisler above the Martin measure (besides the Martin measure
itself)? Also, is there any meaningful diﬀerence between the Lebesgue and Baire ultraﬁlters on DT
with respect to the Rudin-Keisler order?

5.4    Additional facts about the Martin measure and the Rudin-Keisler or-
       der
We will ﬁnish our discussion of Martin’s Conjecture and ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees by mention-
ing a few facts which seem relevant to attempts to investigate the place of the Martin measure in the
Rudin-Keisler order.

A characterization of the Martin measure
In order to use the approach to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture described in Section 5.2, it is necessary
to have tools to show that ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees are equal to the Martin measure. We do
not know of many such tools, except for the following proposition.
Proposition 5.24 (ZF ` AD). Suppose V is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on the Turing degrees such that
tx | Conepxq P V u is in V . Then V “ UM .

Proof. Let A “ tx | Conepxq P V u. We will ﬁrst assume that A is coﬁnal in the Turing degrees and
show that this implies UM “ V . We will then show that A is coﬁnal.
The cofinality of A is sufficient. Assume A is coﬁnal in the Turing degrees. Since UM and V are
both ultraﬁlters, it is enough to show that every set in UM is in V . To show this, it is enough to show
that every cone is in V .



                                                   35
    Fix an arbitrary degree x. We will show that the cone above x is in V . Since A is coﬁnal, there
is some y ěT x such that y P A. By deﬁnition of A, this implies that Conepyq P V and hence that
Conepxq (which is a superset of Conepyq) is in V .
A is cofinal. Let A r “ tx P 2ω | degT x P Au. The idea is to apply Corollary 4.5 to A   r to show that A r
(and hence A as well) is coﬁnal.
    First, we claim that A is not countable. Since we are working in ZF ` AD, V is countably complete
(since every ultraﬁlter is). Since V is nonprincipal and countably complete and A is in V , A cannot
be countable.
    Next we claim that A is countably directed in the Turing degrees.
                                                                 Ş       Let x0 , x1 , . . . be a countable
sequence of elements of A. Hence for each n, Conepxn q P V . So n Conepxn q is also in V , since V is
countably complete. By assumption, A is in V and hence
                                                č
                                           A X Conepxn q
                                                  n

is nonempty. It is easy to check that any element of this intersection gives us an element of A which
is an upper bound for all the xn ’s.
                                         r Hence the perfect set theorem implies that A
    Since A is not countable, neither is A.                                              r contains a
                                                                        r
perfect set. Since A is countably directed in the Turing degrees, so is A. Thus Corollary 4.5 implies
that Ar is coﬁnal in the Turing degrees and so A is as well.

   This proposition has an interesting consequence in the world of Turing-invariant functions, which
can be seen as a sharpening of our result on order-preserving functions.
Definition 5.25. A Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is almost order-preserving if for every
x, there is a cone on which f is above f pxq—i.e. for all y in some cone, f pyq ěT f pxq.
   Note that if f is order-preserving then f pyq ěT f pxq for all y ěT x whereas if f is merely almost
order-preserving then f pyq ěT f pxq only for all y of suﬃciently high Turing degree.
Corollary 5.26 (ZF ` AD ` DCR ). Suppose f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is almost order-preserving. Then either f is
constant on a cone or f ěM id.
Proof. Assume f is not constant on any cone and let F : DT Ñ DT be the function on DT induced
by f . We will show F˚ UM has the property in the statement of Proposition 5.24. To see why, note
that F˚ UM concentrates on the image of F and it follows immediately from the deﬁnition of almost
order-preserving that for every x, the cone above x is in F˚ UM . Also note that since f is not constant
on any cone, F˚ UM is nonprincipal.
   By Proposition 5.24, this implies that F˚ UM “ UM . In other words, f is measure-preserving. So
by Theorem 3.7, f ěM id, as desired.

The Rudin-Keisler order below the Martin measure
Earlier, we showed that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture is equivalent to the statement that there are
no nonprincipal ultraﬁlters on the Turing degrees which are Rudin-Keisler below the Martin measure
(other than the Martin measure itself). It seems reasonable to ask whether there are any nonprincipal
ultraﬁlters at all that are Rudin-Keisler below the Martin measure, even if we consider ultraﬁlters on
sets other than the Turing degrees. In fact, a theorem due to Kunen implies that there are many such
ultraﬁlters: in particular, any ultraﬁlter on an ordinal less than Θ (where Θ is the least ordinal such
that there is no surjection R Ñ Θ).
Theorem 5.27 (ZF ` AD ` DCR ; Kunen). If V is an ultrafilter on an ordinal κ ă Θ then V ďRK UM .
   A proof of this theorem can be found in a paper by Steel [28] in the course of a proof of a more
well-known theorem of Kunen which states that every ultraﬁlter on any ordinal less than Θ is ordinal
deﬁnable (Theorem 8.6 of Steel’s paper).

                                                      36
6     Generalizations and Counterexamples
In this section we will discuss the extent to which our results can be generalized to other contexts. In
particular, we will consider whether they still hold in degree structures other than the Turing degrees,
whether they hold for functions which are not Turing-invariant, and whether they hold (in a modiﬁed
form) in ZFC.
    In general, we ﬁnd that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions is fairly
robust, holding in a number of diﬀerent contexts, while our results on order-preserving functions are
much harder to generalize.

6.1    Other degree structures
There are many degree structures besides the Turing degrees studied in computability theory and
it is possible to state a version of Martin’s Conjecture in a number of these structures. All that’s
required is that the degree structure satisfy the appropriate analog of Martin’s cone theorem and
have a notion of a jump operator. For example, both the arithmetic degrees and the hyperarithmetic
degrees satisfy these requirements—in the arithmetic degrees, the appropriate jump operator is the
ω-jump, while in the hyperarithmetic degrees it’s the hyperjump—and thus we can state a version of
Martin’s Conjecture for both.
    Surprisingly, these diﬀerent versions of Martin’s Conjecture have turned out to work somewhat
diﬀerently from each other. Some of the special cases of Martin’s Conjecture which are known to hold
in the Turing degrees are known to be false in the arithmetic degrees. And there are other instances
of Martin’s Conjecture which are known to hold for the Turing degrees, but whose status is open for
the arithmetic degrees or the hyperarithmetic degrees.
    For example, here is the status of two special cases of Martin’s Conjecture for the arithmetic and
hyperarithmetic degrees.
    • Martin’s Conjecture for uniformly invariant functions: This fails in the arithmetic de-
      grees [16], but holds in the hyperarithmetic degrees (unpublished, but mentioned in [24]).
    • Martin’s Conjecture for regressive functions: This is open for the arithmetic degrees and
      holds for the hyperarithmetic degrees [13].
   In this section, we will discuss to what extent the results in this paper extend to the arithmetic
and hyperarithmetic degrees. In brief, the results on measure-preserving functions seem quite robust
and hold in most degree structures, while the results on order-preserving functions seem to rely more
on the speciﬁc structure of the Turing degrees.

Measure-preserving functions on other degree structures
Both of our proofs of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions seem to be
very ﬂexible and can be made to work in most degree structures, including both the arithmetic
and hyperarithmetic degrees. Rather than recapitulate our proof in detail for many diﬀerent degree
structures, we will just give a sketch of the key points for the case of the arithmetic degrees. We will
use the AD ` UniformizationR proof since it is simpler to explain, but our second proof can also be
easily adapted to the arithmetic degrees.
    For the sake of completeness, we begin by stating the deﬁnition of “measure-preserving” for arith-
metically invariant functions.
Definition 6.1. An arithmetically invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving if for
every a there is some b such that
                                    x ěA b ùñ f pxq ěA a.
In other words, for every a, f is arithmetically above a on a cone of arithmetic degrees.


                                                  37
Theorem 6.2 (ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR ). If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is an arithmetically invariant, measure-
preserving function then f pxq ěA x on a cone of arithmetic degrees.
Proof. First, use UniformizationR to pick an increasing modulus, g, for f . There is one subtlety here:
we want g to be increasing not only on the arithmetic degrees, but also on the Turing degrees. In
other words, we want g to be a function such that

                                 gpxq ěT x and y ěA gpxq ùñ f pyq ěA x.

This may look a little unintuitive: why not just require gpxq ěA x? The reason is that some of the
lemmas we would like to invoke depend on ﬁnding a computable injective function on a pointed perfect
tree and we cannot ﬁnd a computable inverse for g unless gpxq ěT x. It is possible to get around
this diﬃculty by reproving our main lemmas with somewhat diﬀerent hypotheses tailored to functions
on the arithmetic degrees, but our approach of requiring gpxq to compute x seems easier and more
general.
    In any case, there is no problem with requiring gpxq to compute x because if g is any modulus for
f , we can always replace g with x ÞÑ gpxq ‘ x to get a modulus which is increasing on the Turing
degrees.
    Now that we have g, we can proceed with the rest of the proof more or less unchanged. By
Corollary 2.6 we can ﬁnd a pointed perfect tree, T , and a computable function h deﬁned on rT s which
is a right inverse for g on rT s (in this case, it does not matter whether T is pointed in the sense of the
Turing degrees or in the sense of the arithmetic degrees). For all x P rT s, the deﬁnition of modulus
implies that f pxq ěA hpxq and Lemma 2.1 implies that hpxq ‘ T ěT x. Putting these together we
have that f pxq ‘ T ěA x on a cone of arithmetic degrees. Since f is measure-preserving, it gets above
T on a cone and thus f pxq ěA x on a cone, as desired.
    The only things about the degree structure that seem required to make this proof work are that it
satisﬁes something like Martin’s pointed perfect tree theorem7 and its notion of reduction is reasonable
enough to prove things like Corollary 2.6 and Lemma 2.1.

Order-preserving functions on other degree structures
Unlike our results on measure-preserving functions, our results on order-preserving functions do not
seem easy to generalize to other degree structures.
    For order-preserving functions on the arithmetic degrees, for example, part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture
is simply false.
Theorem 6.3 (Slaman and Steel). There is a function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω which is order-preserving for
arithmetic reducibility which is neither constant on a cone of arithmetic degrees nor above the identity
on a cone of arithmetic degrees.
    This theorem has not been published, but the construction is very similar to the counterexample
to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for the arithmetic degrees constructed in [16].
    The theorem above also shows that the analog of Theorem 4.6 for the arithmetic degrees fails:
not all functions which are order-preserving on the arithmetic degrees are measure-preserving on the
arithmetic degrees. To see why, note that any counterexample to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for
order-preserving functions on the arithmetic degrees cannot be measure-preserving on the arithmetic
degrees because, as observed above, part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture does hold for such functions.
    In contrast, we do not know whether part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions
holds for the hyperarithmetic degrees. On the one hand, we do not know how to extend the cru-
cial Theorem 4.6 to the hyperarithmetic degrees. On the other hand, we also don’t know of any
counterexample. Resolving this seems like an interesting question.
    7 Note that this is not true of all degree structures. For example, Marks has observed that Martin’s cone theorem

fails for polynomial time Turing equivalence [14].


                                                         38
6.2    Non-invariant functions
In the previous section, we saw that our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving
functions is robust in the sense that it works in many diﬀerent degree structures. In this section, we
will see that it is robust in another sense: it works even for functions which are not Turing-invariant.
As in the previous section, both the AD ` UniformizationR proof from section 3.1 and the AD ` DCR
proof from section 3.2 can easily be modiﬁed to work in this new setting, but we will just explain how
to modify the AD ` UniformizationR proof since it’s a bit simpler.
     Before we actually give the proof, we will mention one reason why this sort of result is interesting.
If we remove the requirement of Turing invariance from Martin’s Conjecture then there are many
counterexamples. In fact, practically every construction of classical computability theory gives rise
to a counterexample. As a concrete example, consider the Friedberg jump inversion theorem. The
proof of this theorem is quite constructive, and in fact produces a (non Turing-invariant) function
f : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that for each x, f pxq1 ”T x ‘ 01 . Thus f is a regressive function which is neither
constant on any cone nor ever above the identity.
     An interesting feature of most of these classical constructions is that they produce reals which are,
in some sense, generic. Sometimes this is even true in a precise technical sense. For example, if f is
the function produced by Friedberg jump inversion then f pxq is always 1-generic relative to x.
     It is reasonable to ask to what extent this is a necessary feature of such constructions. For example,
is there a constructive proof of the jump inversion theorem that doesn’t produce generic reals? Of
course, this is a hard question to make precise, but we can at least note some ways that reals can
fail to look generic. One feature of most types of generic reals is that they tend to avoid a cone—for
example, if g is a function such that gpxq is always 1-generic relative to x then g avoids the cone above
01 . And if gpxq is instead always 1-random relative to x then g does not necessarily avoid the cone
above 01 (there are 1-random reals in every degree above 01 ), but as soon as x is above 01 , it does. Thus
any proof of jump inversion which produces a (not necessarily Turing-invariant) measure-preserving
function would seem to be producing reals that are not generic.
     The fact that part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions holds even without
the restriction to Turing-invariant functions shows that there is no such measure-preserving jump
inversion function. In other words, this feature of the proof of jump inversion seems to be inescapable.
     Before describing how to modify the proof, we should clarify that when we say a non Turing-
invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving, we mean that for every a P 2ω , there is some b
such that
                                          x ěT b ùñ f pxq ěT a.
In other words, exactly what we meant when we said a Turing-invariant function is measure-preserving.
Theorem 6.4 (ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR ). If f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is measure-preserving (but not necessarily
Turing-invariant) then f pxq ěT x on a cone.
Proof. The proof is nearly identical to the proof for Turing-invariant functions. Let g be an increasing
modulus for f , and h a computable function which inverts g on a pointed perfect tree, T . The key
point is that it follows from the deﬁnition of modulus that if y is in rT s and x ěT y then f pxq ěT hpyq
and that this fact does not depend on f being Turing-invariant.
   To see why this is enough, suppose x is large enough to be Turing equivalent to something in T
and also large enough such that f pxq ěT T . Let y P rT s be Turing equivalent to x. Then

                                     f pxq ěT hpyq ‘ T ěT y ”T x.

In other words, f pxq ěT x for all large enough x.
    The fact that our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions still
works for functions which are not Turing-invariant points to an interesting feature of the proof: it
relies mostly on manipulating functions which are not themselves Turing-invariant, even when the


                                                     39
function f is. The way that we chose the modulus, g, came with no guarantees that g is Turing-
invariant. What’s more, it follows from Slaman and Steel’s theorem on regressive functions that no
inverse for g can be Turing-invariant (otherwise it would yield a non-constant, regressive function on
the Turing degrees).

6.3    Ideal-valued functions
We will now see that our result on measure-preserving functions is robust in yet another way. In
particular, it holds for functions which take values in the set of Turing ideals.
Definition 6.5. A Turing ideal is a set of Turing degrees I such that
   • I is closed under Turing reducibility: if x P I and y ďT x then y P I.
   • I is closed under finite joins: if x1 , . . . , xn P I then x1 ‘ . . . ‘ xn P I.
Also, I is proper if it is not equal to all of DT .
Notation. Let SpecpDT q denote the set of Turing ideals.
Definition 6.6. A function I : 2ω Ñ SpecpDT q is measure-preserving if for every a P 2ω , there is
some b P 2ω such that
                                     x ěT b ùñ a P Ipxq.
   It is not hard to see that our proof of part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions
can also be used to prove a similar result about ideal-valued functions.
Theorem 6.7 (ZF ` AD ` UniformizationR ). Suppose I : 2ω Ñ SpecpDT q is measure-preserving. Then
for all x on a cone, x P Ipxq.
Proof. The proof is nearly identical to the proof for 2ω -valued functions but requires a modiﬁcation
of the deﬁnition of “modulus.” In particular, call f : 2ω Ñ 2ω a modulus for I if for all a,

                                        x ěT f paq ùñ a P Ipxq.

Call f an increasing modulus if, in addition, for all x, f pxq ěT x. By UniformizationR , I has an
increasing modulus. By Corollary 2.6, we can invert f on a pointed perfect tree to get a pointed
perfect tree T and a computable function g deﬁned on rT s such that for all x P rT s, f pgpxqq “ x. Note
that this implies that for all x, gpxq P Ipxq.
    Since g is computable and injective on rT s, for all x P rT s, gpxq ‘ T ěT x. If x is of high enough
Turing degree then T P Ipxq (since I is measure-preserving). Since Turing ideals are closed under
Turing joins, this implies that for any such x,

                                             gpxq ‘ T P Ipxq.

Since Turing ideals are closed under Turing reducibility, this implies that x ďT gpxq‘ T is in Ipxq.
   In light of the above theorem, it seems natural to ask whether something similar holds for order-
preserving ideal-valued functions. More precisely, say that a function I : 2ω Ñ SpecpDT q is order-
preserving if for all x, y P 2ω ,
                                      x ďT y ùñ Ipxq Ď Ipyq.
Suppose I : 2ω Ñ SpecpDT q is order-preserving. Must I either be constant on a cone or satisfy
x P Ipxq on a cone?
    Unfortunately, this is false; a counterexample can be constructed from Slaman and Steel’s coun-
terexample to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for order-preserving functions on the arithmetic degrees
(see Theorem 6.3 above). In particular, if f : 2ω Ñ 2ω is a function which is order-preserving for the

                                                      40
arithmetic degrees and which is neither constant on a cone nor above the identity on a cone (in the
sense of arithmetic reducibility) then the ideal-valued function I deﬁned by

                                    Ipxq “ tdegT pyq | y ďA f pxqu

is a counterexample to the question above (where ďA denotes arithmetic reducibility).
    The existence of this counterexample provides an interesting contrast to a result by Slaman, who
proved an analogue of part 2 of Martin’s conjecture for Borel order-preserving functions I : 2ω Ñ
SpecpDT q (see [23], Theorem 3.1).

6.4    ZFC counterexamples
It is easy to construct counterexamples to Martin’s Conjecture in ZFC, even when the conjecture is
restricted to some special class of functions, such as order-preserving functions. However, Slaman and
Steel have observed in [24] that if we alter the statement of Martin’s Conjecture by replacing “on a
cone” with “coﬁnally” then some special cases are provable in ZFC. They give two examples of this
phenomenon.
 (1) For any order-preserving function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω , if f is above the identity on a cone then either
     f pxq ”T x on a cone or f pxq ěT x1 for coﬁnally many x.
 (2) For any regressive, measure-preserving function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω , f pxq ”T x for coﬁnally many x.
In this section we will show that this does not happen for the main theorems of this paper: ZFC proves
that there are counterexamples to part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions and
order-preserving functions, even when we replace “on a cone” with “coﬁnally” in the conclusion of
Martin’s Conjecture.

Counterexample for measure-preserving functions
We will ﬁrst show that in ZFC we can construct a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω which
is measure-preserving and such that for all uncomputable x, x ęT f pxq. The main idea of the
construction is to write the Turing degrees as an increasing union of Turing ideals and deﬁne f pxq to
be a minimal upper bound for all the reals computable from x which ﬁrst show up in a strictly earlier
ideal than x itself. We will need one fact about Turing ideals.
Lemma 6.8. If I is a countable Turing ideal and x is an uncomputable Turing degree which is not
contained in I then I has an upper bound which does not compute x.
Proof. If I is empty then this is trivial. Otherwise, it follows from a theorem of Spector (see Exercise
6.5.12 of Soare’s textbook [25] for a proof) that I has an exact pair—i.e. Turing degrees a and b such
that
  • a and b are both upper bounds for I
  • and if any Turing degree y is below both a and b then y P I.
Since x R I, x cannot be computable from both a and b and thus at least one of them satisﬁes the
desired conclusion.
Theorem 6.9 (ZFC). There is a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that f is measure-
preserving and for all uncomputable x, f pxq does not compute x.
Proof. Instead of deﬁning a Turing-invariant function on the reals, we will deﬁne a function F on the
Turing degrees (which is equivalent under ZFC).



                                                  41
                                                                                       Ť
   Let xIα yα be an increasing, well-ordered sequence of proper Turing ideals such that α Iα “ DT
and the sequence has no maximal element (such a sequence is easy to construct in ZFC).
   Given a Turing degree x, let αx denote the least ordinal α such that x P Iα and let Ix denote
                        Ix “ ty P DT | y ďT x and for some β ă αx , y P Iβ u.
In other words, Ix consists of those Turing degrees y which are computable from x and which show
up in a strictly earlier ideal than x. It is easy to check that Ix is a countable (possibly empty) Turing
ideal which does not contain x.
    If x is uncomputable then by Lemma 6.8, Ix has an upper bound which does not compute x.
Thus we can deﬁne F as follows: if x is computable then set F pxq “ 0 and otherwise set F pxq to be
any upper bound for Ix which does not compute x.
    By construction, x ęT F pxq holds for all uncomputable x. So we just need to check that F is
measure-preserving. To this end, ﬁx a Turing degree a and we will show that F is above a on a cone.
Let α be the least ordinal such that a P Iα and let b be some Turing degree such that b R Iα (which
exists because Iα is proper). Finally, let c “ a ‘ b.
   We claim that F is above a on the cone above c. Let x ěT c. Since x computes b, which is not in
Iα and since the sequence of ideals is increasing, αx ą α. Since x also computes a, a P Ix and thus
F pxq computes a.

Counterexample for order-preserving functions
We will now show that in ZFC we can construct a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω which is order-
preserving, not constant on any coﬁnal set and not above the identity on any coﬁnal set. Furthermore,
the function we construct is not measure-preserving—in fact, the range is disjoint from a cone—and
thus Theorem 4.6 also fails under ZFC. The proof relies on a theorem of Sacks.
Theorem 6.10 (ZFC; Sacks [22]). Every locally countable countable partial order of size ω1 can be
embedded into the Turing degrees.
Theorem 6.11 (ZFC). There is a Turing-invariant function f : 2ω Ñ 2ω such that f is order-
preserving, not constant on any cofinal set and not above the identity on any cofinal set. Also, the
range of f is disjoint from a cone and hence f is not measure-preserving.
Proof. We will once again just explain how to deﬁne a function on the Turing degrees which has the
desired properties.
   Let pP, ďP q be the partial order consisting of ω1 , with its usual order, plus one point, q, which is
incomparable to everything in ω1 . Let π be an embedding of P into the Turing degrees.
   For any x, let αx be the least ordinal such that x does not compute πpαx q. Note that such an
αx must exist since x can only compute countably many degrees, but the range of π is uncountable.
Now deﬁne F pxq “ πpαx q.
F is order-preserving. Let x and y be Turing degrees such that x ďT y. Note that for any α ă ω1 ,
if x computes πpαq then so does x. Hence αx ď αy . Since π is an embedding of partial orders, we
have
                                F pxq “ πpαx q ďT πpαy q “ F pyq.

F is not constant on a cofinal set. Suppose it is, with constant value a. By deﬁnition of F , a
must be equal to πpαq for some α. But then for any x which computes a, αx cannot be equal to α
and thus since π is an embedding, F pxq “ πpαx q ‰ πpαq. Therefore on the cone above a, F pxq ‰ a,
which contradicts the assumption that F pxq “ a on a coﬁnal set.
The range of F is disjoint from a cone. In particular, the range of F is disjoint from the cone
above πpqq. This is because the range of F is contained in the image of ω1 under π and since π is an
embedding of partial orders, nothing in this image computes πpqq. Note that this also immediately
implies that F is not above the identity on any coﬁnal set.

                                                   42
7    Questions
Throughout this paper we have mentioned some interesting questions raised by our work. For conve-
nience we will now provide a list of these questions.
Question 1. Does part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture hold for all order-preserving functions on the hyper-
arithmetic degrees?
Question 2. Is part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture for measure-preserving functions provable in ZF when
restricted to Borel functions?
A negative answer to questions 3 and 4 together would imply part 1 of Martin’s Conjecture.
Question 3. Is there any ultrafilter on the Turing degrees which is strictly below the Martin measure
in the Rudin-Keisler order?
Question 4. Is there any ultrafilter on the Turing degrees besides the Martin measure itself which is
weakly Rudin-Keisler equivalent to the Martin measure?
Question 5 is a special case of question 3.
Question 5. Are the Lebesgue or Baire ultrafilters on the Turing degrees below the Martin measure
in the Rudin-Keisler order?
Question 6 has no direct bearing on Martin’s Conjecture but seems intriguing.
Question 6. Is there any ultrafilter on the Turing degrees which is strictly above Martin measure in
the Rudin-Keisler order?


References
 [1] Vasco Brattka and Guido Gherardi. Weihrauch degrees, omniscience principles and weak com-
     putability. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 76(1):143–176, 2011.
 [2] Raphaël Carroy. A quasi-order on continuous functions. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 78(2):633–
     648, 2013.
 [3] W. W. Comfort and S. Negrepontis. The theory of ultrafilters. Die Grundlehren der mathematis-
     chen Wissenschaften, Band 211. Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg, 1974.
 [4] Randall Dougherty and Alexander S. Kechris. How many Turing degrees are there? In Com-
     putability theory and its applications (Boulder, CO, 1999), volume 257 of Contemp. Math., pages
     83–94. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2000.
 [5] Marcia J. Groszek and Theodore A. Slaman. A basis theorem for perfect sets. The Bulletin of
     Symbolic Logic, 4(2):204–209, 1998.
 [6] Kojiro Higuchi and Patrick Lutz. A note on a conjecture of sacks.          Preprint available at
     http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01876, 2023.
 [7] Thomas Jech. Set theory. Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
     The third millennium edition, revised and expanded.
 [8] Alexander S. Kechris. Classical descriptive set theory, volume 156 of Graduate Texts in Mathe-
     matics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
 [9] Alexander S. Kechris. The theory of countable borel equivalence relations. Preprint available
     online at author’s website, 2021.

                                                 43
[10] Takayuki Kihara. Personal Communication, 2021.
[11] Peter Koellner and W. Hugh Woodin. Large cardinals from determinacy. In Handbook of set
     theory. Vols. 1, 2, 3, pages 1951–2119. Springer, Dordrecht, 2010.
[12] A. H. Lachlan. Uniform enumeration operations. J. Symbolic Logic, 40(3):401–409, 1975.
[13] Patrick Lutz. Martin’s conjecture for regressive functions on the hyperarithmetic degrees. Preprint
     available at http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.05746, 2023.
[14] Andrew Marks. The universality of polynomial time turing equivalence. Mathematical Structures
     in Computer Science, 28(3):448–456, 2018.
[15] Andrew Marks. Personal Communication, 2020.
[16] Andrew Marks, Theodore A. Slaman, and John R. Steel. Martin’s conjecture, arithmetic equiv-
     alence, and countable Borel equivalence relations. In Alexander S. Kechris, Benedikt Löwe, and
     John R. Steel, editors, Ordinal definability and recursion theory: The Cabal Seminar. Vol. III,
     volume 43 of Lect. Notes Log., pages 493–519. Assoc. Symbol. Logic, Ithaca, NY, 2016.
[17] Donald A. Martin. The axiom of determinateness and reduction principles in the analytical
     hierarchy. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 74(4):687–689, 07 1968.
[18] Donald A. Martin. Measurable cardinals and analytic games. Fund. Math., 66:287–291, 1969/70.
[19] Donald A. Martin. A purely inductive proof of Borel determinacy. In Recursion theory (Ithaca,
     N.Y., 1982), volume 42 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 303–308. Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
     dence, RI, 1985.
[20] Antonio Montalbán. Martin’s conjecture: a classiﬁcation of the naturally occurring Turing de-
     grees. Notices Amer. Math. Soc., 66(8):1209–1215, 2019.
[21] Janusz Pawlikowski and Marcin Sabok. Decomposing Borel functions and structure at ﬁnite
     levels of the Baire hierarchy. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 163(12):1748–1764, 2012.
[22] Gerald E. Sacks. On suborderings of degrees of recursive unsolvability. Z. Math. Logik Grundlagen
     Math., 7:46–56, 1961.
[23] Theodore A. Slaman. Aspects of the Turing jump. In Logic colloquium 2000. Proceedings of
     the annual European summer meeting of the Association for Symbolic Logic, Paris, France, July
     23–31, 2000, pages 365–382. Wellesley, MA: A K Peters; Urbana, IL: Association for Symbolic
     Logic, 2005.
[24] Theodore A. Slaman and John R. Steel. Deﬁnable functions on degrees. In Cabal Seminar 81–85,
     pages 37–55, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1988. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[25] Robert I. Soare. Turing computability. Theory and Applications of Computability. Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin, 2016.
[26] Sławomir Solecki. Decomposing Borel sets and functions and the structure of Baire class 1
     functions. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 11(3):521–550, 1998.
[27] John R Steel. A classiﬁcation of jump operators. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47(2):347–358,
     1982.
[28] John R. Steel. The derived model theorem. In Logic Colloquium 2006, Lecture Notes in Logic,
     page 280–327. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[29] Jindřich Zapletal. Descriptive set theory and deﬁnable forcing.         Mem. Amer. Math. Soc.,
     167(793):viii+141, 2004.


                                                  44
