                      On Martin’s Conjecture

                           Theodore A. Slaman
                    University of California, Berkeley

                                 April 2001




                                      1




                   The Hierarchy of Definability

We are all familiar with the hierarchies of definability which appear in
recursion theory, fine structure, and descriptive set theory in the context of
determinacy.
From these notions of definability, we obtain the canonical functions from
2ω to 2ω such as x 7 → x 0 , x 7→ Ox , and x 7→ x ] . Similarly, we obtain the
                                   ω
canonical functions from 2ω to 22 such that x 7 → 102 (x), x 7→ 111 (x),
and x 7→ 2ω ∩ L(x).
We will discuss some attractive conjectures which assert that these
functions are examples from naturally characterized and ordinally
parametrized classes.



                                      2
                                Notation

Definition 1   1. A cone of reals is a set {y : y ≥T x}, for some x.

 2. A property P on D contains a cone iff there is a cone of reals all of
    whose degrees satisfy P.

 3. A function f : 2ω → 2ω is degree invariant iff for x and y, if x ≡T y
    then f (x) ≡T f (y).

For functions from D to D, we define order preserving on a cone,
constant on a cone, and other notions, similarly.
For degree invariant f and g, f ≥ M g iff {x : f (x) ≥T g(x)} contains a
cone.



                                     3




                        Martin’s Conjecture

Martin has made the following conjecture: Assume ZF+AD+DC.

I. If f is degree invariant and not increasing on a cone, then f is constant
     on a cone.

II. ≤ M prewellorders the set of degree invariant functions which are
    increasing on a cone. If f has ≤ M -rank α, then f 0 has ≤ M -rank
    α + 1, where f 0 : x 7→ f (x)0 for all x.

Martin’s conjecture was prompted by Sacks’s question, “Is there a degree
invariant solution to Post’s problem?”
Though Martin’s conjecture is open, there is a small but interesting
collection of partial results around it.



                                     4
                       Regressive Functions

Theorem 2 (Slaman and Steel, 1988) Assume AD. For any degree
invariant function f , if f (x) <T x on a cone then f is constant on a
cone.

Comments on the proof:

  • Use determinacy to obtain a pointed perfect set U and a recursive
    function {e} such that for all x ∈ U , {e}(x) ≡T f (x).

  • Give a recursion theoretic argument, analyzing the rate at which the
    computations to evaluate {e} converge, to show that {e} is constant on
    a cone.



                                     5




            Uniformly Degree Invariant Functions

Definition 3 • We say that x ≡T y via (i, j) iff {i}(x) = y and
    { j}(y) = x.

  • f : 2ω → 2ω is uniformly degree invariant iff there is a point perfect
    set U and a function t : ω × ω → ω × ω such that

         ∀x, y ∈ U [x ≡T y via (i, j) → f (x) ≡T f (y) via t (i, j)]

For example, x 7→ x 0 is uniformly degree invariant.




                                     6
                           Steel’s Theorem

Theorem 4 (Steel, 1982–88) Martin’s conjecture is true when restricted
to uniformly degree invariant functions.

Theorem 4 extends an earlier result of Lachlan, that there is no uniformly
degree invariant solution to Post’s problem. Steel’s proofs are direct (not
straightforward) applications of AD.
Steel has made the following conjecture: Assume ZF+AD+DC.

III. Every degree invariant function is uniformly degree invariant.




                                     7




                          Becker’s Analysis

Becker (1988) extended the understanding of those uniformly degree
invariant functions which are increasing on a cone. Given a uniformly
degree invariant function f , Becker constructs a pointclass 0 such that for
each x, f (x) has the same degree as the universal 0(x) subset of ω.

Theorem 5 (Becker) If f is a uniformly degree invariant function, then
f is uniformly order preserving.




                                     8
                   Order Preserving Functions

Theorem 6 (Slaman and Steel, 1988) Suppose that f : 2ω → 2ω is
order preserving and increasing on a cone. Then either,
  • ∃α < ω1 [ f (x) ≡T x α ] on a cone or
  • ∀α < ω1x [x α <T f (x)] on a cone.

Theorem 6 follows from a modest extension the following.

Theorem 7 (Posner and Robinson, 1981) For any x ∈ 2ω , if x is not
recursive then there is a g such that x + g ≡T g 0 .

For every nonrecursive set x, x is equivalent to the jump relative to some
set g.


                                     9




                                                     ω
                     Functions from 2ω to 22

Martin’s conjecture is an assertion that the set of definable and degree
invariant functions from 2ω to 2ω are naturally parametrized by the
ordinals.
                                                                           ω
We will now make a similar conjecture for the functions from 2ω to 22
that share some of the characteristics of maps from x to set of y ∈ 2ω
such that y is definable from x.




                                     10
                          Closure Operators

                                                             ω
Definition 8 A closure operator is a map M : 2ω → 22 with the
following properties.

 1. For all x ∈ 2ω , x ∈ M(x).

 2. For all x and for all z, if z is recursive in finitely many elements of
    M(x) then Z ∈ M(x). M(x) is closed under relative computation.

 3. For all x and y in 2ω , if x is recursive in y then M(x) ⊆ M(y). M is
    monotone.

As in the Martin Conjecture, closure operators can be compared by
eventual pointwise inclusion.


                                      11




                            The Borel Case

Theorem 9 (Slaman) If M is a closure operator such that the relation
y ∈ M(x) is Borel, then one of the following conditions holds.
 1. There is a countable ordinal α such that M is equivalent to the map
    x 7 → {y : y is recursive in x (α) }.
 2. There is a countable ordinal α such that M is equivalent to the map
    x 7 → {y : (∃β < α)[y is recursive in x (β) ]}.
 3. M is equivalent to the map x 7→ 2ω .

Here x (α) is evaluated relative to a fixed counting of α.

Question 10 Is something similar true under AD for those functions f
such that for all x, f (x) ⊂ L(x)?


                                      12
                            REA-operators

Definition 11 (Jockusch and Shore, 1984) • An REA-operator is a
    function j from 2ω to 2ω such that there is an e such that for all x,
    j (x) is the join of x with the eth set which is recursively enumerable
    relative to x.

  • An α-REA-operator is an α-length iteration of REA-operators, where
    the iteration is organized using a recursive presentation of α.

Theorem 12 • (Shore and Slaman, 1999) Suppose that j is an α-REA
   operator and for all β < α, ∅(β) 6 ≥T x. There is a g such that
   x + g ≡T j (g).
  • (Woodin) Suppose that x is not 111 . Then there is a g such that
    x + g ≡T Og .


                                     13




                              What Next?

The proof of Theorem 9 uses the join theorem for α-REA-operators to
work through the hyperarithmetic hierarchy and then applies Woodin’s
join theorem for the hyperjump eliminate any remaining possibilities.
This approach loses momentum as one attempts to use it to work through
through the ordinals.




                                     14
                          A Counter Point

Kechris has conjectured that Turing equivalence is a universal countable
Borel equivalence relation. If this conjecture is true, then Martin’s
conjecture is false.




                                    15
