                                                    A passive self-correcting quantum memory in three dimensions
                                                           Shankar Balasubramanian1 , Margarita Davydova1 , and Ting-Chun Lin2,3
                                            1
                                                Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics and Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, California
                                                                            Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
                                                          2
                                                            Department of Physics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
                                                                               3
                                                                                 Hon Hai Research Institute, Taipei, Taiwan
arXiv:2605.10943v1 [quant-ph] 11 May 2026




                                                                                                Abstract
                                                         We construct a 3D Pauli stabilizer Hamiltonian whose ground state space can encode a qubit
                                                     for exponential time when coupled to a bath at non-zero temperature. Our construction recursively
                                                     applies a sequence of transformations to a seed Hamiltonian that increases the memory lifetime of
                                                     the encoded qubit while maintaining geometric locality in R3 .



                                            Contents
                                            1 Introduction                                                                                               2
                                              1.1 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
                                              1.2 Overview of the construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5
                                              1.3 Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9

                                            2 Preliminaries                                                                                              10
                                              2.1 Quantum CSS and cochain complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                10
                                              2.2 Tanner graphs and Tanner square complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                11
                                              2.3 Quantum code embedding framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 11
                                              2.4 Topological defect networks and sheaf codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            17
                                              2.5 Memory lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19

                                            3 Construction with random embedding                                                                         21
                                              3.1 Step 1: perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         22
                                              3.2 Step 2: replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          25
                                              3.3 Main statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          40
                                              3.4 Explicit choice of constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41

                                            4 Decoder                                                                                                    41
                                              4.1 Decoder via coarse-graining maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           42
                                              4.2 Coarse-graining for RZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         45
                                              4.3 Coarse-graining for RX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           48




                                                                                                    1
5 Memory lifetime                                                                                                     58
  5.1 Unstable and stable syndrome configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       59
  5.2 Recording coarse-graining history in the decoding graph . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       62
  5.3 Witness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 64
  5.4 Main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 66

6 Construction with explicit embedding                                                                                68
  6.1 Warm-up: classical code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   68
  6.2 Quantum code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    74

7 Acknowledgments                                                                                                     94

Appendix                                                                                                              94

A Explicit verification of the homological perturbation lemma                                                         94

B Deferred embedding proofs                                                                                           96

C A tensor product construction                                                                                       97



1     Introduction
A self-correcting quantum memory is a quantum many-body system that can store quantum informa-
tion in its ground state subspace when interacting with a bath at non-zero temperature [1, 2]. In this
system, quantum information is stored passively and in equilibrium, without the need for active error
correction or other external sources of power. Technologically, this could have significant implications
for building energy-efficient quantum hard drives. Theoretically, such a system provides an example
of topological order at non-zero temperature and contributes to the ongoing program of classifying
gapped phases of quantum matter. However, all known examples of self-correcting quantum memories
require four or more spatial dimensions, and whether self-correction is possible in three dimensions
has remained a long-standing open question. In this paper, we settle this question by providing a
construction in three dimensions.
    For a family of Hamiltonians {Hk , k ∈ N} with system size nk , a standard way to diagnose self-
correction is as follows. We encode a qubit in Hk and evolve it under local thermalization dynamics
(such as generalized Glauber dynamics) at inverse temperature β. Define the memory lifetime tmem as
the maximum time for which the encoded information can be reliably recovered. If there exists a finite
βc such that tmem ≳ exp nηk for some η > 0 and for all β > βc , we say that {Hk } is self-correcting1 .
In 4D, the (2,2) toric code satisfies tmem ∼ exp n1/4 below a critical temperature [1, 3]. In contrast,
                                                     

2D stabilizer codes have tmem = O(1) for any finite β [4, 5]. This is due to the existence of string-like
operators creating point-like excitations that thermally proliferate. This intuition extends to any 2D
or 3D code described by a topological quantum field theory (TQFT) [6].
   1
     A weaker but reasonable definition is tmem → ∞ as n → ∞ for β > βc . We use the stronger definition because it
captures the idea that a small system can keep a qubit safe for an incredibly long time, easily longer than the age of the
universe.




                                                            2
    Thus, we must look beyond TQFT fixed point states for a 3D self-correcting quantum memory.
In 2011, Haah proposed the cubic code [7], whose excitations are created by operators supported on
a fractal subset of the lattice. The energy barrier of this code scales like Θ(log n), implying the best-
case possibility of tmem ∼ exp(Θ(log n)). Unfortunately, subsequent numerical studies showed that
tmem = O(1) [8, 9]. This rules out self-correction in the cubic code. More generally, [10] proved that all
3D translation-invariant stabilizer codes have an O(log n) energy barrier and likely have tmem = O(1)
due to the existence of string or fractal generators. This suggests that breaking translation invariance
is essential for achieving self-correction. The first code that achieved a polynomial energy barrier is
the welded toric code [11], which is not translation-invariant. Despite an energy barrier of O(n2/9 ), it
was argued that tmem = O(1) [9]. This is because the welded code is built from 3D toric codes of size
O(n2/3 ) and inherits the undesirable thermal properties of these codes. Recent developments in codes
with optimal parameters in three dimensions [12, 13, 14] achieve an energy barrier O(n1/3 ), but these
examples are not self-correcting for similar reasons [15, 16, 17].
    One of the most interesting ideas was proposed by Brell [18]. Observing that the classical Ising
model on a Sierpiński carpet has an ordered phase [19], he suggested taking a homological product of
2D surface codes supported on a Sierpiński carpet and its dual. This results in a 4D surface code on a
manifold with many punctures, which one might hope could retain the self-correction properties of the
4D surface code. Furthermore, the fractal dimension of the manifold can be made as small as 2+ϵ < 3,
suggesting the possibility of a local embedding in R3 . No such procedure was provided in Brell’s paper,
but we believe that the ideas in the current paper can resolve this question. Unfortunately, Brell’s
proposal has other issues. First, it is likely that tmem ∼ O(1) due to the existence of point-like
excitations introduced by the punctures, as discussed in Ref. [20]. It is also likely that there is no
phase transition at non-zero temperature2 . Thus, the construction is not self-correcting, contrary to
the claim made in the paper. Additionally, the large number of small-distance logical operators makes
the perturbative stability of the proposal unclear.
    In this paper, we provide a three-dimensional construction that we prove is self-correcting. Our
code is CSS stabilizer and is obtained by alternating between applying two procedures. One procedure
increases the energy cost of excitations associated with X-type errors, while the other does the same for
excitations associated with Z-type errors. Our main result combines these procedures with a random
embedding (inspired by Refs. [12, 21]) which allows us to establish (1) locality in R3 , (2) preservation
of a single logical qubit, and (3) an exponential lower bound on the memory lifetime at sufficiently
low temperature. We also present a version with an explicit embedding later in the paper. Three
additional results include a more intuitive version of random embedding construction that we provide
in the introduction, a construction based on a hypergraph product that we provide in Appendix C,
and an analogous classical code that we construct in Sec. 6.

1.1    Main results
We now state our main results. Our construction produces a family of CSS codes from a family
of cochain complexes. We begin with a finite “seed” code C(0) encoding a single logical qubit, and
define the code C(k) iteratively through C(k−1) . Let Hk be the stabilizer Hamiltonian associated with
C(k) , acting on nk qubits. For every k, the code C(k) encodes a single logical qubit; equivalently, the
ground-state degeneracy of Hk is two.
  2
    The statistical mechanics duality argument in Ref. [18] does not correctly account for the extensive number of
metachecks whose weight scales with the system size. As a result, the dual model is ordered at all temperatures,
corresponding to a zero-temperature transition in the original model.



                                                        3
    To model thermalization, we consider a quantum many-body system with local Hamiltonian H
coupled weakly to a bath, so that its time evolution is described by the Markovian master equation [4,
3, 22]
                                      ρ̇(t) = −i[H, ρ(t)] + L(ρ(t)).                              (1)
The stationary state is the Gibbs state ρβ = e−βH / Tr e−βH where β = 1/T is the inverse tem-
                                                                  

perature. We assume that the Lindbladian L is generated by local jump operators of O(1) support,
although this condition can be relaxed.
    We consider a family of Hamiltonians Hk associated to codes C(k) , and prove the following.
Theorem 1.1 (Quantum memory lifetime; informal). There exists a family of three-dimensional local
Hamiltonians {Hk : k ∈ Z≥0 } associated with CSS stabilizer codes {C(k) } on nk = exp(Θ(k)) qubits
along with encoding and decoding maps Enck and Deck such that for every single-qubit state ρL
                                        Deck ◦ Enck (ρL ) = ρL .                                   (2)
Moreover, there exist constants Tc > 0 and η > 0 independent of k, such that for all temperatures
T < Tc :
 (1) After time t, the state of the system satisfies
                              Φ1/T,t ◦ Enck (ρL ) − Enck (ρL ) 1 ≤ t exp −Θ(nηk )
                                                                                 
                                                                                                   (3)
     where Φ1/T,t is the evolution generated by ρ̇(t) = −i[H, ρ] + L(ρ), and
 (2) The memory lifetime obeys
                                             tmem ≥ exp Θ(nηk )
                                                                   
                                                                                                   (4)
In this Theorem, we used the definition of the memory lifetime
                      tmem = min{t : Φ1/T,t ◦ Enck (ρL ) − Enck (ρL ) 1 ≤ 1/10}                    (5)
which characterizes the timescale when the encoded state is forgotten; thus, statement (2) follows
trivially from statement (1). The subscript ‘L’ denotes the logical degree of freedom. The encoding
that we choose is a thermal encoding defined in Refs. [3, 22]. Namely, the Hilbert space of H2k can be
decomposed as H = HL ⊗ Helse with the Hamiltonian H2k = IL ⊗ H2k,else′    . Under this decomposition,
the thermal encoding map is defined to be
                                                               ′
                                                         e−βH2k,else
                                  Enck (ρL ) = ρL ⊗           ′
                                                                      .
                                                       Tr e−βH2k,else

We also separately prove that these Hamiltonians are local in R3 .
Theorem 1.2 (Embedding in R3 ; informal). For every k ≥ 0, the Hamiltonian Hk admits an embed-
ding of its qubits into R3 such that:
  1. (Local) The support of each Hamiltonian term is contained in a ball of radius O(1).
  2. (Bounded density) Every unit ball in R3 contains O(1) qubits.
    Additionally, we believe that the spectral gap of our construction is stable under arbitrary local
Hamiltonian perturbations. This requires proving that our construction obeys TQO-1 and TQO-2,
which are defined in Ref. [23]. While TQO-1 follows immediately from our code having distance scaling
as a power of nk , TQO-2 requires a separate proof, which will be provided in an updated version of
this paper.

                                                   4
1.2     Overview of the construction
We now discuss our construction. We begin with a construction that is not treated in the main body
of the paper, but that is conceptually intuitive. We then discuss the main construction for which we
rigorously prove self-correction, which can be viewed as a simplification of the intuitive construction.
Finally, we describe a non-random variant of the construction.
    A useful heuristic for self-correction is to find a construction where the size of the error syndrome
grows with the size of the error. For X-type errors, which correspond to 1-cochains in the associated
cochain complex, this implies the following coboundary expansion property:
                                       1
                                ∀ e ∈ C(k) : syn(e) = |δe| ≥ α min |e + b|γ                                 (6)
                                                                        b∈B 1

for constants α, γ > 0. For Z-type errors, which correspond to 1-chains in the dual chain complex, this
implies an analogous boundary expansion property. All of our constructions will satisfy these bounds
for suitable choices of α and γ.

1.2.1    Intuitive 4-step construction with random embedding
We provide a variant of our main construction that has similar features but is more intuitive.
   As a seed, we take a constant-sized surface code encoding a single logical qubit, specified by a
                         0 → C 1 → C 2 . We then construct the code iteratively by alternating
cochain complex C(0) : C(0)      (0)    (0)
between two procedures, denoted RX and RZ :

                                         C(2k) = (RZ ◦ RX )◦k (C(0) )                                       (7)

Operationally, RX and RZ are very similar. The main difference is that RX increases the syndrome
cost of X-type errors, while RZ does the same for Z-type errors. Each procedure increases the code
size by a constant factor, so that after 2k steps the number of physical qubits is n2k = exp(Θ(k)).
    There is a natural map from the Tanner graph of C(i) to a square complex, which we call the
Tanner square complex T(i) . Thus, at level i we can specify the construction by the triple

                                                (C(i) , T(i) , I(i) )

where I(i) : T(i) → R3 is a local bounded-density embedding. More precisely, if t is the maximum
number of squares intersecting any unit ball in R3 , and ℓ is an upper bound on the embedded edge
lengths, then we say that I(i) is a (t, ℓ)-embedding.
     The idea of alternating between increasing the syndrome cost of Z-operators and increasing the
syndrome cost of X-operators is a common theme for all the constructions we provide in this paper.
For the construction in this subsection, an iteration consists of 4 steps: perturbation, subdivision,
thickening, and degree reduction.
     Suppose that at level i we are given a triple (C(i) , T(i) , I(i) ). One iteration produces the next triple
                         
 C(i+1) , T(i+1) , I(i+1) . We make an induction hypothesis that the square complex T(i) has maximum
edge and vertex degrees bounded by sufficiently large universal constants ze and zv , and that I(i) is a
(t, 1)-embedding for some sufficiently large constant t independent of i. We then perform the following
4 steps:
   1. Perturbation: Scale the current embedding map I(i) by a constant ℓ > 1, then randomly
      perturb the images of vertices in T(i) by distance ≍ ℓ according to a procedure similar to that
      in Refs. [12] and [21]. Such a procedure relies on the Lovász local lemma to show the existence

                                                         5
      Figure 1: An illustration of the perturbation step and its effect on the embedding density.


      of a perturbation that reduces the density to a sufficiently small t′ < t. This results in a
      (t′ , ℓ)-embedding map without altering the structure of T(i) , see Fig. 1 for an illustration.

   2. Subdivision: Subdivide each square of T(i) into ≍ ℓ × ℓ squares, obtaining the subdivided code
        ′ and its associated Tanner square complex T ′ . This restores the unit-scale geometry, so
      C(i)                                                (i)
      that the resulting complex is (t′′ , 1)-embedded in R3 for some t′ < t′′ < t. One can think of the
      code at this stage as a defect network of ≍ ℓ × ℓ-sized surface codes.

   3. Thickening: We now “thicken” the entire code; locally, this means that patches of the surface
      code turn into thickness-1 slabs of 3D surface code, and the newly introduced boundary surfaces
      are membrane-condensing. In the RX iteration, the membranes are X-type, and in the RZ
      iteration, the membranes are Z-type. This increases the energy cost of either X-type or Z-type
      excitations, depending on the iteration.
                                                                                             ′ ⊗Q
      More formally, in the RX iteration this step corresponds to taking a tensor product C(i)
      where Q : Q0 → Q1 is the cochain complex of a 2-bit repetition code. We then only keep the
      terms in the product complex of degree 2 and below. In the RZ iteration this step corresponds
                              ′ ⊗Q
      to the tensor product C(i)   e where Q     e −1 → Q
                                             e : Q        e 0 is the dual cochain complex of a 2-bit
      repetition code. We then only keep the terms in the product complex of degree 0 and above.
      After thickening, the code is (t, 1)-embedded in R3 where t > t′′ . However, both the maximum
      edge and maximum vertex degrees in the Tanner graph have increased.

   4. Degree reduction: If we were to repeat the first three steps many times, the edge and vertex
      degrees would eventually become unbounded. We claim that there exists a degree reduction
      procedure that restores the maximum edge and vertex degrees to the universal constants ze and
                                                                                            ′′ obtained
      zv without affecting properties of the code. More precisely, for the cochain complex C(i)
      after thickening, there exists a cochain-homotopic complex C(i+1) whose degrees are reduced3 ;
      an example is illustrated below:

    We claim that the embedding map I(i+1) at the end is a (t, 1)-embedding and that maximum
edge and vertex degrees are ze and zv , which completes the induction step. We also claim that each
iteration preserves the total number of logical qubits. The self-correcting property arises due to the
   3                                                              ′′
     A similar effect can be achieved by starting from the code C(i) and constructing the new complex code C(i+1) by
removing some of the redundant checks and some of the bits. One can check that there exists such a procedure that
reduces the degrees while preserving the number of logical qubits. The resulting complex is not chain-homotopic to the
original one, but all essential properties remain unchanged.


                                                          6
Figure 2: Local effect of the degree reduction step. On the left, we show a toy example of degree
reduction for a local neighborhood in a 1D complex. On the right, we show an analogous procedure
for a 2D square complex. In both cases, the thickening step increases the degrees near the junction
where several subcomplexes meet. The cells responsible for this increase are shown in red.


thickening step: each application of RX or RZ multiplies the syndrome size of one error type by 2.
Since the two operations are alternated, this occurs on all scales and for both Pauli error types.

1.2.2     Main construction with random embedding
The idea behind the main construction in this paper is similar to that of the 4-step one, but is
structurally simpler. The iterations RX and RZ only consist of 2 steps: perturbation and replacement.
Suppose that at level i we are given a triple (C(i) , T(i) , I(i) ). We make the same induction hypothesis
as before.

  1. Perturbation: Performed in the same way as above. This produces a new (t′ , ℓ)-embedding
     with sufficiently small t′ < t.

  2. Replacement: Replace each square s ∈ T(i) (2) with a copy of a square complex UX in the
     X-iteration and with a copy of UZ in the Z-iteration, with the boundary subcomplexes of the
     adjacent copies identified:                           
                                                 G
                                     T(i+1) =         UX,s  / ∼,
                                                    s∈T(i) (2)

        The complexes UX (UZ ) combine and simplify the net effect of subdivision, thickening, and
        degree reduction. Both consist of two parallel ≍ ℓ × ℓ layers joined by a single transverse strip
        of thickness 2 parallel to the thickened direction, as shown in (3.2.1). This already suffices to
        double the syndrome of either Z-type or X-type Pauli errors, depending on the iteration. For
        our choice of UX and UZ , the vertex and edge degrees in T(i+1) remain uniformly bounded. By an
        argument similar to that described in the 4-step construction, one can obtain a (t, 1)-embedding
        map I(i+1) .

1.2.3     Memory lifetime proof
To prove an exponential memory lifetime at low temperatures, we apply a more intricate version of
a Peierls argument. For this, we need a decoder D that, given a Pauli error e, applies a correction
that depends only on the syndrome σ = δe. We say that σ is unstable if there exists a single-qubit


                                                     7
error e1 such that σ and σ ′ = σ + δe1 decode to different logical outcomes under D. Let Σ(β) be
the Gibbs distribution on syndrome configurations at inverse temperature β with the energy function
E(σ) = |σ|. By Theorem 1 from Ref. [22], if the decoder D has the property that

                              Pσ∼Σ(β) (σ unstable under D) ≤ exp(−nη ),

then the memory lifetime is tmem ≳ exp(nη ).
   We choose D to be a renormalization group (RG)-like decoder that acts by performing a correction
at each scale, from the smallest scale to the largest, while applying a “coarse-graining” operation
between each correction. Because of the simple structure of the local subcomplexes UX (UZ ), the
decoder can be defined explicitly. Under this decoder, one can show that syndrome σ is unstable if
any syndrome remains at the largest scale.
   Any unstable configuration in the 2k-level construction must contain a connected error cluster
with syndrome weight ≍ 2k . This follows because, roughly speaking, the X-syndrome weight doubles
during the RX iterations, while the Z-syndrome weight doubles during the RZ iterations. On the other
hand, the number of connected clusters with syndrome weight m is at most ≍ B m for some constant
B > 1, by reduction to counting connected size-m subgraphs in a bounded-degree “decoding graph”.
Combining these two properties with a standard Peierls argument shows that, setting k ≍ log n, the
probability of an unstable syndrome configuration is ≤ exp(−nη ) when T < Tc . The current bound
(which we believe is tight up to constants) is Tc ≳ 1/ log ℓ, where ℓ is the scale parameter of the
perturbation step. This results in a relatively large value for Tc even with poor bounds on ℓ.

1.2.4   Construction with explicit embedding
We now describe the third construction, which comes with an explicit embedding. The motivation
for this construction is to make the perturbation step deterministic, thus providing exact locations
of all the local configurations in the code. By choosing a deterministic perturbation, we can also
optimize how the code is packed in R3 , providing much smaller bounds on the scale factor ℓ compared
to random construction. This results in larger bounds on the temperature for thermal stability and a
parametrically longer memory lifetime.
    As before, the construction consists of two types of iterations, RX and RZ . Each iteration consists
of two steps, which we call refinement and doubling. These steps play roles analogous to perturbation
and replacement in the previous construction: the refinement step modifies the geometry without
changing the underlying topological structure, while the doubling step implements a 2-bit repetition-
code structure to increase the syndrome cost of errors.
    In the explicit construction, we will manipulate a geometric complex X, which plays the same role
as the Tanner square complex T in the previous constructions. We arrange the embedding so that all
faces in X are parallel to coordinate planes.

  1. Refinement: X 7→ X ′ . We scale and subdivide the complex, and then apply a deterministic
     local perturbation. This step preserves the underlying homotopy: the refined complex is homo-
     topy equivalent to the original one, and the refined chain complex is chain homotopy equivalent
     to the original one. In particular, the resulting code stores the same number of logical qubits.

  2. Replacement: X ′ 7→ Y = (X ′ ⊔ Xcopy   ′   ⊔ Xcyl )/∼. We form two copies of X ′ . One copy
     remains in place, while the other is translated by the vector (1, 1, 1). The remaining complex
     Xcyl connects the two copies. Conceptually, the two copies duplicate the encoded information,
     while Xcyl mediates between them and enforces their agreement.

                                                   8
       An example of this process is illustrated below.



                  Refinement                                        Doubling
         z
             yx
                               z                                                z
                                   yx                                               yx




    The construction is specified by listing all possible local structures that can appear at each stage,
together with local rules describing how these structures transform under refinement and doubling.
In total, there are four refinement gadgets and three doubling gadgets. The proof of locality follows
by showing that these rules form a closed system: every allowed local structure can only be trans-
formed into a configuration of other allowed local structures, with no new unaccounted configurations
produced. We leave the complete proof of the exponential memory lifetime for this version of the con-
struction to future work. However, because the explicit construction behaves similarly to the random
one, we believe that the proof should not deviate much from the proof for the random construction.

1.3          Outlook
   1. Other constructions: We hope that the existence of a 3D self-correcting quantum memory will
      motivate alternative constructions. Since there likely exists no Pauli stabilizer code in 3D that is
      self-correcting and translation invariant [10], one could explore translation-invariant codes that
      are not stabilizer codes or that violate the TQO axioms. Other directions may involve utilizing
      exotic kinds of domain walls such as the magic domain walls from Ref. [24].
   2. Initialization: Our proof uses a thermal encoding Enc(ρL ) = ρL ⊗ ρβ , but we do not address
      efficient passive initialization of this state. A natural strategy is to start with an easily preparable
      state, such as |0⟩⟨0|L ⊗ IX ⊗ |∅⟩⟨∅|Z (which can be prepared from an all-0 product state by
      measuring X stabilizers), and rely on thermalization to mix the state within the logical sector4 .
      The X-syndrome sector must heat up, while the Z-syndrome sector will cool down from infinite
      temperature. This is believed to be efficient in the 4D toric code, although not proven rigorously.
      For our construction, energetic bottlenecks might be an obstruction for rapid mixing to |0⟩⟨0|⊗ρβ .
   3. Thermally stable quantum computer: A natural question one can ask is whether a fault
      tolerant and passive quantum computer exists in three dimensions. The main bottleneck in this
      approach is an efficient implementation of a fault-tolerant non-Clifford gate via code-switching
      while coupled to a thermal bath.
   4. “Circuit to Gibbs state” mapping: The Feynman-Kitaev method maps polynomial-depth
      quantum circuits to Hamiltonians whose ground state encodes the computation history. However,
      states at low energies fail to encode the computation history. Finding circuit-to-Hamiltonian
      mappings where states over a larger energy window can encode the computation history may
      provide insight into the quantum PCP conjecture (see Ref. [26] for recent ideas). A simpler but
      still interesting question is whether nontrivial distributions over eigenstates of the Hamiltonian
   4
    A simpler question is whether rapid initialization is possible from the state |0⟩⟨0| ⊗ |∅⟩⟨∅|X ⊗ |∅⟩⟨∅|Z as in Ref. [25].
However, for their results to hold, the metacheck matrix must be LDPC, which is not the case in our code. Thus some
generalization of their results will be needed.



                                                             9
      can still encode the computation history. One natural distribution would come from the Gibbs
      state of a local Hamiltonian at non-zero temperature. Ideas from self-correction may help answer
      this question.
    5. Relation to phases of matter: Since our result produces a scaling family of Hamiltonians
       with a well-defined thermodynamic limit, one could ask how it fits within the current landscape
       of topological phases of matter. In particular, the excitations in our code are deformable, and
       we expect that braiding and fusion rules can be appropriately defined. Can one prove that our
       Hamiltonian is distinct from any known translation-invariant phase of matter?
    6. Optimal parameters: It would be interesting to understand the optimal parameters achievable
       by a 3D self-correcting quantum memory. The key exponent governing the memory lifetime is
       η, which is closely related to the exponent γ in the coboundary-expansion bound, eq. (6). Our
       work establishes nontrivial lower bounds on the optimal value of η, but finding matching upper
       and lower bounds is open.


2     Preliminaries
2.1    Quantum CSS and cochain complexes
We briefly review the connection between quantum CSS codes and cochain complexes. A CSS code
on n qubits is specified by two classical codes, Cx = ker(Hx ) and Cz = ker(Hz ). Here, Hx and Hz
denote the parity-check matrices

                                  Hx : Fn2 → Fm x
                                              2 ,                 Hz : Fn2 → Fmz
                                                                              2 ,                       (8)

which satisfy Hz HxT = 0. The X and Z-type Pauli operators that commute with all stabilizers
correspond to Cz and Cx , respectively. The X-type stabilizers correspond to Cx⊥ = Im(HxT ), and the Z-
type stabilizers correspond to Cz⊥ = Im(HzT ). The number of encoded qubits is k = dim Cx −dim Cz⊥ =
dim Cz − dim Cx⊥ . The X- and Z-distances are

                                 dx =     min       |c|,          dz =        min        |c′ |,         (9)
                                        c∈Cz \Cx⊥                          c′ ∈Cx \Cz⊥

and the code distance is d = min(dx , dz ). We call a quantum code a low-density parity-check (LDPC)
if each check acts on O(1) qubits, and each qubit participates in O(1) checks.
    A CSS code naturally gives rise to the cochain complex C • :

                                                δ 0 =HxT          δ 1 =Hz
                                         F2mx               Fn2             Fmz
                                                                             2 .                       (10)

with δ 1 δ 0 = 0. We will frequently write this as
                                                           δ0         δ1
                                          C • : C 0 −→ C 1 −→ C 2 .                                    (11)

The X-type operators commuting with all Z-checks are 1-cocycles, Z 1 (C • ) := ker(δ 1 ), while the X-
type stabilizers are 1-coboundaries, B 1 (C • ) := Im(δ 0 ). For an X-type error eX ∈ C 1 , its syndrome is
δ 1 eX ∈ B 2 (C • ) := Im(δ 1 ). Equivalence classes of distinct X-type logical operators are labeled by the
first cohomology group

                            H 1 (C • ) = Z 1 /B 1 = ker(Hz )/ Im(HxT ) = Cz /Cx⊥ .                     (12)

                                                            10
whose dimension is precisely the number of encoded qubits.
   Let C• := Hom(C • , F2 ) be the dual chain complex, which we can also write as

                                                      (δ 1 )T   (δ 0 )T
                                            C• : C2 −→ C1 −→ C0                                                  (13)

with Ci ∼ = C i . The Z-type operators that commute with all X-checks are 1-cycles, i.e. Z1 (C• ) :=
ker(δ ) , while Z-type stabilizers are 1-boundaries, B1 (C• ) := Im(δ 1 )T . For a Z-type error eZ ∈ C1 ,
      0 T
                   T
its syndrome is δ 0 eZ ∈ B0 (C• ) := Im(δ 0 )T . Equivalence classes of distinct Z-type logical operators
are labeled by the first homology group

                              H1 (C• ) = Z1 /B1 = ker(Hx )/ Im(HzT ) = Cx /Cz⊥ .                                 (14)

2.2    Tanner graphs and Tanner square complexes
A convenient way to represent classical and quantum codes is via their Tanner graphs. The Tanner
graph G = (V, E) of a classical code is bipartite, with V = Vb ∪Vc , where Vb contains one vertex per bit
and Vc one vertex per check. An edge is placed between vb ∈ Vb and vc ∈ Vc if the bit corresponding
to vb participates in the check corresponding to vc .
    The Tanner graph G = (V, E) of a quantum CSS code is tripartite, with V = VX ∪ VQ ∪ VZ , where
VQ contains one vertex per qubit, VX contains one vertex per X-check, and VZ contains one vertex per
Z-check. A vertex in VQ is connected to a vertex in VX or VZ if the corresponding qubit participates
in the corresponding X- or Z-check.
    It was observed in Ref. [27] that the commutativity condition of a quantum CSS code, namely
Hz HxT = 0, can be naturally captured by associating a 2-dimensional square complex to the Tanner
graph of the code, with the Tanner graph as its 1-skeleton. While a Tanner square complex determines
a unique quantum code, the converse does not hold: a given code may correspond to multiple square
complexes. However in our construction, there is a natural choice of square complex that we will use.
    We review how to construct such a square complex. Given a Tanner graph G = (V, E) of a
quantum CSS code, a square complex T associated with this Tanner graph shares the same vertex set
V = VX ∪ VQ ∪ VZ and edge set E, but comes with a set of faces F that we will now describe. Fix
x ∈ VX and z ∈ VZ , and let Qxz ⊆ VQ be the set of qubits shared by these checks. Note that |Qxz |
must be even, since the corresponding X- and Z-checks commute. Thus, we may choose a collection of
pairs {qi , qj } with qi , qj ∈ Qxz such that every shared qubit participates in at least one pair. For each
such pair {qi , qj }, we assign a face f ∈ F whose boundary is the cycle (x, qi , z, qj ). Repeating this for
all x ∈ VX and z ∈ VZ produces a square complex T whose 1-skeleton is the Tanner graph of the CSS
code. The parity-check matrices Hx and Hz are recovered from the incidence relations between VX
and VQ , and between VZ and VQ , respectively. The square faces encode the commutativity condition
Hz HxT = 0.

2.3    Quantum code embedding framework
In our iterative construction, the relation between the code properties at levels i and i + 1 is most
transparent in the formalism of quantum code embedding5 , introduced in Ref. [28]. In Ref. [28], this
   5
    Here “embedding” means that one code is realized inside the algebraic structure associated with a different code.
This terminology should not be confused with geometric embedding, which is a different concept that we use to realize
our construction locally in R3 . For certain codes like layer codes [14], the code embedding formalism also provides a
natural embedding in Euclidean space, but this is not the case for our construction.


                                                          11
framework was formulated in terms of iterated mapping cones. Here, we reformulate it using spectral
sequences, which more readily allows us to argue chain-homotopy equivalence between different steps
of our construction. We also make notational deviations from Ref. [28] to match the other conventions
in this paper.
    The setting of quantum code embedding is that one has a global code C composed of smaller
local codes Cv indexed by v ∈ V , which are connected via some maps g and s. The local codes are
typically simple and have well-understood cohomological properties, which allows one to compute the
cohomology of the larger code C in terms of the cohomology of the local codes and the connecting
maps. The quantum code embedding framework provides a systematic way to do this analysis.
                                           δ0         δ1
   Given a cochain complex C : C 0 −→ C 1 −→ C 2 constructed from a direct sum of local cochain
complexes
              Cx : Cx0 → Cx1 → Cx2 , Cq : Cq0 → Cq1 → Cq2 , Cz : Cz0 → Cz1 → Cz2           (15)
indexed by x ∈ VX , q ∈ VQ , z ∈ VZ . We will use uppercase letters X, Q, Z to denote the direct sums
of the local complexes, and lowercase letters x, q, z to denote the individual local complexes and maps:
                                  M                   M                M
                             •
                           CX  =       Cx• , CQ•
                                                  =        Cq• , CZ• =      Cz•                     (16)
                                    x∈VX                    q∈VQ                     z∈VZ

In this notation, the complex C has the form

                         0    0                 δ0                         δ1
                    C : CX ⊕ CQ ⊕ CZ0 −→ CX
                                          1    1
                                            ⊕ CQ ⊕ CZ1 −→ CX
                                                           2    2
                                                             ⊕ CQ ⊕ CZ2 .                               (17)

The coboundary maps δ 0 and δ 1 of the global code are constructed from coboundary maps of the local
complexes as well as the connecting maps. For m = 0, 1, the local coboundary maps are

                     δxm : Cxm → Cxm+1 ,        δqm : Cqm → Cqm+1 ,        δzm : Czm → Czm+1 ,          (18)

and the connecting maps are
                      m
                     gxq : Cxm → Cqm+1 ,         m
                                                gqz : Cqm → Czm+1 ,         m
                                                                           gxz : Cxm → Czm+1 .          (19)

Equivalently, the full structure of the cochain complex C can be visualized as the following diagram:
                                                                  0
                                                                 δX              1
                                                                                δX
                                                            0
                                                           CX          1
                                                                      CX               2
                                                                                      CX
                                                              0
                                                             gXQ        1
                                                                       gXQ
                                      0
                                     gXZ
                                                      0
                                                     δQ           1
                                                                 δQ
                                            0
                                           CQ               1
                                                           CQ          2
                                                                      CQ                                (20)
                                                                             1
                                                                            gXZ
                                                 0
                                                gQZ           1
                                                             gQZ
                                      0
                                     δZ               1
                                                     δZ
                              CZ0          CZ1             CZ2

Where C is the total complex of the structure shown in the diagram. We also used the uppercase
notation X, Q, Z to denote the direct sums of the connecting maps, namely:
                        M M                     M M                   M M
                 •                 •     •                •    •             •
                gXQ  :=          gxq , gQZ  :=          gqz , gXZ  :=      gxz .          (21)
                        x∈VX q∈VQ                         q∈VQ z∈VZ                         x∈VX z∈VZ


                                                           12
Note that we assume there are no direct maps from CZ to CQ or CX , nor from CQ to CX .
     Because δ 1 ◦ δ 0 = 0, the maps gxq , gqz , gxz must satisfy compatibility conditions, for example
δq1 ◦ gxq
       0 = g 1 ◦ δ 0 for any x ∈ V , q ∈ V . In our construction, the structure is even simpler because
            xq    x                X      Q
                                              • = 0.
there is no direct map from Cx to Cz , i.e. gxz
     The distinction between horizontal and vertical maps in the structure shown in Eqn. 20 will play
an important role throughout the paper. Therefore, we split the coboundary map of the full cochain
complex C as δ = δloc + g, where the local part δloc consists of maps δX , δQ , and δZ acting within
individual local complexes, and g are the connecting maps. In other words, the full coboundary map
                                                     
                                        m
                                       δX    0      0
                                     m      m
                              δ m = gXQ δQ         0,     where m = 0, 1,                       (22)
                                        m   m
                                      gXZ gQZ δZ    m


can decomposed as δ m = δloc
                         m + g m , where

                                m                                         
                                                                   0   0   0
                                          
                                δX 0   0
                         m          m                         m
                        δloc =  0 δQ  0 ,            g m = gXQ      0   0
                                                                            .                    (23)
                                                               m   m
                                 0  0 δZm                     gXZ gQZ      0

                                            2 = 0, g 2 = 0 and δ g + gδ
From a direct computation, it follows that δloc                 loc     loc = 0.


2.3.1   Spectral sequence and homological perturbation lemma
Now, we depart from the discussion in [28] and introduce the spectral sequence perspective. To our
knowledge, this perspective is new and it naturally captures the code embedding framework. We first
describe the general setup before relating it to the cochain complex C in Eqn. 20. We will use the
notation (C, δ) to specify the cochain complex, where C denotes the vector spaces and δ denotes the
differential operator.
    Let us review some of the facts we will need. Let Erp,q denote the vector space on the r-th page of
the spectral sequence (r ≥ 0), where p is the horizontal grading and q is the vertical grading. Define
the total complex                                     M
                                        Tot(Er )n :=        Erp,q                                  (24)
                                                       p+q=n

which is the complex obtained by summing along the diagonals of the r-th page. On the r-th page,
we also define the differential operator

                                    Dr : Tot(Er )n → Tot(Er )n+1 ,                                (25)

which satisfies Dr ◦ Dr = 0. Furthermore, Dr decomposes into

                                        Dr = dr,0 + dr,1 + ...,                                   (26)




                                                  13
where dr,i : Erp,q → Erp−r−i+1,q+r+i (i ≥ 0). Here is an example showing the 0-th page.
                                                          p


                        E0p−1,q−1            E0p,q−1           E0p+1,q−1   E0p+2,q−1


                                                        d0,0
                          E0p−1,q             E0p,q             E0p+1,q     E0p+2,q
                 q                               d0,1                                                (27)

                        E0p−1,q+1            E0p,q+1           E0p+1,q+1   E0p+2,q+1
                                      d0,2



                        E0p−1,q+2            E0p,q+2           E0p+1,q+2   E0p+2,q+2


We now describe how P
                    to define the vector spaces on the next page of the spectral sequence. Because
Dr ◦ Dr = 0, we have i+j=k dr,i ◦ dr,j = 0 for any k ≥ 0. In particular, when k = 0, we have

                                                 dr,0 ◦ dr,0 = 0.                                    (28)

The differential dr,0 induces the next page of the spectral sequence, namely
                                              p,q
                                             Er+1 = H(Erp,q , dr,0 ).                                (29)

We now describe how the total differential Dr+1 on the next page is obtained. This relies on the
homological perturbation lemma [29], which we will briefly review here. More discussions can be
found in Section A. Suppose that we have:
 (1) A cochain complex (C, d),
 (2) A smaller cochain complex (H, dH ),
 (3) A map h : C → C[−1] and chain maps i : H → C, p : C → H satisfying

                                                        pi = idH                                     (30)

     and
                                                 ip = idC + hd + dh.                                 (31)

Then H is a deformation retract of C. We note an abuse of notation in that p is simultaneously used
both for the grading index, e.g., in Erp,q , as well as the map p. Now we perturb the differential on C
by adding dpert , so the new differential is

                                                 d′ = d + dpert ,                                    (32)

with (d′ )2 = 0. Under a suitable smallness condition, we can transfer this perturbation to a new d′H
on H. We then define (C, d′ ) and (H, d′H ) and we can compute the new maps d′H , i′ , p′ , h′ , such that
(H, d′H ) is again a deformation retract of (C, d′ ).

                                                        14
   Under the smallness condition, if there exists a finite N for which (hdpert )N = 0, we can compute
the transferred differential d′H as

             d′H = dH + p dpert (1 − hdpert )−1 i = dH + p dpert (1 + hdpert + (hdpert )2 + ...)i,       (33)

where the geometric series stops after finitely many terms.
   Returning to the spectral sequence, we will apply the homological perturbation lemma with:

                                          (C, d) = (Tot(Er ), dr,0 ),
                                                                                                         (34)
                                         (H, dH ) = (Tot(Er+1 ), 0).

Notice that because we work over a field (not just a ring), the complex (Erp,q , dr,0 ) contracts onto its
                              p,q
cohomology, thus giving (Er+1     , 0) = (H(Erp,q , dr,0 ), 0). Thus, (Tot(Er+1 ), 0) is a deformation retract
of (Tot(Er ), dr,0 ). We then set
                                             dpert = Dr − dr,0                                            (35)
which produces (C, d + dpert ) = (Tot(Er ), Dr ), and define (Tot(Er+1 ), Dr+1 ) = (H, d′H ), which allows
us to find Dr+1 using the homological perturbation lemma, assuming that the perturbation satisfies
the smallness condition. This gives us a Dr+1 such that (Tot(Er+1 ), Dr+1 ) is a deformation retract of
(Tot(Er ), Dr ):
                                  (Tot(Er ), Dr ) ≃ (Tot(Er+1 ), Dr+1 ).                              (36)
The reason the smallness condition is satisfied in our case is that our complexes are bounded, so the
geometric series terminates after finitely many terms.

2.3.2   The spectral sequence description for code embedding framework
We now use spectral sequences to reformulate the code embedding framework. We focus primarily on
the “height-2 cone” described in [28], although the same idea applies to the “height-n cone” as well.
    Let C be the cochain complex in (20), and let C g be the embedded complex defined in [28], whose
definition we recall below. The original framework relates C g and C at the level of cohomology groups.
Here we give a chain-level refinement of this relation. In particular, we obtain a natural cochain map
from C g to C.
    To do so, we first relate C to the spectral sequence from the previous subsubsection. We have

                                          (Tot(E0 ), D0 ) = (C, δ).                                      (37)

Here the nonzero entries on the 0-th page are

                                E0p,0 = CX
                                         p
                                           ,   E0p,1 = CQ
                                                        p+1
                                                            ,    E0p,2 = CZp+2 ,                         (38)

and all other vector spaces E0p,q are set to zero. The horizontal map d0,0 is identified with δloc . The
vertical map d0,1 is identified with the maps gXQ and gQZ , while d0,2 is identified with gXZ . All other
maps are zero.




                                                      15
   Thus, the complex C fits into the 0-th page of the spectral sequence as follows:

                                                          p


            E0−2,−1              E0−1,−1                  E00,−1                      E01,−1       E02,−1


                                                                      d0,0 = δloc
            E0−2,0               E0−1,0                 E00,0 = CX
                                                                 0              E01,0 = CX
                                                                                         1       E02,0 = CX
                                                                                                          2


   q                                       d0,2 = gXZ         d0,1 = gXQ


            E0−2,1            E0−1,1 = CQ
                                        0               E00,1 = CQ
                                                                 1                  E01,1 = CQ
                                                                                             2     E02,q−1



         E0−2,2 = CZ0         E0−1,2 = CZ1              E00,2 = CZ2                    E01,2        E02,2


                                                                                          (39)
By the homological perturbation lemma, the cochain complex is chain-homotopy equivalent to the
complex on the 1-st page.
                                   (C, δ) ≃ (H(C, δloc ), H(g)).                          (40)
Here (H(C, δloc ), H(g)) denotes the cochain complex on the 1-st page, namely (Tot(E1 ), D1 ). We later
refer to this as the induced complex. When there is no ambiguity, we abbreviate this equivalence as
C ≃ H(C, δloc ).
    We now recall the definition of C g . It is the subcomplex of Tot(E1 ) = H(C, δloc ) given by the
column
                                       C g : E10,0 → E10,1 → E10,2 .
    From this perspective, we can upgrade the original code embedding formalism from a statement
about cohomology groups to a chain-level statement. Indeed, the embedded code C g appears naturally
as a subcomplex of H(C, δloc ), and the homological perturbation lemma provides a chain-homotopy
equivalence from H(C, δloc ) to C:
                                                          ≃
                                       C g ,→ H(C, δloc ) −
                                                          → C.
   As an application of this perspective, we recover the isomorphism from [28, Theorem I.1].

Lemma 2.1. Assume that H 1 (C X ) = H 1 (C Z ) = 0, then

                                             H 1 (C g ) ∼
                                                        = H 1 (C).

Proof. First,
                                          H 1 (H(C, δloc )) ∼
                                                            = H 1 (C),
since H(C, δloc ) is chain-homotopy equivalent to C.
    It remains to show H 1 (C g ) ∼
                                  = H 1 (H(C, δloc )). The assumptions H 1 (C X ) = H 1 (C Z ) = 0 imply
        −1,2            1,0
that E1      = 0 and E1 = 0. Consequently, the induced complex reduces to

                 H(C, δloc ) : E10,0 ⊕ (E1−1,1 ⊕ E1−2,2 ) → E10,1 → E10,2 ⊕ (E12,0 ⊕ E11,1 ).

                                                        16
Since the differential D1 = H(g) only has components of the form d1,i : E1p,q → E1p−i,q+1+i for i ≥ 0,
the source and target degrees force all components in H(g) to vanish except for E10,0 → E10,1 → E10,2 .
This is precisely the subcomplex C g . Therefore, the inclusion C g ,→ H(C, δloc ) induces an isomorphism

                                            H 1 (C g ) ∼
                                                       = H 1 (H(C, δloc )).



2.4     Topological defect networks and sheaf codes
Typically, a code is specified combinatorially, by giving a set of qubits, a set of checks, and the incidence
relations between them. There is, however, a more geometric way to encode the same information,
through the language of topological defect networks [30, 14] or sheaf codes [31, 32, 33, 34], which are
closely related frameworks for quantum CSS codes. In what follows, we use the sheaf-code formalism
as developed in [33, 34].
    We will use this formalism in Section 6 to construct codes with an explicit embedding in R3 .
The advantage is that the operations involved in these explicit constructions have natural geometric
descriptions.
    Readers who prefer to avoid the formalism may skip ahead to Section 6. Our use of sheaf codes is
fairly minimal there: the relevant data are summarized explicitly and rephrased in terms of assigning
colors to elements of a cell complex (see the discussion at the beginning of each subsection in Section 6).
    Let X be a t-dimensional cell complex, and let X(i) denote the set of i-cells in X, for i = 0, 1, ..., t.
For cells σ, τ ∈ X, we write σ ≤ τ to mean that σ is a face of τ , and we write σ ⋖ τ if, in addition,
their dimensions differ by 1. Let

                                           X≥σ (i) = {τ ∈ X(i) : τ ≥ σ}

denote the set of i-cells that contain σ as a face.
    A sheaf F assigns a finite-dimensional vector space Fσ over F2 to each cell σ ∈ X, together with
restriction maps
                                   resσ,τ : Fσ → Fτ for each σ ≤ τ,
satisfying the condition
                                 resπ,τ ◦ resσ,π = resσ,τ          for all σ ≤ π ≤ τ.
   The cell complex X together with its sheaf data F defines a sequence of maps
                                                       δ0                  δ1     δ t−1
                      C • (X, F) :       C 0 (X, F) −→ C 1 (X, F ) −→ · · · −→ C t (X, F),              (41)

where                                                             M
                                               C i (X, F ) =              Fσ ,
                                                                 σ∈X(i)

and                                      X
                      (δα)(τ ) =                    resσ,τ (α(σ)),        for every τ ∈ X(i + 1).
                                      σ∈X(i): σ⋖τ

   We want these maps to form a cochain complex, i.e., to satisfy δ ◦ δ = 0. This is guaranteed
whenever the cell complex with the constant sheaf forms a cochain complex:

                     C • (X, F2 ) :     C 0 (X, F2 ) −→ C 1 (X, F2 ) −→ · · · −→ C t (X, F2 ).          (42)

                                                            17
Here, the constant sheaf assigns F2 to every cell, with all restriction maps equal to the identity.
   We specialize to the case where Fτ = F2 for every t-cell τ . Thus, for any cell σ, the restrictions of
an element of Fσ to the top-dimensional cells containing σ define a map
                                                               X≥σ (t)
                                                       Fτ ∼
                                                Y
                                   ισ : Fσ →              = F2
                                                    τ ∈X≥σ (t)

given by                                                 Y
                                           ισ (α) =                resσ,τ (α).
                                                      τ ∈X≥σ (t)

   The sheaves appearing in our construction satisfy the strong sheaf axiom. Under this condition,
                                                                         X (t)
the map ισ is injective, so we may regard Fσ as a subspace of F2 ≥σ . Moreover, the sheaf is
determined by its values on the (t − 1)-cells [34, Lemma 3.5]. More explicitly, for any cell σ, one has
the characterization [34, Theorem 3.3]
                                   Y
                   ισ Fσ = {α ∈          Fτ : ∀τ ′ ∈ X≥σ (t − 1), α|X≥τ ′ (t) ∈ ιτ ′ Fτ ′ }.       (43)
                                     τ ∈X≥σ (t)

                                                                                                     X   (t)
Consequently, in Section 6, to specify the sheaf, it suffices to assign a subspace Fσ ⊆ F2 ≥σ for each
(t − 1)-cell σ. In the following, we drop ι from the notation and simply regard Fσ as a subspace of
  X (t)
F2 ≥σ .
    The sheaves we consider also satisfy local acyclicity. We say that the cell complex X is locally
acyclic if, for every i-cell σ ∈ X,

                                       Hj (X≤σ , F2 ) = 0        for 0 < j ≤ i.

We say that the sheaf F is locally acyclic if, for every i-cell σ ∈ X,

                                        H j (X≥σ , F) = 0        for i ≤ j < t.

    These local acyclicity conditions imply a Poincaré duality statement for sheaf codes. This duality
lets us study the dual chain complex, obtained by transposing the coboundary maps, in terms of the
cochain complex associated with a dual sheaf. To define this dual sheaf, for each (t − 1)-cell σ let
         X (t)
Fσ⊥ ⊆ F2 ≥σ be the orthogonal subspace of Fσ . The sheaf F ⊥ is then generated from these values
on the (t − 1)-cells using the characterization in Equation (43).
    We are ready to state the Poincaré duality.
Theorem 2.2 ([34, Theorem 3.17]). Let X be a t-dimensional sparse cell complex, and let F be a
locally acyclic sheaf on X. Then there is a duality between F and F ⊥ in terms of logical qubits,
code distances, (co)boundary expansion, and decoders. In particular, for every 0 ≤ i ≤ t, there is an
isomorphism:
                                     H i (X, F ⊥ ) ∼
                                                   = Ht−i (X, F).                                (44)
We expect this duality to extend to memory lifetime.6
  We summarize the data that must be specified:
   6
    A possible unifying proof strategy is to apply the homological perturbation lemma to the double complex arising
from Čech cohomology. Because the cell complex is sparse and finite-dimensional, the resulting perturbation expansion
terminates after finitely many terms.


                                                          18
   • the cell complex X;
                                                             X   (t)
   • the sheaf data on (t − 1)-cells, namely Fσ ⊆ F2 ≥σ                for σ ∈ X(t − 1).

The data on the (t − 1)-cells determine the sheaf values on all other cells through the characterization
in Equation (43).
    We must then check the following conditions:

   • the constant sheaf C • (X, F2 ) satisfies δ ◦ δ = 0,

   • the cell complex X is locally acyclic,

   • the sheaf F is locally acyclic.

Once these conditions hold, we can apply Poincaré duality to study the dual code by analyzing the
cochain complex associated with the dual sheaf, which is often easier to analyze.
   We also briefly comment on the relation to topological defect networks. One way to interpret the
quantum CSS code associated with

                                            δ i−1                 δi
                               C i−1 (X, F) −→ C i (X, F) −→ C i+1 (X, F)

is to regard each t-cell of X as a copy of the (i, t − i)-toric code in t dimensions. The sheaf data on the
(i − 1)-cells then specifies the corresponding gapped boundary conditions between adjacent copies of
these toric codes. In the topological defect network language, boundary conditions can be described in
terms of condensation data for the e- and m-type excitations, which in the sheaf language is encoded
by the vector spaces Fσ .
    For example, when i = 1 and t = 2, the choice

                            Fσ = {000, 111},        Fσ⊥ = {000, 011, 101, 110},

describes a gapped boundary between three copies of the two-dimensional surface code. In this case,
the condensed excitations are generated by

                                         ⟨e1 e2 e3 , m1 m2 , m2 m3 ⟩.

See [33] for further discussion.

2.5   Memory lifetime
We now discuss how to prove that the memory lifetime of our code is exponentially long in a power of
the system size. Normally, the model studied in this setting is a quantum system coupled to a bath in
a weak-coupling Markovian limit. This means that the density matrix of a quantum system ρ evolves
according to the Master equation
                               d                            1
                                                  (Si ρSi† − {ρ, Si† Si })
                                                 X
                                  ρ = −i[H, ρ] +                                                      (45)
                               dt                           2
                                                    i

with H the system Hamiltonian and the last term is often called the Lindbladian and written as L(ρ).
The operators {Si } are referred to as jump operators. The solution to this equation of motion is
written as ρ(t) = exp(−it[H, ·] + tL)[ρ(0)]. We will be interested in a choice of jump operators where

                                                        19
L(ρβ ) = 0 with ρβ = e−βH / Tr e−βH an equilibrium Gibbs state. We may additionally like to impose
                                      

a detailed balance condition on the jump operators, but the main theorem we use does not require
detailed balance. More details can be found in Refs. [4, 3, 22].
    Since our construction has a single encoded qubit, we restrict the analysis that follows to this case.
Call XL and ZL the logical operators associated to the encoded qubit.
    We now construct so-called dressed operators X  eL and ZeL , which will be useful for proving self-
correction. We assume that our code is a CSS quantum code, where the stabilizers are only X- or
Z-type, and the two Pauli sectors effectively decouple. In our setting, XeL and Z eL take the form
                                       X
                                X
                                eL =      ΠσZ OZ (σZ )XL OZ (σZ )ΠσZ
                                        σZ
                                        X
                                 Z
                                 eL =        ΠσX OX (σX )ZL OX (σX )ΠσX ,                             (46)
                                        σX

where the syndrome σ = (σX , σZ ), where σX ∈ Fr2Z and σZ ∈ Fr2X , is split into the violations of Z-
type and X-type stabilizers, respectively. Here ΠσX and ΠσZ project onto the subspace of states with
syndrome σX and σZ , respectively, and OX (σX ) and OZ (σZ ) are Pauli correction operators chosen
to remove the syndrome of a particular kind. Since the choice of Pauli correction is not unique, the
definition above is not yet well defined. We will require a decoder to determine OX (σX ) and OZ (σZ ).
It will be a composite map relying on maps fX (σX ) and fZ (σZ ), which determine the supports of
Z-type correction and X-type correction to be applied based on the given syndrome. Then:

Definition 2.3 (Dressed observable). Suppose we are given logical operators (XL , ZL ) and Pauli
corrections output by the decoder OZ (σZ ) = Z fZ (σZ ) and OX (σX ) = X fX (σX ) . The dressed observables
with respect to this decoder are given by Eq. (46).

We then define the notion of an observable being protected from a set of errors:

Definition 2.4. Define Pstable to be a projector onto the subspace satisfying Pstable X
                                                                                      eL = X
                                                                                           eL Pstable for
dressed observable X
                   eL . We say that X eL is protected from a set of operators E on the subspace Pstable
if and only if
                                          eL ]Pstable = 0 ∀E ∈ E.
                                      [E, X                                                         (47)

     To illustrate this definition, suppose E is a set of Pauli operators (the main theorem will hold for
non-Pauli jump operators as well). Define |σ, ±L ⟩ = O(σ) |±L ⟩ as a state with syndrome σ = (σX , σZ ),
where O(σ) = OX (σX )OZ (σZ ) is the Pauli correction operator and |±L ⟩ is a codestate that is an
eigenstate of XL with eigenvalue ±1. It follows from a simple computation that X  eL |σ, ±L ⟩ = ± |σ, ±L ⟩.
Define Pstable as a subspace of states protected from an error E. This means that [E, X   eL ] |σ, ±L ⟩ = 0
if |σ, ±L ⟩ ∈ Pstable . By another simple computation, the only states for which this is not true is those
where O(σ) |σ, ±L ⟩ ̸= O(σ + σE )E |σ, ±L ⟩, where σE is the syndrome associated to E. One may say
that these states are those which decode differently upon applying a small error. A similar result holds
for ZL and Z  eL .

Claim 2.5. Assuming E is a set of Pauli operators, if ∃E ∈ E and ∃ |σ, ·⟩ ∈ supp(Pstable ) such that
O(σ)O(σ + σE )E is a logical operator, then X
                                            eL (ZeL ) is not protected from E on subspace Pstable .

   The main theorem we will need is (from [22], but implicitly appeared in [3]):




                                                     20
Theorem 2.6 (Theorem 1 in [22]). Let L be a Lindbladian with jump operators in the set E, whose
stationary state is ρβ = e−βH / Tr e−βH for stabilizer Hamiltonian H. Define eLt to be the generator
of time evolution by time t ≥ 0. Construct dressed observables X
                                                               eL and Z
                                                                      eL as well as a subspace Pstable
in which XL and ZL are protected from the set of errors E. Assume that X
          e        e                                                    eL , Z
                                                                             eL , and Pstable commute
                                                                  2
with H: then there exists a CPTP logical encoding map Enc : L(C ) → L(HS ) and a logical decoding
map Dec : L(HS ) → L(C2 ) such that

                         e−it[H,·]+Lt ◦ Enc(τ ) − Enc(τ )          ≤ 8∥L∥1 t Tr(1 − Pstable )ρβ                   (48)
                                                               1

for any single-qubit density matrix τ , and Dec ◦ Enc(τ ) = τ .

The proof of this theorem provides explicit logical encoding and logical decoding maps. Note that the
total Hilbert space for the system can be factorized as HS = Hlog ⊗ Hsyn where Hlog is the logical
subspace. In this basis, the Hamiltonian is H = I ⊗ H ′ where H ′ is diagonal in the syndrome basis
with matrix elements equal to the size of the syndrome. We choose a thermal encoding map to encode
the logical state τ , which acts as
                                                             ′
                                                    τ ⊗ e−βH
                                       Enc(τ ) =                                                 (49)
                                                  Tr(τ ⊗ e−βH ′ )
     The goal is to retrieve τ after evolving the system for a long time t. In the infinite time limit, the
                                          −βH ′
system thermalizes to the state I ⊗ Tre e−βH ′ , and thus while we cannot recover τ at infinite time, we
                                         (      )
want to be able to do so after time ∼ exp nηk where η is some positive constant and nk is the number
of qubits in the construction at level 2k. The logical decoding map Dec(ρ) = TrHsyn (ρ) extracts the
state of the encoded qubit after this time. It is immediate that Dec ◦ Enc(τ ) = τ .
     In summary, our goal will be to construct decoding maps fX (σX ) and fZ (σZ ) and a subspace of
states Pstable so that XeL and ZeL are protected from the set of single-qubit Pauli operators on Pstable 7 .
Then, if we can prove that Tr(1 − Pstable )ρβ ≤ exp −nηk , the above theorem proves that the memory
                                                           

lifetime is exponentially long.


3       Construction with random embedding
Our code is a CSS code associated with a three-term cochain complex that we construct iteratively.
We denote the code in the i-th iteration by C(i) • (we may also refer to this as the code at “level i”),

which is associated with a Tanner square complex T(i) (see Subsec. 2.2).
    Each iteration maps T(i) 7→ T(i+1) , and increases the size of the code by a constant factor while
effectively doubling the size of the syndrome associated with one type of errors, Pauli X or Z. There
are two different iterations: the RX iteration, which acts as RX : T(2i) 7→ T(2i+1) , and the RZ iteration,
which acts as RZ : T(2i+1) 7→ T(2i+2) . The RX iteration effectively doubles the size of the syndrome for
X-type errors, while the RZ iteration does the same for Z-type errors. The final code is constructed
by alternating between these iterations. Each iteration consists of 2 steps, which we call perturbation
and replacement.
    We use I(i) : T(i) → R3 to denote the embedding map, which maps each vertex of T(i) to a point
in R3 . The image of edges and higher-dimensional cells are then obtained via linear interpolation. At
    7
   We restrict our analysis to single-site Pauli jump operators, but we emphasize that Theorem 2.6 applies to non-Pauli
jump operators, as well as jump operators supported over regions moderately smaller than the code distance.



                                                          21
the i-th iteration, we assume an induction hypothesis that I(i) is bounded-density and local. Then we
show that after one iteration, the resulting embedding I(i+1) remains bounded-density and local.
    We briefly collect some important notation for defining the construction.
General notation:
   • C(i)
      • : the cochain complex of the code at iteration i.

   • T(i) : Tanner square complex of the code at iteration i.
   • RX (T(i) ) = T(i+1) , for i even: X-iteration.
   • RZ (T(i) ) = T(i+1) , for i odd: Z-iteration.
   • UX and UZ : the new square complex each square is replaced with during the RX and RZ
     iterations, respectively.
Geometry-related notation (all parameters will be universal constants independent of the iteration
index i):
   • I(i) : T(i) → R3 : embedding map at iteration i.
   • zv , ze : maximum vertex degree (edges incident to a vertex) and maximum edge degree (faces
     incident to an edge) in T(i) at any step M .
   • t, t′ : “density” of embedding at different steps, namely the maximum number of 2-cells of the
     complex that intersect any unit ball in R3 . We will have t′ < t.
   • λ: scale factor; during the perturbation step, we scale the square complex by a constant λ, and
     then perturb the vertices.
   • ℓ: a geometric parameter related to λ, which sets the subdivision scale, such that the edges in
     the square complex after the replacement step become unit length again.
   • α, α1 , α2 , γ: geometric O(1) parameters controlling the perturbation appearing in embedding.
     Roughly, αλ is the distance we perturb by, α2 λ is the distance between the perturbation vectors
     of neighboring 0-cells, and α1 λ captures the range of possible perturbation vectors for a 0-cell;
     our procedure randomly selects a vector in this range.

3.1   Step 1: perturbation
An iteration RX (RZ ) consists of two steps: perturbation and replacement. The two steps transform
                                                             perturb            replace
                                                                          ′ ) 7−−−−→ (T
the Tanner square complex and embedding as (T(i) , I(i) ) 7−−−−→ (T(i) , I(i)          (i+1) , I(i+1) ). In
particular, the perturbation step does not change the square complex, only the embedding map. The
replacement step updates both the square complex and the embedding map.
    We now state the induction hypothesis. In particular, we assume that the embedding I(i) is local
and has bounded density (defined below). We also assume that the maximum vertex degree (edges
incident to a vertex) and maximum edge degree (faces incident to an edge) in T(i) are zv = 7 and
ze = 4. For the induction step, we show that I(i+1) is local and bounded-density characterized by the
same universal constants, and that T(i+1) has the same values for zv and ze .
    The definition of a bounded-density local embedding of a square complex is provided below:
Definition 3.1 ((t, ℓ)-embedding in R3 ). A map I : X → R3 is called a (t, ℓ)-embedding of a cell
complex X in R3 if it satisfies the following conditions:
  1. (Bounded density) the preimage of a unit ball in R3 intersects with ≤ t 2-cells in X.

                                                      22
  2. (Geometric locality) Neighboring 0-cells in X map to points separated a distance ≤ ℓ in R3 .
Remark 3.2. In Section 6, we use a variant in which the bounded-density condition is imposed on
balls of diameter 1 rather than unit balls. That is, the preimage of any ball of diameter 1 in R3
intersects ≤ t 2-cells of X.
    If the square complex is (t, ℓ)-embedded in R3 for constants t and ℓ, then the associated code is
local in R3 . The main statement regarding the perturbation step is:
                                                                                             ′ of T
Lemma 3.3. If I(i) is a (t, 1)-embedding of T(i) in R3 , there exists another embedding map I(i)    (i)
      3          ′                          ′
in R that is a (t , ℓ)-embedding, where t, t < t and ℓ > 1 are universal O(1) constants independent
of i.
    Before proving this lemma, we provide a high-level description of what the embedding achieves. We
                                                                                                ′ that
assume that I(i) is a (t, 1)-embedding, and in the perturbation step, we construct a new map I(i)
       ′                                ′
is a (t , ℓ)-embedding. The constant t can be made small enough, so that we can then show that the
embedding map I(i+1) for the complex after replacement will be a (t, 1)-embedding, for t large enough.
In this case, ℓ will depend on t and t′ (this dependence is derived in the proof of Lemma 3.3). We will
avoid explicitly specifying the relationship between these O(1) constants in statements of lemmas and
claims, as they are cumbersome and the reader can deduce them from the proofs. Instead, we provide
explicit numerical values for them in Subsec. 3.4.
    The perturbation procedure is similar to those used in the embedding theorems of Refs. [12, 21].
The full procedure is defined as follows:
  1. We formally add diagonal lines to the square 2-cells so they are standard triangular simplices;
     these can be removed later on. Therefore, we will refer to the embedded complex as a simplicial
     complex for the rest of the discussion. This simplicial complex is (2t, 1)-embedded in R3 .
  2. We scale the image of the simplicial complex in R3 by a sufficiently large constant λ (which is
     O(1)); this results in a (2t, λ)-embedding.
  3. Finally, we perturb the vertices of the embedded simplicial complex. For this, select A > 1
     distinct labels, and assign labels to vertices so that no simplex contains two vertices of the same
     label. Consider a ball of radius αλ for α a large integer. On this ball, select A caps of size (arc
     length) α1 λ, each separated by arc-distance ≥ 2α2 λ for positive integers 1 < 2α2 < α and α1 .
     Assign a distinct label to each cap. For a vertex with label i at position v, choose a uniformly
     distributed vector c(v) in the cap labeled i (perturbations of different vertices with the same
     label are independent random variables); perturb the vertex to position v + c(v). As we prove
     below, after perturbation, the new map will be a (t′ , ℓ)-embedding for some t′ < t that we can
     choose to be small enough.
   To prove Lemma 3.3, we first need to establish that simplices do not become too distorted after
perturbation.
Claim 3.4. After the perturbation step, the image of any 1-simplex in R3 has length ∈ [(α2 −1)λ, (2α+
1)λ].
Proof. Call r1 and r2 the locations of the endpoints of the 1-simplex before perturbation. Call p1 and
p2 the vectors they were perturbed by. Then,

                ∥(r1 + p1 ) − (r2 + p2 )∥2 ≤ ∥r1 − r2 ∥2 + ∥p1 ∥2 + ∥p2 ∥2 ≤ λ + αλ + αλ.          (50)

                                                   23
using the fact that p1 and p2 lie on a radius αλ sphere. To achieve a lower bound, we use

                    ∥(r1 + p1 ) − (r2 + p2 )∥2 ≥ ∥p1 − p2 ∥2 − ∥r2 − r1 ∥2 ≥ α2 λ − λ              (51)

which uses the fact that each endpoint is assigned a different label, and the distance between caps is
≥ 4α2 λ/π ≥ α2 λ.

Claim 3.5. Define the width of a 2-simplex as the shortest distance from a vertex to its opposite
side, minimized over all vertices. The width of any 2-simplex is ≥ γλ after perturbation, where
γ = α(1 − cos αα2 ) − 1.

Proof. We provide the crudest possible argument showing γ > 0; significant improvements can be
made to our lower bound on γ for certain placements of the caps. Using notation from the proof of
the previous claim, the distance between a vertex and the opposite side is

                     d1 = min ∥r1 + p1 − ϵ(r2 + p2 ) − (1 − ϵ)(r3 + p3 )∥2
                           ϵ∈[0,1]

                        ≥ min ∥p1 − ϵp2 − (1 − ϵ)p3 ∥2 − ∥r1 − ϵr2 − (1 − ϵ)r3 ∥2
                           ϵ∈[0,1]

                        ≥ min ∥p1 − ϵp2 − (1 − ϵ)p3 ∥2 − λ                                         (52)
                           ϵ∈[0,1]

where in the third line we use the fact that the width of the original simplex is less than the maximum
side length.
    Call qϵ = ϵp2 + (1 − ϵ)p3 . Then we can write
                                                     1
                       d1 ≥ min ∥p1 − qϵ ∥2 − λ ≥       min |p1 · (p1 − qϵ )| − λ,                 (53)
                             ϵ∈[0,1]                αλ ϵ∈[0,1]

by Cauchy-Schwartz. Because the arc distance between the caps is at least α2 λ, the angle between
any two points in different caps is at least αα2 . Therefore, p1 · p2 ≤ αλ2 cos αα2 , and
                                                    p1 · q ϵ             α2 
                           |p1 · (p1 − qϵ )| = αλ −          ≥ αλ 1 − cos      .
                                                     αλ                    α
Combining this with Equation (53), we obtain γ ≥ α 1 − cos αα2 − 1.
                                                                      

    Now, we will argue that the density of simplices reduces after perturbation. We will rely on some of
the arguments in Theorem 7 of Ref. [12], which is a modification of a proof first presented by Gromov
and Guth [21]. However, we will depart from their arguments in a few places to provide a sharper
analysis with explicit constants.

 Proof of Lemma 3.3. We will now show that after scaling by λ and perturbation by scale αλ, the
simplicial complex is (t′ , (2α + 1)λ)-embedded for λ large enough, giving the desired embedding map
  ′ with ℓ = (2α + 1)λ.
I(i)
     The proof involves showing two results: first that the density reduces like t → t′ and second that
distances increase like 1 → ℓ. The second result follows from Claim 3.4, so we only need to prove the
first result. The intuition behind the proof will be to identify “bad events” where the density is too
large and show that the random perturbation decreases the probability of bad events. Invoking the
Lovász local lemma shows the existence of a perturbation where no bad event occurs.


                                                   24
    The scaling step caused the complex to be (2t, λ)-embedded. Mark each simplex with one of
A′ = O(1) labels so that simplices of the same label do not share any vertices. Define ∆ to be some
set of 2-simplices with the same label. Call Pk,∆ the probability that there exists a unit ball such that
all 2-simplices in the set ∆ intersect it after perturbation, and |∆| = k. Call (k, ∆) the corresponding
event that this occurs. For the event (k, ∆) to occur, all simplices in ∆ must be contained in a ball of
radius αλ (denoted B(αλ)). We now state the following claim; the proof is deferred to Appendix B,
where we provide bounds on the constants:
Claim 3.6. Given a fixed unit ball B ′ (1) ⊂ B(αλ), the probability that a 2-simplex in B(αλ) intersects
B ′ (1) after perturbation is ≤ Γ/λ for some constant Γ > 0.
    Since each 2-simplex in ∆ is perturbed independently of the others, the probability that all simplices
in ∆ intersect B ′ (1) is PB ′ (1),∆ ≤ Γk λ−k by independence. Define C to be a cover of B(αλ) with unit
balls such that |C| = α3 λ3 . By a union bound
                                                 X
                                    Pk,∆ ≤ max        PB ′ (1),∆ ≤ α3 Γk λ3−k .
                                          C
                                              B ′ (1)⊂C

   Given that the preimage of any radius-λ ball overlaps with ≤ 2t simplices, the event (k, ∆) depends
on ≤ (2α3 t)k events, and if
                               (2α3 t)k Pk,∆ ≤ α3 (2α3 Γt)k λ3−k ≤ 1/4                            (54)
then there is a non-zero probability that (k, ∆) does not occur for any ∆, by the Lovász local lemma.
Thus by setting kA′ = t′ , we ensure that each unit ball overlaps with ≤ t′ simplices; this requires
                     ′  ′   ′           ′   ′   ′
choosing λ ≥ (4α3 )A /(t −3A ) (2α3 Γt)t /(t −3A ) . A numerical bound is provided in Sec. 3.4. This implies
that there exists an event where the complex is (t′ , ℓ)-embedded in R3 where ℓ = (2α + 1)λ.

Even though the perturbation step only proves the existence of a good perturbation, there exists an
algorithm running in expected polynomial time that finds a good perturbation. This algorithm is
simply the generalized Moser-Tardos algorithm (see Ref. [35, 36]), which is generally applicable as
long as some version of the Lovasz local lemma is satisfied.

3.2     Step 2: replacement
We present two equivalent formulations for studying replacement. The first replaces each square in
the Tanner square complex with a square complex, while the second replaces each vertex with a
corresponding cochain complex.
    The square-based formulation offers clearer intuition from the perspective of embeddings. In
contrast, the vertex-based formulation aligns with the code embedding framework in Section 2.3. It is
better suited for analyzing code properties, such as the number of encoded qubits, and for constructing
chain maps between codes, which will play a central role in the construction of the decoder.

3.2.1    Replacement in the Tanner square complex framework
From here onward, we assume that ℓ is odd and will choose it to be the smallest odd integer larger
than (2α + 1)λ.
    In the replacement step of iteration RX each square s ∈ T(i) (2) is replaced by the square complex
UX that is shown in Fig. 3.2.1 (in the illustration, we set ℓ = 5). Similarly, in the dual iteration RZ ,
each square is replaced by the square complex UZ shown in Fig. 3.2.1. Vertices of both UX and UZ
are 3-colored as indicated in the caption.

                                                          25
Figure 3: An illustration of the replacement process. A square s in the Tanner square complex T(i)
is replaced with a local structure UX during the RX iteration, and with UZ during the RZ iteration.
The coloring convention is as follows: red dots denote z ∈ VZ,(i) , black dots denote q ∈ VQ,(i) , and
blue dots denote x ∈ VX,(i) .


    Both complexes consist of two ℓ × ℓ layers along with a perpendicular square subcomplex of
thickness 2 (shown in purple). Furthermore, both complexes come with four 1-dimensional boundary
subcomplexes, associated with four edges of the square being replaced. Adjacent boundary complexes
meet at a pair of vertices, which form a corner subcomplex associated with corners of the square being
replaced.
    More formally, for each square s ∈ T(i) (2), let UX,s be the copy of UX that will replace s in the
RX iteration. The new Tanner square complex T(i+1) is obtained by gluing these copies according to
incidence relations in T(i) . In the RX iteration,
                                                                  
                                                     G
                                     T(i+1) =                 UX,s  / ∼
                                                  s∈T(i) (2)

where ∼ identifies the edges and vertices at common boundaries of neighboring structures UX . Namely,
if two squares s, s′ ∈ T(i) (2) are adjacent along an edge e, then we identify the boundary subcomplexes
of UX,s and UX,s′ labeled by e. Similarly, we identify all corner subcomplexes labeled by the same
vertex v ∈ T(i) (0). The replacement step for RZ is defined identically, with UX instead replaced by
UZ . By construction, T(i+1) is again a square complex. Each square of T(i+1) has two diagonally
opposing black vertices in VQ,(i+1) , one red vertex in VZ,(i+1) , and one blue vertex in VX,(i+1) .

Remark 3.7. Note that the subcomplex UX resembles a piece of a thickness-1 3D surface code slab
with Pauli-X membrane operators and membrane-condensing boundary conditions in the front and
back of the slab. Similarly, the subcomplex UZ resembles a piece of a thickness-1 3D surface code slab
with Pauli-Z membrane operators and membrane-condensing boundary conditions in the front and
back of the slab. This illustrates the “doubling” effect of the RX and RZ iterations on the X-type and
Z-type errors, respectively.

    For the new Tanner square complex T(i+1) after replacement, the embedding map I(i+1) : T(i+1) →
R3 can be obtained from the perturbed embedding I(i)    ′ : T        3
                                                             (i) → R . In the RX iteration, define a
                                            ′ . U ′ is geometrically a projection of U onto R2 along
“flat” realization of UX , which we denote UX    X                                    X
the doubling direction, and it has the same four boundary subcomplexes and the same four corner


                                                     26
subcomplexes as UX . As a result of this flattening, several cells can collapse onto one location. This
is illustrated below:




                                                                                                      (55)
For example, the corner subcomplex of UX    ′ is now entirely placed at the same point.

    Now, we will describe how to obtain the map I(i+1) . Recall that in the perturbation step, we
formally added a diagonal to each square s ∈ T(i) (2), turning it into a pair of adjacent triangular
simplices. Thus, if an embedded square I(i) ′ (s) is not planar, it nevertheless consists of two embedded

triangular simplices, where each simplex is trivially planar. For each s ∈ T(i) (2), we add an associated
              ′
diagonal to UX,s that turns it into a pair of subdivided triangles. We can now define a piecewise-linear
embedding map
                                              ′       ′
                                             IX,s : UX,s → R3
by sending the four corners of UX,s′                                                         ′ (s). The
                                      to the locations of the the four vertices of s under I(i)
                                                           ′
images of the rest of the vertices, edges, and 2-cells in UX,s are obtained by linear interpolation. An
example of the action of this local auxiliary map is shown below:




                                                                                                     (56)
            ′ (s) are compatible on the boundary subcomplexes, since on every common edge and
The maps I(i)
                                                                              ′ . Therefore, this
corner they are determined by the same embedded edge or vertex of T(i) under I(i)
defines a unique piecewise-linear map

                                          I(i+1) : T(i+1) → R3 .

Finally, we remove the auxiliary diagonals. In subsec. 3.2.7, we show that I(i+1) introduced here is a
(t, 1)-embedding.

3.2.2   RX in the code embedding framework
We now give an alternative description of the replacement step via the code embedding formalism.
The main implication from this perspective is twofold: the number of logical qubits is preserved under

                                                   27
the replacement,
                                           H 1 (C(i) ) ∼
                                                       = H 1 (C(i+1) )                               (57)
and there exists a chain map
                                            FRX : C(i) → C(i+1)                                      (58)
which will be proved in Section 3.2.4. The analogous statement for RZ will be proved in Section 3.2.6.
   Let us first discuss replacement during the RX iteration. Recall that the vertices of the Tanner
                                   V
graph of the code C(i) : FV2 X → F2 Q → FV2 Z can be decomposed as T(i) (0) = (VX , VQ , VZ ). We will
associate a local cochain complex to each v ∈ T(i) (0). In the RX step, we define the local complexes
Cx : Cx0 → Cx1 → Cx2 , Cq : 0 → Cq1 → Cq2 , Cz : 0 → 0 → Cz2 , which are indexed by x ∈ VX ,
q ∈ VQ , z ∈ VZ . The code at the next level C(i+1) = RX (C(i) ) is an embedding complex as defined in
Subsec. 2.3 with the following structure:
                                                              0
                                                             δX           1
                                                                         δX
                                                        0
                                                       CX          1
                                                                  CX           2
                                                                              CX
                                                          0
                                                         gXQ          1
                                                                     gXQ
                                                   0
                                                  δQ          1
                                                             δQ
                                            0           1
                                                       CQ          2
                                                                  CQ                                 (59)

                                                 0
                                                gQZ       1
                                                         gQZ
                                     0
                                    δZ             1
                                                  δZ
                               0            0          CZ2

                                                                                          •
which differs from the discussion in Subsec. 2.3 in that some vector spaces are zero and gXZ = 0. The
                    0    δ0   1     δ1  2
full code C(i+1) : C(i+1) −→ C(i+1) −→ C(i+1) is the total complex of the diagram above, with
                                           •        •    •
                                          C(i+1) = CX ⊕ CQ ⊕ CZ•                                     (60)

Its coboundary maps are direct sums of local boundary maps and connecting maps, which we will
write as δ = δloc + g. The local part δloc consists of maps δx , δq , and δz acting within individual
local complexes as in Eqn. (19). The connecting maps g are defined between local complexes as in
Eqn. (19).
    The rest of this discussion formally defines the local complexes Cx , Cq , and Cz as well as gluing
maps in detail. On a first pass, the reader can skip these formal discussions and refer to Eqn. (73).
    For x ∈ VX , the local complex Cx : Cx0 → Cx1 → Cx2 is determined by the local 2D structure of
the square complex T(i) in the vicinity of x. Let Xx be the 2-cell subcomplex of T(i) formed by 2-cells
that contain x:
                                      Xx = {f ∈ T(i) (2) : x ∈ f }                                 (61)
and let ∂Xx ⊂ Xx be the 1-cell complex that does not contain x:

                                         ∂Xx = {e ∈ Xx (1) : x ̸∈ e}                                 (62)

where the {. . .} notation stands for closure. In particular, if Xx contains a square f , it also contains
its boundary edges and vertices, and if ∂Xx contains an edge e, it also contains its boundary vertices.
Both Xx and ∂Xx are illustrated in (63).
    We now construct a new local complex Yx from Xx in two steps. First, subdivide each square in
Xx into (ℓ − 1)/2 × (ℓ − 1)/2 squares (recall that ℓ is odd) to obtain square complex Xx′ . Similarly,

                                                       28
we subdivide each edge in ∂Xx into (ℓ − 1)/2 edges to obtain ∂Xx′ . Second, define Yx by gluing two
copies of Xx′ along the cylinder on their common boundary:

                         Yx = Xx′ × {0} ⊔ Xx′ × {1} ⊔ ∂Xx′ × [0, 1] / ∼,
                                                                   


where ∼ identifies the two copies of ∂Xx′ in (Xx′ × {0}) ⊔ (Xx′ × {1}) with the two copies of ∂Xx′ in
∂Xx′ × [0, 1]. We now define Cx to be the cellular cochain complex of Yx , i.e. Cx• := C • (Yx ). We
illustrate an example below in (63), where we chose ℓ = 5.




                                                                                                   (63)

    Similarly, Cq : 0 → Cq1 → Cq2 is induced by the local 1D structure of T(i) in the vicinity of q. Let
Xq be the 1-cell subcomplex of T(i) formed by the 1-cells that connect the vertex q ∈ VQ with vertices
in VZ :

                            Xq = {e ∈ T(i) (1) : q ∈ e, ∃z ∈ VZ s.t. z ∈ e}.                       (64)
Let ∂Xq be the 0-cell subcomplex of Xq that does not contain q:

                                      ∂Xq = {v ∈ Xq (0) : q ̸= v}.                                 (65)

Both Xq and ∂Xq are illustrated in (66). We then similarly obtain Yq in two steps: first, we subdivide
each edge of Xq into (ℓ − 1)/2 edges, obtaining Xq′ . Second, we set

                         Yq = Xq′ × {0} ⊔ Xq′ × {1} ⊔ ∂Xq′ × [0, 1] / ∼,
                                                                 


where ∼ identifies the two copies of ∂Xq′ in Xq′ × {0} ⊔ Xq′ × {1} with the two copies of ∂Xq′
                                                                      

in ∂Xq′ × [0, 1]. Finally, we define Cq to be the shifted cellular cochain complex of Yq , i.e. Cq• :=
C • (Yq )[−1], so that Cqm = C m−1 (Yq ).




                                                  29
                                                                                                   (66)
     Finally, Cz : 0 → 0 → Cz2 is defined to be two copies of the point z, which form a basis of the
vector space Cz2 . More formally, we define a 0-dimensional square complex Yz consisting of two points
and set Cz• = C • (Yz )[−2].
     To fully define C(i+1) , we also need to define the connecting maps gXQ and gQZ . Below, we define
gxq and gqz ; these can then be used to define gXQ and gQZ via Eqn. (21).
     The map gxqm : C m → C m+1 for m = 0, 1 is only nonzero when q ∈ V and x ∈ V are adjacent in
                      x        q                                           Q           X
T(i) . Consider an adjacent pair (x, q), and let Xx′ and Xq′ be the associated cell complexes as defined
above. Note that Yx contains a one-dimensional subcomplex that is isomorphic to Yq . We therefore
have the map
                                                  Yq ,→ Yx ,                                        (67)
which induces a cochain map corresponding to restriction:

                                           C(Yx ) → C(Yq ).                                        (68)

Combined with the definitions Cx ∼
                                 = C(Yx ) and Cq ∼
                                                 = C(Yq )[−1], we obtain

                                  gxq : Cx ∼
                                           = C(Yx ) → C(Yq ) ∼
                                                             = Cq [1].                             (69)
                     m : C m → C m+1 . We will only need this map for m = 1. It only acts nontrivially
    Next, we define gqz   q     z
for adjacent q ∈ VQ and z ∈ VZ in T(i) . Consider such an adjacent pair (q, z). Note that Yq includes
a 0-dimensional subcomplex that is isomorphic to Yz . The construction therefore gives a map

                                               Yz ,→ Yq ,                                          (70)

which induces a cochain map corresponding to restriction:

                                           C(Yq ) → C(Yz ).                                        (71)

Combined with the definitions Cq ∼
                                 = C(Yq )[−1] and Cz ∼
                                                     = C(Yz )[−2], we obtain

                                gqz : Cq [1] ∼
                                             = C(Yq ) → C(Yz ) ∼
                                                               = Cz [2],                           (72)

    The structure of the full complex C(i+1) = RX (C(i) ) obtained this way is shown below for one
example of a local neighborhood. The specification of all local complexes and gluing maps is identical
to the replacement procedure defined on the Tanner square complex in the previous subsubsection.

                                                  30
                                                                                                                         (73)

3.2.3    The induced code (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g))
Given the construction of C(i+1) from local complexes, we apply the code embedding formalism from
Section 2.3.1 to analyze its structure. We begin by describing the induced complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) and
its induced coboundary maps H(g), which will serve as the main tool for studying the properties of
C(i+1) in the next subsubsection. The main lemma we will prove in this subsubsection is the following:

Lemma 3.8. The cochain complex (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)) has the following structure:

                                  0 )
                               H(gXQ                        1 )
                                                         H(gQZ
              H 0 (CX , δX )            H 1 (CQ , δQ )                  H 2 (CZ , δZ ) ⊕ H 2 (CX , δX ) ⊕ H 2 (CQ , δQ )
                                 0
                                δ(i)                    1 ⊕0⊕0
                                                     ∆◦δ(i)
        ∼          V                         V
        =         F2 X,i                    F2 Q,i                        (F22 )VZ,i ⊕ H 2 (CX , δX ) ⊕ H 2 (CQ , δQ )
                                                                                                                         (74)
                                                                  0
                                                                 δ(i)            1
                                                                                δ(i)
                                                             V             V           V                V
      0 and δ 1 are the cochain maps in C
Here δ(i)    (i)                         (i) : F2
                                                  X,i
                                                      −−→ F2 Q,i −−→ F2 Z,i and ∆ : F2 Z,i → (F22 )VZ,i ∼
                                                                                                        =
 V        V
F2 Z,i ⊕ F2 Z,i is the diagonal map b 7→ (b, b).
    In the map ∆ ◦ δ(i) 1 ⊕ 0 ⊕ 0, the only nonzero component is ∆ ◦ δ 1 to (F2 )VZ,i . The components
                                                                      (i)     2
to H (CX , δX ) and H 2 (CQ , δQ ) are zero maps.
      2


     The local complexes in C(i+1) (see Eqn. 59) are labeled by the basis elements of vector spaces
                   V
in C(i) : FV2 X → F2 Q → FV2 Z . Readers familiar with the quantum code embedding formalism might
already see that the code “embedded” in C(i+1) = RX (C(i) ) must be related to the code in the
previous iteration C(i) . The “embedded code” is (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)); the lemma above implies that
it contains a subcomplex of the form
                                                         V               VZ
                                            FV2 X → F2 Q → F22                                                           (75)

This subcomplex almost looks like C(i) except that the boundary of X-type operators (1-cochains)
                                                               V
is doubled, which is reflected in the last vector space F22 Z . In the next subsubsection, we will
argue that there is a chain map from C(i) to H(Ci+1 , δloc ), and this will help us prove an isomorphism
between the first cohomology groups of C(i) and C(i+1)



                                                         31
Proof of Lemma 3.8. We start by determining the vector spaces and the maps in complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ).
For this, we will first need the cohomology groups of Cx , Cq , and Cz with respect to their local cobound-
ary maps. First, consider Cx . Note that it is the cellular cochain complex of Yx . Further, observe
that Xx′ is topologically the cone of ∂Xx′ and Yx is topologically the suspension of ∂Xx′ . For reduced
cohomology, suspension shifts the degree by one:
                                                e m (Yx ) ∼
                                                H         =He m−1 (∂Xx′ ).                                                (76)
                               e m−1 (∂Xx′ ) ∼
In addition, we trivially have H             =He m−1 (∂Xx ). For m > 0, the reduced cohomology and
the usual cohomology agree, and H 0 (Yx ) ∼= F2 because Yx is connected. Therefore,

                                     H 0 (Yx ) ∼
                                               = F2 ,         H 1 (Yx ) ∼
                                                                        =He 0 (∂Xx ) = 0,                                 (77)

where the second identity holds because ∂Xx is connected. This translates into the cohomological
properties of Cx :
                              H 0 (Cx , δx ) ∼
                                             = F2 , H 1 (Cx , δx ) ∼
                                                                   = 0.                    (78)
In addition, H 2 (Cx ) is nontrivial, but we will not need to evaluate it.
    Next, we consider Cq . Notice that Xq′ is topologically the cone of ∂Xq′ , and Yq is topologically the
suspension of ∂Xq′ . Thus, we have the same relation between the reduced cohomology of Yq and ∂Xq′
as we had before, i.e. H  e m (Yq ) ∼
                                    =H e m−1 (∂X ′ ). Yq is still connected, so H 0 (Yq ) ∼
                                                                                          = F2 , but ∂Xq′ is not
                                                 q
connected so He 1 (Yq ) ∼
                        =H e 0 (∂X ′ ) will now be nontrivial. However, H 2 (Cq ) ∼
                                    q                                              = H 1 (Yq ), and we will not
need to evaluate this for our purposes. Including the shift by one in the definition of Cq , we have:

                                        H 0 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                                       = 0,          H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                                                                    = F2 .                                (79)

   Finally, the homological properties of Cz are

                        H 0 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                       = 0,         H 1 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                                                   = 0,             H 2 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                                                                                   = F22 ,                (80)

   and the complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) has the following structure:


                                                        H 0 (CX , δX ) ∼
                                                                       = FV2 X                     0             H 2 (CX , δX )

                                                                        0                                 1
                                                                     H(gXQ )                           H(gXQ )


                                                                          V
                                 0                      H 1 (CQ , δQ ) ∼
                                                                       = F2 Q                H 2 (CQ , δQ )

                          0                                  1
                       H(gQZ )                            H(gQZ )


       0                         0                      H 2 (CZ , δZ ) ∼
                                                                       = (F22 )VZ

                                                                                                                          (81)
   A direct verification shows that
                                             0
                                          H(gxq ) : H 0 (Cx , δx ) → H 1 (Cq , δq )

maps 1 7→ 1 for adjacent x and q. To see this, notice that H 0 (Cx , δx ) ∼
                                                                          = F2 is generated by the all-1
0-cochain on Cx0 , and H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                      = F2 is generated by the all-1 1-cochain on Cq1 . For adjacent x

                                                                32
        0 restricts C to a subcomplex isomorphic to C , therefore mapping one generator to the
and q, gxq             x                                     q
other. Thus, the map H(gxq  0 ) is equivalent to the adjacency map between V and V in T , i.e. the
                                                                            X     Q    (i)
coboundary map δ(i)0 of C .
                           (i)
   Similarly, a direct verification shows that
                                      1
                                   H(gqz ) : H 1 (Cq , δq ) → H 2 (Cz , δz )

maps 1 7→ (1, 1) for adjacent q and z. Consider again the all-1 1-cochain in Cq that is a generator
of H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                  = F2 . Restricting it to the subcomplex isomorphic to Cz (again, with a degree shift by
one), gives an all-1 2-cochain on Cz2 when q and z are adjacent. This 2-cochain corresponds to the
diagonal class (1, 1) ∈ H 2 (Cz , δz ) ∼= F22 . Thus, the map H(gqz
                                                                 1 ) is the composition of the adjacency

map between VQ and VZ in T(i) (i.e. the coboundary map δ(i)   1 of C ) with the diagonal map 1 7→ (1, 1).
                                                                    (i)
   Thus, the cochain complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) can be summarized by Eqn. 74.


Remark 3.9. We see that the subcomplex in eq. (75) and the full complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) agree up to
the extra vector spaces H 2 (CX , δX ) and H 2 (CQ , δQ ). These capture relations between the extra Z-type
stabilizers added in C(i+1) = RX (C(i) ) in comparison to C(i) .
    Additionally, the fact that we end up with two copies of FV2 Z means that applying RX results in
doubling of the syndrome of X-type errors.

3.2.4   Properties of the code C(i+1) = RX (C(i) )
We now analyze the properties of the code C(i+1) obtained from the replacement process.
Lemma 3.10. For the replacement C(i+1) = RX (C(i) ), there exists a chain map

                                           FRX ,i : C(i) → C(i+1) .                                             (82)

   Furthermore, FRX ,i induces an isomorphism on the first cohomology groups

                                           H 1 (C(i) ) ∼
                                                       = H 1 (C(i+1) ).                                         (83)

In particular, the replacement preserves the number of logical qubits.
Proof. We prove the lemma by factoring the desired map through the induced complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ).
Specifically, we construct FRX ,i as a composition
                                                                 ≃
                                    C(i) ,→ H(C(i+1) , δloc ) −
                                                              → C(i+1) .                                        (84)

We will show that both maps induce isomorphisms on first cohomology, which implies that FRX ,i also
induces an isomorphism on first cohomology.
    We first define the chain map C(i) ,→ H(C(i+1) , δloc ). The induced complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) has the
structure shown in Lemma 3.8, and this leads to the following maps:
                                     0
                                    δ(i)                              1
                                                                     δ(i)
                           V                    V                                        V
          C(i) :          F2 X,i              F2 Q,i                                    F2 Z,i
                                                                                             ∆⊕0⊕0
                                     0
                                    δ(i)                  1 ⊕0⊕0
                                                       ∆◦δ(i)
                           V                    V
    H(C(i+1) , δloc ) :   F2 X,i              F2 Q,i                 (F22 )VZ,i ⊕ H 2 (CX , δX ) ⊕ H 2 (CQ , δQ )
                                                                                                                (85)

                                                        33
Recall that ∆ is the diagonal map FV2 Z → (F22 )VZ ∼        V     V
                                                        = F2 Z ⊕ F2 Z , b 7→ (b, b), which is injective, so the
last vertical map is also injective. It is clear that the above maps commute with the coboundary maps
in both complexes, so we have defined a chain map C(i) ,→ H(C(i+1) , δloc ).
    We now argue that this chain map induces an isomorphism on first cohomology. Since the degree-0
to degree-1 maps coincide in both complexes, we have

                                  B 1 (C(i) ) = im δ(i)
                                                    0
                                                        = B 1 (H(C(i+1) , δloc )).                        (86)

Moreover, since ∆ is injective,

                         Z 1 (H(C(i+1) , δloc )) = ker(∆ ◦ δ(i)
                                                            1            1
                                                                ) = ker δ(i) = Z 1 (C(i) ).               (87)

It follows that
                                 H 1 (C(i) , δ(i) ) ∼
                                                    = H 1 (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)).                      (88)
                                                        ≃
   We now define the chain map H(C(i+1) , δloc ) −→ C(i+1) . By the code embedding formalism and the
spectral sequence analysis in Section 2.3.1, the complex C(i+1) can be realized as the total complex of
the E0 page of a spectral sequence. In particular, we identify

                                       (Tot(E0 ), D0 ) = (C(i+1) , δ(i+1) ),                              (89)

where E0p,0 ∼    p    p,1 ∼
            = CX , E0 =     CQp+1         ∼ C p+2 , and E p,q = 0 otherwise. The horizontal maps are the
                                  , E0p,2 =  Z           0
local maps δX , δQ , and δZ , while the vertical maps are the connecting maps gXQ and gQZ .
    Similarly, the induced complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) is the total complex of the E1 page:

                                  (Tot(E1 ), D1 ) = (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)).                            (90)

By the general theory of spectral sequences, as discussed in Section 2.3.1, we have

                                       (Tot(E0 ), D0 ) ≃ (Tot(E1 ), D1 ).                                 (91)

Hence, this yields a chain homotopy equivalence
                                                              ≃
                                           H(C(i+1) , δloc ) −
                                                             → C(i+1) ,                                   (92)

which induces an isomorphism on first cohomology:

                              H 1 (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)) ∼
                                                            = H 1 (C(i+1) , δ(i+1) ).                     (93)

This completes the proof.

3.2.5   RZ in the code embedding formalism
We now define replacement during the Z-iteration. We will keep the discussion brief since the definition
of RZ is, in a sense, dual to that of RX . In particular, the roles of x and z vertices will be effectively
exchanged, and we will take the dual of certain intermediate cell complexes.




                                                         34
   To each v ∈ T(i) (0), associate a local cochain complex, which now has a different structure. The
code at the next level C(i+1) = RZ (C(i) ) can be visualized as:

                                                           0
                                                          δX          1
                                                                     δX
                                                     0
                                                    CX         0          0
                                                       0
                                                      gXQ           1
                                                                   gXQ
                                                0
                                               δQ          1
                                                          δQ
                                          0
                                         CQ          1
                                                    CQ         0                                     (94)

                                            0
                                           gQZ         1
                                                      gQZ
                                     0
                                    δZ          1
                                               δZ
                              CZ0        CZ1        CZ2


The local complex Cz : Cz0 → Cz1 → Cz2 plays a similar role to that of Cx in the X-iteration. It is
determined by the local 2D structure of the square complex T(i) in the vicinity of z ∈ VZ . We define
auxiliary complexes Xz , ∂Xz , as well as subdivided Xz′ , ∂Xz′ by analogy with the definition for Cx
during the X-iteration. We then define

                        Yz = Xz′ × {0} ⊔ Xz′ × {1} ⊔ ∂Xz′ × [0, 1] / ∼ .
                                                                    


We further define Cz to be the dual cochain complex of Yz , i.e. Cz• = (C • (Yz ))T . We illustrate an
example below.




                                                                                                     (95)
    Similarly, the local complex Cq : Cq0 → Cq1 → 0 is induced by the local 1D structure of T(i) in the
vicinity of q, where now we keep the edges connecting the vertex q ∈ VQ to blue vertices x ∈ VX . We
define Yq by analogy as before and set Cq• = (C • (Yq ))T . Note that, unlike for X-iteration, there is no
degree shift in the definition, as it is taken care of due to the transposition. Finally, Cx : Cx0 → 0 → 0
is defined to be two copies of the point x, and Cx• = (C • (Yx ))T .
    The gluing maps gXQ and gQZ are defined similarly to those in X-iteration. The structure of
the full complex C(i+1) = RZ (C(i) ) obtained this way is shown below for one example of a local
neighborhood.




                                                    35
                                                                                                                        (96)

3.2.6   Properties of the code C(i+1) = RZ (C(i) )
                                                                                                
As before, we first study the structural property of the cochain complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g) .

Lemma 3.11. The cochain complex (H(C(i+1) , δloc ), H(g)) has the following structure:

                                                                          0 )
                                                                       H(gXQ                         1 )
                                                                                                  H(gQZ
                H 0 (CZ , δZ ) ⊕ H 0 (CX , δX ) ⊕ H 0 (CQ , δQ )                 H 1 (CQ , δQ )            H 2 (CZ , δZ )
                                                                      0 ◦∆′ ⊕ 0 ⊕ 0
                                                                     δ(i)                           1
                                                                                                   δ(i)
        ∼                                                                              V                        V
        =         (F22 )VX,i ⊕ H 0 (CX , δX ) ⊕ H 0 (CQ , δQ )                        F2 Q,i                   F2 Z,i
                                                                                                                        (97)
                                                                           0
                                                                          δ(i)           1
                                                                                        δ(i)
                                                 VX,i      V          V
      0 and δ 1 are the cochain maps in C
Here δ(i)    (i)                          (i) : F2    −−→ F2 Q,i −−→ F2 Z,i and ∆′ : (F22 )VX,i ∼
                                                                                                =
 V          V       V
F2 X,i ⊕ F2 X,i → F2 X,i is the codiagonal map (b, 0) 7→ b, (0, b) 7→ b.

Thus, the cochain complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) contains a subcomplex of the following form:
                                                       VX       V
                                                F22          → F2 Q → FV2 Z                                             (98)

This subcomplex almost looks like C(i) , and the part of this structure relevant to X-operators is
                                                                      V
identical to that in C(i) . The doubling in the first vector space F22 X reflects the fact that the
boundary of Z-type errors, which are 1-chains in the dual chain complex, is doubled.

Proof of Lemma 3.11. After computing all the local cohomology groups in a similar manner to the




                                                               36
proof of Lemma 3.8, we find that the complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) has the following structure:

                                                      H 0 (CX , δX ) ∼
                                                                     = (F22 )VX       0                0

                                                                     0                       1
                                                                  H(gXQ )                 H(gXQ )


                                                                        V
                         H 0 (CQ , δQ )               H 1 (CQ , δQ ) ∼
                                                                     = F2 Q           0

                          0                               1
                       H(gQZ )                         H(gQZ )


  H 0 (CZ , δZ )                 0                   H 2 (CZ , δZ ) ∼
                                                                    = FV2 Z

                                                                                                            (99)
   A direct verification shows that
                                             0
                                          H(gxq ) : H 0 (Cx , δx ) → H 1 (Cq , δq )
maps (1, 0) 7→ 1 and (0, 1) 7→ 1 for adjacent x and q. To see this, notice that H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼         = F2
is generated by the 1-cochain that is supported on a single (arbitrarily chosen) basis element in Cq1 .
H 0 (Cx , δx ) ∼
               = F22 is generated by (1, 0) and (0, 1), and each of these maps into a nontrivial representative
of H (Cq , δq ) ∼
      1
                 = F2 under H(gxq  0 ) if x and q are adjacent. Thus, the map H(g 0 ) is the direct sum of
                                                                                       xq
two copies of the adjacency map between VX and VQ in T(i) (i.e. a direct sum of two copies of the
coboundary map δ(i)     0 of C ).
                              (i)
     We also directly check that
                                             1
                                          H(gqz ) : H 1 (Cq , δq ) → H 2 (Cz , δz )
maps 1 7→ 1 for adjacent q and z. Note that H 2 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                                           = F2 is generated by the 2-cochain that is
supported on a single (arbitrarily chosen) basis element in Cz2 . For adjacent q and z, the nontrivial
generator of H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                            = F2 in Cq maps onto the nontrivial generator of H 2 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                                                                            = F2 under
    1              1
H(gqz ). Thus, H(gqz ) is the adjacency map between VQ and VZ in T(i) (i.e. the coboundary map δ(i) 1

of C(i) ).
    Thus, the cochain complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) can be summarized by Eqn. 97.


Remark 3.12. We see that the subcomplex in eq. (98) and the full complex H(C(i+1) , δloc ) agree up to
the extra vector spaces H 0 (CQ , δQ ) and H 0 (CZ , δZ ). These capture relations between the extra X-type
stabilizers added in C(i+1) = RZ (C(i) ) in comparison to C(i) .
    Additionally, the fact that we end up with two copies of FV2 X means that applying RZ results in
doubling of the syndrome of Z-type errors.
Lemma 3.13. For the replacement C(i+1) = RZ (C(i) ), there exists a chain map
                                                 FRZ ,i : C(i) → C(i+1) .                                  (100)
   Furthermore, FRZ ,i induces an isomorphism on the first cohomology groups
                                                H 1 (C(i) ) ∼
                                                            = H 1 (C(i+1) ).                               (101)
In particular, the replacement preserves the number of logical qubits.
Proof. Analogous to that of Lemma 3.10.

                                                             37
3.2.7     Embedding in R3 after replacement
Here, we will show that the embedding map I(i+1) : T(i+1) → R3 defined earlier in subsection 3.2.2 is
a (t, 1)-embedding. First, we establish a useful geometric property of our construction, namely, that
the edge and vertex degrees of T(i+1) remain bounded by a universal constant:
                                                                    (i)         (i)
Lemma 3.14. If T(i) has maximum vertex and edge degrees zv ≤ 7 and ze ≤ 4, then T(i+1) similarly
                                          (i+1)            (i+1)
has maximum vertex and edge degrees zv            ≤ 7 and ze       ≤ 4.

Proof. For the purpose of this proof, we will call UX,s ⊆ T(i+1) minus all its boundary and corner
subcomplexes the bulk subcomplex of UX,s .
   Then, for any vertex in T(i+1) (0), the following holds:

 (1) v ∈ T(i+1) (0) is inside the bulk subcomplex associated with some UX,s . Then, the maximum
     degree of this vertex is 6, which occurs at the crossing point of two subcomplexes labeled in
     purple in the figure below.

 (2) v ′ ∈ T(i+1) (0) is inside the boundary subcomplex labeled by some e ∈ T(i) (1). Any vertex in the
     boundary subcomplex neighbors a single vertex for each adjacent bulk subcomplexes along with
     at most 3 other vertices that belong to the boundary. This is illustrated in the figure below,
     where an adjacent vertex in the bulk is connected to vertex v via an edge highlighted in red.
                                                           (i)
     The number of adjacent bulk subcomplexes equals ze ≤ 4. Thus, the degree of v ′ is at most 7.

 (3) v ′′ ∈ T(i+1) (0) is inside the corner subcomplex labeled by some w ∈ T(i) (0). The connectivity of
                                                                          (i)
        this vertex is the same as for w, and thus, has degree at most zv ≤ 7.
                                       (i+1)
Thus, we have directly verified that zv        ≤ 7.




                                                                                                  (102)
   For any edge in T(i+1) (1), the following holds:

 (1) e ∈ T(i+1) (1) is inside the bulk subcomplex associated with some UX,s . The highest edge degree
     is 4, which is shown in the figure below.

 (2) e′ ∈ T(i+1) (1) is inside the boundary subcomplex labeled by some e ∈ T(i) (1). Any edge in the
     boundary subcomplex has one incident square per adjacent bulk subcomplex; the number of
                                       (i)
     adjacent bulk subcomplexes is ze ≤ 4.



                                                      38
                                         (i+1)
Thus, we have directly verified that ze          ≤ 4.




                                                                                                       (103)


                         ′ : T         3                                                   3
Lemma 3.15. Given I(i)         (i) → R as defined in Subsec. 3.1 and I(i+1) : T(i+1) → R as defined
                     ′ is a (t′ , ℓ)-embedding, then I
in Subsec 3.2.2, if I(i)                                                                        ′
                                                      (i+1) is a (t, 1)-embedding where t = 64πt (2α +
1)2 /(γ(α2 − 1)).
                                                                     ′ : T       3
Proof. Let us first recall several facts about the embedding map I(i)     (i) → R . In lemma 3.3, we
              ′         ′                              ′
showed that I(i) is a (t , ℓ)-embedding with ℓ = ℓ(t, t ) satisfying
                                                             ′   ′   ′       ′   ′   ′
                         ℓ(t, t′ ) ≥ (2α + 1)λ ≥ (4α3 )A /(t −3A ) (2α3 Γt)t /(t −3A ) .

The constants A′ , α and Γ are O(1) universal constants.
    To obtain (T(i+1) , I(i+1) ), we perform replacement where each square in T(i) is subdivided into
a pair of (triangular) simplices and is replaced with a flat square complex UX         ′ (or U ′ for the R
                                                                                                Z           Z
iteration). We additionally subdivide some of the squares in UX    ′ (U ′ ) into a pair of simplices as shown
                                                                        Z
in (56). Upon replacement, there will be two types of 2-cells, ones with nonzero area (these are the
squares and triangles shown in (56) that are in-plane with the original 2-cells to be substituted) and
the ones with zero area (these are the squares shaded purple in (55)). Let us first consider only 2-cells
with nonzero area.
    Since the sidelengths of the original triangular simplices are ∈ [(α2 −1)λ, (2α+1)λ], the sidelengths
                                                          α2 −1
of 2-cells with nonzero area upon replacement are ∈ [ 2α+1      , 1]. Since each of the original triangular
simplices had width ≥ γλ, any diagonal added to the complex UX        ′ (U ′ ) has length ∈ [ 2γ ,1]. There-
                                                                           Z                  2α+1
                      ′ (U ′ ) have area ≥ γ(α2 −1) . Since number of 2-cells that intersect in a unit ball
fore, the 2-cells in UX   Z                (2α+1)2
       ′
is ≤ t before replacement, the number of new 2-cells with non-zero area that intersect with a unit
ball after replacement is at most
                                                  (2α + 1)2
                                             8πt′            .                                       (104)
                                                  γ(α2 − 1)
    Now let us add the zero-area squares back into consideration. All sidelengths of these squares are
≤ 1. The density of 2-cells intersecting a unit ball now increases by at most a factor of 8, and a unit
ball intersects
                                                    (2α + 1)2
                                          t ≤ 64πt′                                               (105)
                                                    γ(α2 − 1)
simplices in total.



                                                        39
3.3   Main statements
We will start with the base case. Consider a 2-dimensional cochain complex
                                                   0
                                                  δ(0)     1
                                                          δ(0)
                                              0        1       2
                                      C(0) : C(0) −→ C(0) −→ C(0)                                  (106)

corresponding to the [[5, 1, 2]] surface code that contains two X-type and two Z-type stabilizers, where:
                                    0 ∼ 2       1 ∼ 5       2 ∼ 2
                                   C(0) = F2 , C(0) = F2 , C(0) = F2 .                             (107)

Its associated Tanner square complex is shown below:




                                                                                                   (108)

   Starting from this base complex, we define the level-2k code by alternating X- and Z-iterations:

                                      C(2k) := (RZ ◦ RX )◦k (C(0) ).                               (109)

Let T(2k) be the associated Tanner square complex, and let H(2k) be the corresponding CSS stabilizer
Hamiltonian after embedding T(2k) in R3 . The size of the code at level 2k is n2k = exp(Θ(k)). Because
the base case had a single logical qubit, our code will always have one logical qubit by Lemmas 3.10
and 3.13.
Theorem 3.16 (3D self-correcting quantum memory). For the code C(2k) at any level k ≥ 0, there
exist constants t, βc < ∞ and η > 0 independent of k such that:
 (1) There exists a (t, 1)-embedding map

                                               I(2k) : T(2k) → R3                                  (110)

      which can be constructed by a randomized algorithm in expected time poly(n2k ).
 (2) The code C(2k) encodes a single logical qubit, equivalently H 1 (C(2k) ) ∼
                                                                              = F2 .
 (3) The pair (T(2k) , I(2k) ) defines a local Hamiltonian H(2k) in R3 . At β > βc , the memory lifetime
     defined in Subsec. 2.5 satisfies
                                               tmem ≥ exp Θ(nη2k )
                                                                   
                                                                                                   (111)
      for some η > 0.
Proof. For our base case C(0) , all three items are immediately satisfied.
    We now prove statement (1) by induction. Assume T(i) admits a (t, 1)-embedding I(i) for some
i-independent constant t. The perturbation step produces a (t′ , ℓ)-embedding by Lemma 3.3. The
replacement step then turns this into a (t, 1)-embedding I(i+1) of T(i+1) by Lemma 3.15, after choos-
ing the geometric constants as in Subsec. 3.4. Thus, every T(2k) admits a (t, 1)-embedding with t
independent of k.
    Statement (2) follows from the base case combined with Lemmas 3.10 and 3.13. Proving statement
(3) will be the main goal of the next two sections.

                                                   40
3.4   Explicit choice of constants
We now argue that there is a choice of all the constants that fit the constraints. Our constants are
very far from optimal as the goal is merely to show that the construction is well-defined, and we leave
the task of optimizing these constants to the future.
    First we note that A′ ≤ 4zv + 1 and A ≤ 2zv + 1. By the induction hypothesis, ze = 4 and zv = 7
so A′ ≤ 29 and A ≤ 15. Select α = 1000 as well as α1 = 2α2 = 139, which allows for an arrangement
of A caps on B(αλ) with enough separation. We can compute
                                                    α2 
                                      γ = α 1 − cos       −1≥1                                    (112)
                                                      α
We can now compute the constant Γ(α, α1 , α2 , γ) determined in Appendix B

                                             18(2α + 1)
                                      Γ≤              α1 ≤ 14920
                                                                                                     (113)
                                           αγ 1 − cos 2α

Following Lemma 3.15, we find

                                     t        (2α + 1)2
                                        ≤ 64π           ≤ 1.18 × 107                                  (114)
                                     t′       γ(α2 − 1)

Finally, in order to apply the Lovász local lemma, we need

                         α3 (2α3 Γt)k λ3−k ≤ α3 ((6.84 × 108 )α3 Γk)k λ3−k ≤ 1/4                      (115)

where we use the upper bound for t/t′ as well as t′ ≤ kA′ ≤ 29k. The choice of k which minimizes
λ gives t′ ≤ 29k ≤ 5595 and λ ≈ 5.4 × 1024 . Thus, with these parameters, we can guarantee that
after each iteration, the construction is (6.6 × 1010 , 1)-embedded in R3 . It is likely that one additional
round of subdivision and scaling one can improve this to a (t, 1)-embedding for t close to 1; proving
this will require some additional geometric properties of the random perturbation, which we leave to
the future. However, in this case the scaling factor ℓ will still need to be quite large.


4     Decoder
In this section, we describe the decoder fX for the Pauli-X errors and the decoder fZ for the Pauli-Z
errors for the code family {C(2k) } constructed in the previous section. These decoders will be used in
the next section to analyze the memory lifetime of the code family.
    The goal of the decoder fX for the code C(2k) is the following: given a syndrome σX = δ(2k)1 e ∈
                                                                                                   X
  2                                1                             1
B(2k) induced by an error eX ∈ C(2k) , find a correction fX ∈ C(2k) such that

                                                1
                                               δ2k fX = σX .                                          (116)

The correction need not coincide with the error. However, decoding is successful if the difference
between the correction and the error is an X-stabilizer, i.e.
                                                       1
                                            fX − eX ∈ B(2k) .                                         (117)

In this case, we say that the decoder successfully corrects the error.


                                                    41
    The decoder fZ for Pauli-Z errors is defined analogously using the dual complex. Since the X
and Z sectors can be analyzed independently and behave equivalently in our construction, we focus
on just the X-decoder fX and suppress the superscript X.
    As we will discuss in the next subsection, our decoder follows a renormalization group (RG)-like
approach and satisfies two key properties: (1) syndrome reduction and (2) local computability. Both
conditions are essential for establishing the memory lifetime in the next section.

4.1     Decoder via coarse-graining maps
We construct the decoder through a sequence of RG-like coarse-graining steps. Given an initial
                       2 , the coarse-graining step at level i > 0 takes a syndrome σ ∈ B 2 as input
syndrome σ2k ≜ σ ∈ B(2k)                                                             i      (i)
                                       1                                             2
and outputs a level-i correction fi ∈ C(i) together with a coarser syndrome σi−1 ∈ B(i−1) , satisfying

                                          σi = δi1 fi + Fi−1 (σi−1 ).                                (118)

Here Fi−1 : C(i−1) → C(i) is either the cochain map FRX ,i−1 defined in Section 3.2.4 or the cochain
map FRZ ,i−1 defined in Section 3.2.6, depending on the replacement step at level i − 1. We suppress
the replacement label for conciseness.
    Thus, each coarse-graining step decomposes the syndrome σi into a locally correctable part δi1 fi and
a residual part Fi−1 (σi−1 ) represented by the coarse-grained syndrome σi−1 . Applying this recursively
produces the pairs
                                  (σ2k−1 , f2k ), (σ2k−2 , f2k−1 ), ..., (σ0 , f1 ).                (119)
                                                                                                       1
At the base level i = 0, the code has finite size, so the decoder directly outputs a correction f0 ∈ C(0)
such that
                                                σ0 = δ01 f0 .                                       (120)
Using these corrections f0 , f1 , ..., f2k , we construct a global correction f for the original syndrome σ
by lifting each lower-level correction to level 2k and summing the contributions:

             f = f2k + F2k−1 (f2k−1 ) + F2k−1 ◦ F2k−2 (f2k−2 ) + · · · + F2k−1 ◦ · · · ◦ F0 (f0 ).   (121)
                                            1 f = σ.
By direct calculation, one can verify that δ2k
   The full level-2k decoder is obtained by composing the coarse-graining steps

                                              σi 7→ (σi−1 , fi ),                                    (122)

together with the base-level decoder for σ0 . The remainder of this section constructs these coarse-
graining steps explicitly.
    Before describing the coarse-graining steps, we discuss two additional properties that the coarse-
graining map must satisfy: (1) syndrome reduction and (2) local computability. These two properties
will play a central role in the proof of memory lifetime.

4.1.1    Syndrome reduction
In the proof of the memory lifetime bound, we compare two competing effects: the Boltzmann sup-
pression coming from the energy of a syndrome, and the entropic/combinatorial contribution coming
from the number of syndrome configurations of a certain energy. Syndrome reduction controls the
Boltzmann factor, while local computability controls the entropic factor.

                                                      42
    In particular, we need the syndrome weight to decrease sufficiently under coarse-graining. Equiva-
lently, if a syndrome persists through many coarse-graining steps, then the original syndrome at level
2k must have had a large weight.
    Specifically, we will prove the following two bounds:

   • for RZ iterations, the coarse-graining step satisfies |σi−1 | ≤ |σi |;

   • for RX iterations, the coarse-graining step satisfies |σi−1 | ≤ 12 |σi |.

    The implication of these results is that the syndrome weight decreases throughout the coarse-
graining process: RZ steps are weight non-increasing, while RX steps are weight-contracting.

4.1.2   Local computability and the decoding graph
To control the entropic factor, we want both the coarse-grained syndrome σi−1 and the correction fi
at a given location to depend only on the values of σi in a constant-size neighborhood of this location.
Because of Equation (118), this controls the number of syndrome configurations σi that can be directly
responsible for a given syndrome configuration σi−1 after coarse-graining.
    The local computability definition will rely on the notion of a “decoding graph”, which we use to
capture the history of the coarse-graining steps applied by the decoder. The nodes of the decoding
graph index the local complexes where either the syndrome or the corrections at each level can be
supported. The simplest definition of local computability uses a “directed” graph distance on the
decoding graph as a measure of locality. While we could have used spatial locality instead, graph
locality will be more convenient for the proofs in Sec. 5.
    The decoding graph G is defined to be a union of subgraphs Gi , one for each level i of the
construction. Because the local complexes C(i),x , C(i),q , and C(i),z at level i are labeled by the vertices
of the Tanner square complex at level i − 1, i.e. x ∈ VX,(i−1) , q ∈ VQ,(i−1) and z ∈ VZ,(i−1) , Gi is
isomorphic to the Tanner square complex at level i − 1. Nodes v in Gi and v ′ in Gi−1 are connected
if the v is in the local complex Y(i−1),v′ . A schematic example of a decoding graph is shown in Fig. 4.
A more formal definition is given below.

Definition 4.1 (Decoding graph). For 1 ≤ i ≤ 2k, define Gi = (Vi , Ei ) to be a graph isomorphic
to the 1-skeleton of T(i−1) . Label vertices in Gi by vertices in T(i−1) (0) and edges in Gi by edges in
T(i−1) (1). Define G0 to be a single vertex, labeled v (0) .
    The decoding graph G = (V, E) contains a disjoint union 2k
                                                                         S
                                                                           i=0 Gi as well as additional edges
connecting consecutive levels Gi−1 and Gi . A node v ∈ Gi−1 is connected to a node v ′ ∈ Gi if the
latter satisfies v ′ ∈ Y(i−1),v (0). Finally, the root node v (0) is connected to all nodes in G1 .

We will now define local computability with respect to a “directed” graph distance on G. The reason
for using a directed distance, rather than the usual graph distance, is that the coarse-graining map
has a natural directed dependence: the correction or the coarse-grained syndrome in one local region
may depend only on the input syndrome in regions that can reach it along directed paths in G.

Definition 4.2 (Directed distance). Define a directed structure on G at each level Gi in the following
way. The edge (u, v) ∈ Ei is directed from u to v if the corresponding vertices in the Tanner square
complex T(i−1) (0) satisfy u ∈ VX,(i−1) and v ∈ VQ,(i−1) or u ∈ VQ,(i−1) and v ∈ VZ,(i−1) . Define
disti (u, v) to be the smallest length of the directed path from u to v in Gi . We will call disti (u, v) the
directed distance between u and v. If no directed path exists, disti (u, v) = ∞.


                                                     43
Figure 4: A schematic illustration of the nodes and edges in the decoding graph. It contains subgraphs
at each level Gi ∼ = T(i−1) . The subgraph at level 0 G0 consists of a single node. The nodes at different
levels are connected; the node labeled by v at level i is connected to the node v ′ at level i + 1 if
v ′ ∈ Y(i−1),v (0). There is a single node at level 0, which is connected to all nodes at level 1. The
marking of nodes and edges in black will be discussed in more detail in Sec. 5. At a high level, the
marked nodes and edges illustrate the history of coarse-graining steps starting from some syndrome
σ2k . A node v ∈ Gi ≃ T(i−1) is marked black if C(i),v contains the support of either syndrome σi ,
or the coboundary of any local correction fi,s for some w ∈ T(i−1) (0). An edge between two marked
nodes is also marked.

Definition 4.3 (Locally computable). For node v ∈ T(i−1) (0), define
                                                         X
                                       ξi,v (m) =                       σi Yv .                     (123)
                                                    v ′ ∈T (i−1) (0):
                                                    disti (v ′ ,v)≤m

Given a coarse-graining step at level i where σi 7→ (σi−1 , fi ), we say that the correction fi is locally
computable if it decomposes into a sum of local components, i.e.
                                                  X
                                         fi =           fi,v ,                                      (124)
                                                 v∈T(i−1) (0)


such that fi Yv = fi,v , and each local component fi,v depends only on the the values of the syndrome
σi in the local complexes Cv′ for which disti (v ′ , v) ≤ 1. More formally,

                                         fi,v (σi ) = fi,v (ξi,v (1)).                              (125)

We say that the coarse-grained syndrome σi−1 is locally computable if its value σi−1,z = σi−1 z at
location z ∈ VZ,(i−1) only depends on the values of syndrome σi in the local complexes Cv′ for which
disti (v ′ , v) ≤ 2. More formally,
                                     σi−1,z (σi ) = σi−1,z (ξi,v (2)).                         (126)




                                                       44
Remark 4.4. Because of the condition σi = δi1 fi + Fi−1 (σi−1 ), if fi is locally computable, σi−1 is
also locally computable. This is because the syndrome points in Fi−1 (σi−1 ) must be either in σi (which
is graph-distance 0 away) or in the coboundary of some local correction fi,v . In the latter case, the
correction fi,v depends on the syndrome within graph-distance 1 away, and taking the coboundary of
the correction increases graph-distance by at most 1 because δ 1 = δloc
                                                                    1 + g1.


Remark 4.5. The use of the directed distance implies the following dependencies. We start with
subgraphs associated with the RX iteration. Any correction fi,x will only depend on σi Yx and fi,q will
only depend on                                    X
                                          σi Yq +    σi Y x .
                                                        x∼q

Any syndrome σi−1,z will only depend on
                                                X                X
                                     σ i Yz +         σ i Yq +         σi Yx .
                                                q∼z              x∼q
                                                                 q∼z

The syndrome and correction will not have support in any of the other regions. For subgraphs associated
with the RZ iteration, fi,z will only depend on σi Yz and σi−1 Yz will only depend on σi Yz . The
syndrome and correction will not have support in any of the other regions.

4.2   Coarse-graining for RZ
We first describe the coarse-graining step at levels corresponding to the RZ iteration. This is simpler
than the coarse-graining step for the RX iteration.

Theorem 4.6. Given a level-i syndrome σ ∈ B(i)      2 , there exist a locally computable coarse-graining

map σ 7→ (σ ′ , f ) where the coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ ∈ B(i−1)
                                                              2                         1 satisfy
                                                                   and correction f ∈ C(i)

                                        σ = δi1 f + FRZ ,i−1 (σ ′ ).                              (127)

Moreover,
                                                 |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|.                                    (128)

Moving forward, we will drop the subscript i in the notation for the local complexes; for example, we
will write Cz instead of C(i),z .
    The key idea is that the syndrome can be coarse-grained by considering configurations locally. Each
local part of the syndrome is contained in a local subcomplex Cz = (C • (Yz ))T for some z ∈ VZ,(i−1) ,
and can be corrected independently of the others. In each Cz , we choose a correction supported only
on Cz that brings the local syndrome to the image of FRZ ,i−1 , which consists of a single point inside
Cz . Geometrically, this correction is a sum of open strings on Yz that bring all syndromes inside Yz to
the coarse-grained point. This correction is local, and the resulting syndrome weight cannot increase:
each local cluster contributes at most one syndrome point after coarse-graining.
    We now formalize this argument. In the remainder of this subsection, we suppress the subscript
RZ in FRZ ,i−1 for notational simplicity.

Proof of Theorem 4.6. We split the proof into four parts:




                                                       45
Figure 5: The syndrome σ is supported on the level-i complex C(i) , while the coarse-grained syndrome
σ ′ is supported on the level-(i − 1) complex C(i−1) .

                                                           2 ∼ C2 =
1. Defining the coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ : Recall that C(i)                                   2
                                                                                              L
                                                               = Z                            z Cz ,   and Cz ≜
  •      T                          2
(C (Yz )) . Thus, the syndrome σ ∈ C(i) decomposes as
                                                       X
                                              σ=                  σ|Yz                                    (129)
                                                    z∈VZ,(i−1)


where σ|Yz denotes the restriction of σ to the local complex Yz , viewed as a vector in (Cz2 )T . In this
expression and similar expressions below, it is implied that the local cochains can be included in the
full complex via extension by zero.
                                                        ∼  VZ,(i−1)
    We define the coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ ∈ C(i−1)
                                                   2
                                                        = F2        via

                                    σ ′ |z ≜ [σ|Yz ]loc ∈ H 2 (Cz , δz ) ∼
                                                                         = F2 ,                           (130)

for each z ∈ VZ,(i−1) . Here, [α]loc denotes the local cohomology class α + Bz2 in H 2 (Cz , δz ). Notice
that by Cz3 = 0, we have Cz2 = Zz2 , and σ|Yz is automatically a local cocycle; thus, the class [σ|Yz ]loc
is well-defined.
    Equivalently,                                    X
                                            σ ′ |z =     σ|p .                                      (131)
                                                       p∈Yz (2)

namely, σ ′ |z is the parity of the entries of the vector σ|Yz . The local computability of the map σ 7→ σ ′
follows directly from the definition.
2. Verifying that σ ′ ∈ B(i−1)
                           2   : We will show that there exists e′ ∈ C(i−1)
                                                                       1    such that σ ′ = δi−1
                                                                                              1 e′ . Since

                                                                               ∼   VQ,(i−1)
σ ∈ B 2 , there exists some e ∈ C 1 such that σ = δ 1 e. We define e′ ∈ C 1
      (i)                          (i)                    i                    =F (i−1)   2 via

                                    e′ |q ≜ [e|Yq ]loc ∈ H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                                                        = F2 ,                            (132)

for each vertex q ∈ VQ,(i−1) . Since Cq2 = 0, we have Cq1 = Zq1 , so e|Yq is automatically a local cocycle,
and the class [e|Yq ]loc is well-defined.
    We now show that σ ′ = δi−1  1 e′ . Recall from Section 3.2.6 that the induced map H(g 1 ) is precisely
                                                                                           QZ
                          1
the coboundary map δi−1 in the coarse-grained complex:
                                                   V            V
                                     1
                                  H(gQZ )∼  1
                                         = δi−1 : F2 Q,(i−1) → F2 Z,(i−1)                                 (133)


                                                        46
Therefore,
                                                           X
                                    1
                                        e′ )|z =                     1
                                                                                       
                                  (δi−1                           H(gqz ) [e|Yq ]loc                   (134)
                                                   q∈VQ,(i−1)
                                                                             
                                                            X
                                                                       1
                                                                              
                                              =                      gqz e|Yq                        (135)
                                                       q∈VQ,(i−1)
                                                                                loc
                                                       (δi1 e)|Yz loc
                                                                 
                                              =                                                        (136)
                                              = [σ|Yz ]loc                                             (137)
                                                       ′
                                              = σ |z .                                                 (138)
Thus, σ ′ = δi−1
             1 e′ ∈ B 2
                     (i−1) .
   The identity above can also be checked more directly. From the definition of e′ , we have
                                                 X
                                         e′ |q =      ea ,                                             (139)
                                                             a∈Yq (1)

so e′ |q is simply the parity of the entries of vector e. Since each map gqz
                                                                          1 sends a basis element of Y (1)
                                                                                                      q
                                               ′    1   ′
to a basis element of Yz (2), the relation σ = δi−1 e follows by counting in F2 .
3. Constructing the correction f : A natural candidate for the correction f ∈ C(i)     1 would be

f = e − Fi−1 (e′ ), which indeed satisfies Equation (127). However, this expression depends on the
unknown error e, whereas the decoder has access only to σ. We therefore construct f directly from σ
via a local map.
    By definition of σ ′ , for each z ∈ VZ,(i−1) we have

                                      σ|Yz − Fi−1 (σ ′ )|Yz ∈ B 2 (Cz , δz ).                          (140)
Hence there exists a local correction fz ∈ Cz1 such that
                                          δz1 fz = σ|Yz − Fi−1 (σ ′ )|Yz ,                             (141)
that is locally computable by definition. We then define
                                                 X
                                           f≜           fz .                                           (142)
                                                           z∈VZ,(i−1)

We now verify that f satisfies σ = δi1 f + Fi−1 (σ ′ ). Recall that δi = δloc + gXQ + gQZ . Since f is
supported on the local complexes Cz only, the terms gXQ and gQZ vanish on f . Therefore,
                             X               X
            δi1 f = δloc
                     1
                                  δz1 fz =              σ|Yz − Fi−1 (σ ′ )|Yz = σ − Fi−1 (σ ′ ).
                                                                             
                         f=                                                                      (143)
                             z∈VZ,(i−1)         z∈VZ,(i−1)


4. Verifying that |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|: Since σ ′ |z ∈ F2 is a single bit, its weight is either 0 or 1. Therefore,

                                                   σ ′ |z ≤ σ|Yz .                                     (144)

Using Equation (129) and that Cz are disjoint for different z ∈ VZ,(i−1) , it follows from the above
equation that |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|.


                                                             47
4.3   Coarse-graining for RX
We now state the main result for the coarse-graining steps associated with RX .
Theorem 4.7. Given a level-i syndrome σ ∈ B(i)      2 , there exist a locally computable coarse-graining

map σ 7→ (σ ′ , f ) where the coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ ∈ B(i−1)
                                                              2                           1 satisfy
                                                                   and a correction f ∈ C(i)

                                         σ = δi1 f + FRX ,i−1 (σ ′ ).                               (145)
Furthermore,
                                                        1
                                                |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|.                                        (146)
                                                        2
In the remainder of this subsection, we suppress the superscript RX in FRX ,i−1 . We will also suppress
the subscript i in many of the variables. For example, we will write CX instead of C(i),X , Cx instead
of C(i),x , and fx instead of fi,x .
    In contrast to the case of RZ , the coarse-graining step for RX is more complicated. For RZ , the
coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ can be defined directly from the local cohomology classes of the original
syndrome σ ′ |z = [σ|Yz ]. For RX , however, such a direct construction is not possible. Instead, the map
is constructed as a sequence of steps:
  1. Cleaning the syndrome from CX : For each x ∈ VX,(i−1) , we find a local correction fx ∈ Cx1 ,
     so that the updated syndrome and error are
                                      X                        X
                           σ1 ≜ σ +         δ 1 fx , e1 ≜ e +         fx .                 (147)
                                         x∈VX,(i−1)                            x∈VX,(i−1)

      where σ = δi1 e, and σ1 is supported on YQ ∪ YZ .
  2. Cleaning the error from CX : This step is not performed by the decoder; instead, this is an
     auxiliary step used to prove that the final coarse-grained syndrome is a coboundary. For each
     local complex Cx , we show that there exists a stabilizer sx ∈ Cx0 that removes the error within
     Cx :                                             X
                                         e′1 ≜ e1 +          δi0 sx                             (148)
                                                           x∈VX,(i−1)

      so that e′1 ∈ CQ
                     1.


  3. Cleaning the syndrome from CQ : For each q ∈ VQ,(i−1) , we find a local correction fq ∈ Cq1
     so that the final cleaned syndrome and the new error are:
                                        X                         X
                            σ2 ≜ σ1 +         δ 1 fq , e2 ≜ e′1 +     fq ,                 (149)
                                         q∈VQ,(i−1)                             q∈VQ,(i−1)

      which satisfy σ2 ∈ CZ2 and e2 ∈ CQ
                                       1.


  4. Defining the coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ and correction f : Finally, the new syndrome
     σ ′ can be defined directly from the cleaned syndrome σ2 ∈ B(i)
                                                                   2 . We will show that the following

     is well-defined:
                                             −1               −1
                                      σ ′ = Fi−1 (σ2 ), e′ = Fi−1 (e2 ).                          (150)
      The total correction is given by
                                                 X                   X
                                         f=                fx +                fq .                 (151)
                                              x∈VX,(i−1)          q∈VQ,(i−1)


                                                      48
Throughout the section, we also track the syndrome weight. In particular, we show that
                                                                    1
                                |σ1 | ≤ |σ|, |σ2 | ≤ |σ1 |, |σ ′ | = |σ2 |.                  (152)
                                                                    2
Together, these inequalities imply the desired syndrome-reducing property from Equation (146),
                                                       1
                                               |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|.                                  (153)
                                                       2
   The first three steps of the coarse-graining procedure are established in separate lemmas, while
the final step is carried out in the proof of Theorem 4.7.

4.3.1   Cleaning the syndrome from CX
We begin with the step that cleans the syndrome from the local complexes Cx . This is the most
involved part of the decoding step.
   First observe that if σ ∈ B 2 (C(i) ), then its restriction to Yx for x ∈ VX,(i−1) is a local coboundary.
Indeed, if σ = δi1 e, then
                                    σx := σ|Yx = (δi1 e)|Yx = δx1 (e|Yx ),                             (154)
so σx ∈ Bx2 . Thus, the syndrome can be cleaned from each local complex Cx independently.
Lemma 4.8 (Cleaning the syndrome from Cx ). Let σx = σ|Yx ∈ Bx2 be a local syndrome. Then there
exists a local correction fx ∈ Cx1 such that
 (1) fx removes the syndrome on Yx , i.e. δx1 fx = σx ;
                    1
     P
 (2)   q∈VQ,(i−1) |gxq (fx )| ≤ |σx |.

Before proving the lemma, we explain why the second condition guarantees that cleaning the syndrome
from Cx does not increase the total weight of the updated syndrome.
Corollary 4.9. Suppose that for each x ∈ VX,(i−1) , we found a local correction fx ∈ Cx1 satisfying
Lemma 4.8. Then                                 X
                                |σ1 | = σ + δi1        fx ≤ |σ|.                              (155)
                                                       x∈VX,(i−1)

Proof. Recall that δi1 = δloc
                          1 + g1        1              1   1          2   1 1    2
                                  XQ + gQZ , where gXQ : CX → CQ and gQZ : CQ → CZ . Let
                                         1 , we have
      P
fX := x fx . Since fX is supported on CX
                                                                     
                                      X                  X
                           δi1 fX =          δx1 fx +        1
                                                             gxq (fx ) .           (156)
                                      x∈VX,(i−1)              q∈VQ,(i−1)

The first term cleans the syndrome out of CX = x Cx because δx1 fx = σx . Therefore, the net change
                                                       L
in the syndrome weight is
                                             X      X
                                                       1
                                 |σ1 | = σ +   σx +   gxq (fx )                                (157)
                                                   x          x,q
                                               X              X
                                                                          1
                                       ≤ σ+            σx +             |gxq (fx )|                   (158)
                                                   x           x,q
                                                   X             X
                                       ≤ |σ| −         |σx | +           |σx | = |σ|                  (159)
                                                   x                x

where the last line follows from the definition σx := σ|Yx and statement (2) of Lemma 4.8.

                                                        49
Figure 6: Decomposition of a piece Yx,j associated with a face j ∈ Xx (2). Each piece consists of Yx,j,0
(gray) and Yx,j,1 (orange), corresponding to layers 0 and 1, together with Yx,j,left (pink) and Yx,j,right
(purple) which connect the two layers.

Proof of Lemma 4.8. We fix x and drop the subscript x throughout the proof; for example, σx ∈ Cx2
and f ∈ Cx1 will be denoted as σ and f .
    The complex Yx decomposes into pieces, each corresponding to a face j ∈ Xx (2); see Figure 6 for
one such piece. On each piece Yx,j , if it contains an even syndrome weight, we can choose a correction
fj consisting of open strings that pair the syndrome points within that piece. It is straightforward to
verify that the choice can be made so that statement (2) of the Lemma holds locally for each such
piece.
    The case when the number of syndrome points in Yx,j is odd is more subtle and is addressed
separately. We construct a correction f0 , such that σ + δ 1 f0 has even syndrome parity on every piece
Yx,j . We then choose a correction fj on each piece. Finally, we show that
                                                        X
                                             f = f0 +        fj                                   (160)
                                                         j∈Xx (2)

satisfies the desired properties.
1. Defining the regions in Yx . Recall that

                      Yx = Xx′ × {0} ⊔ Xx′ × {1} ⊔ ∂Xx′ × [0, 1] / ∼,
                                                              
                                                                                                    (161)

where Xx′ is a subdivision of Xx . Each face j ∈ Xx (2) corresponds to a piece Yx,j of Yx , so that
                                                  [
                                           Yx =         Yx,j .                                      (162)
                                                     j∈Xx (2)

We further decompose each piece into four regions:

                               Yx,j = (Yx,j,0 ∪ Yx,j,1 ∪ Yx,j,left ∪ Yx,j,right ) ,                 (163)

which are illustrated in Figure 6. We call the one-dimensional subcomplex separating two adjacent
two-dimensional regions an interface. We use both the local interfaces inside a fixed Yx,j and the
interfaces between adjacent pieces Yx,j and Yx,j ′ .

                                                       50
   Accordingly, we decompose the syndrome as
                           X           X
                      σ=         σj =       (σj,0 + σj,1 + σj,left + σj,right ) ,                  (164)
                             j∈Xx (2)     j∈Xx (2)

where each term in the sum is supported in the region denoted by the summation index.
                            fR ∈ F2 to denote the parity of the syndrome α in a given region R; for
   We will use the notation α
example,                                        X
                                        σej :=        σj s ,                                 (165)
                                                 s∈Yx,j (2)

where the sum runs over all coordinates in the corresponding region.
2. Constructing f0 . Let G = (VG , EG ) be the link graph for the vertex x in the complex Xx .
Thus, the edge set EG ∼  = Xx (2) corresponds to the faces of Xx incident to x, while the vertex set
VG ∼
   = Xx (1) \ ∂Xx corresponds to the edges of Xx incident to x. Note that the elements of VG index
the interface regions between adjacent pieces Yx,j .
   Let σe ∈ FE2
                G
                  be the vector recording the parity of σ on each piece Yx,j :

                                             σ
                                             e = (σej )j∈EG .                                      (166)

                   e ∈ Im δG . Since σ ∈ Bx2 , there exists some e ∈ Cx1 such that δx1 e = σ. We
We first show that σ
decompose e according to the regions defined above:
                                           X        X
                                      e=       ej +     ev ,                                 (167)
                                              j∈EG        v∈VG

where ev is supported on the interface region shared by {Yx,j : j ∋ v}, while ej is supported on the
remaining part of the piece corresponding to j ∈ EG , excluding interface regions between the pieces.
   Let eeint ∈ FV2 G be the vector recording the parity of e on each interface region:

                                            eeint = (eev )v∈VG .                                   (168)

Let δG : FV2 G → FE
                  2
                    G
                      be the coboundary map of G. We claim that

                                               σ
                                               e = δG eeint .                                      (169)

This holds because a basis element of Cx1 supported in an interface region indexed by v changes the
syndrome parity on the pieces indexed by j ∋ v, whereas a basis element supported inside Yx,j leaves
the syndrome parity on Yx,j and all other pieces unchanged. Applying this to the definition of eeint
yields the claim.
    Thus, σ                                                                e ∈ Im δG , we choose any
           e lies in Im δG . Although the decoder does not know e, because σ
α ∈ FV2 G satisfying
                                               δG α = σ
                                                      e.                                       (170)
We now choose f0 so that its parity on the interface indexed by v ∈ VG is αv , i.e. it satisfies
                                                      
                                               ]
                                         fe0 = (f 0 )k k∈V = α.                                    (171)
                                                              G




                                                     51
Figure 7: An example of pairing syndromes on a piece Yx,j . The red triangles indicate the syndromes
to be paired. The circles indicate the correction 1-cochains. The pairing is chosen to minimize the
number of crossings between the regions Yx,j,0 , Yx,j,1 , Yx,j,left , and Yx,j,right .


   Our choice of f0 will be such that its support entirely lies in only one of the two layers, 0 or 1,
and choose the correction that gives the smaller contribution to gxq1 (f ). By symmetry between the

two layers, we may assume             X              X
                                           |e
                                            σj,1 | ≤      |e
                                                           σj,0 |.                              (172)
                                        j∈Xx (2)               j∈Xx (2)

Under this assumption, we take f0 to be supported near the center of the copy Xx′ × {0}, on the
qubits adjacent to the central X-check, which is shared by all faces. These qubits are in one-to-one
correspondence with vertices in VG , so we choose the value of f0 on them to be α.
    Let the updated syndrome after applying f0 be

                                                   τ = σ + δx1 f0 .                                    (173)

By construction,
                                                       τej = 0                                         (174)
for every j ∈ Xx (2). Thus, the updated syndrome τ has even syndrome parity on each piece Yx,j .
3. Constructing fj for each piece. For each j ∈ Xx (2), we choose a correction fj consisting of
open “strings” that pair the syndrome points inside each Yx,j . See Figure 7 for an example of such a
pairing.
    We choose the strings so that they cross the interfaces between the regions Yx,j,0 , Yx,j,1 , Yx,j,left ,
                                                                              1 (f ), which we want to
and Yx,j,right as few times as possible because each crossing contributes to gxq
minimize. Our choice will be determined by the syndrome parities within each region, which we denote

                                       τej,0 , τej,1 , τej,left , τej,right ∈ F2 .                     (175)

Since τej = 0, we have
                                   b = τej,0 + τej,1 = τej,left + τej,right ∈ F2 .                     (176)
First pair syndrome points within each region, using strings that do not cross any interface. This
leaves exactly one unpaired syndrome in each region whose parity is 1, and no unpaired syndrome in
regions whose parity is 0. The remaining correction strings are chosen according to the value of b.

                                                          52
                                               1 (f ) from crossings of the interfaces. Each crossing
Figure 8: Illustration of the contribution to gxq
involves qubits supported on the interface, which induce syndrome outside Yx through gxq 1 . Crossings

along the left–right interface contribute weight 2, while crossings along other interfaces contribute
weight 1.

   • If b = 0, the possible unpaired syndromes in Yx,j,0 and Yx,j,1 can be paired by a string crossing the
     interfaces between 0 and left, and between left and 1. Similarly, the possible unpaired syndromes
     in Yx,j,left and Yx,j,right can be paired by a string crossing the interface between left and right.
   • If b = 1, then there is one unpaired syndrome in one of Yx,j,0 and Yx,j,1 , and one unpaired
     syndrome in one of Yx,j,left and Yx,j,right . These two syndromes can be paired by a string crossing
     a single interface.
    A crossing between Yx,j,left and Yx,j,right corresponds to a qubit at the corner which contributes 2
     1 (f )|, whereas crossing any of the other interfaces contributes 1; see Figure 8 for an example.
to |gxq  x
Therefore, we obtain
                     X
                              1
                            |gxq (fj )| = |e
                                           τj,0 | + |e
                                                     τj,1 | + |e
                                                               τj,left | + |e
                                                                            τj,right | − |e
                                                                                          τj,0 + τej,1 |. (177)
                    q∈VQ,(i−1)

To verify this expression, it suffices to check all possible distinct parity configurations up to the
symmetries exchanging Yx,j,0 with Yx,j,1 and Yx,j,left with Yx,j,right :
   • (e
      τj,0 , τej,1 , τej,left , τej,right ) = (0, 0, 0, 0): no crossing is needed, and both sides of Equation (177)
     equal 0.
   • (e
      τj,0 , τej,1 , τej,left , τej,right ) = (1, 1, 0, 0): two crossings are needed, and both sides of Equation (177)
     equal 2.
   • (e
      τj,0 , τej,1 , τej,left , τej,right ) = (0, 0, 1, 1): one crossing between left and right is needed, and both sides
     of Equation (177) equal 2.
   • (e
      τj,0 , τej,1 , τej,left , τej,right ) = (1, 0, 1, 0): one crossing between 0 and left is needed, and both sides of
     Equation (177) equal 1.
Finally, we set                                            X
                                                  f1 =              fj ,                                          (178)
                                                         j∈Xx (2)


                                                          53
and the full correction is f = f0 + f1 .
4. Verifying statement (2) of the Lemma. Statement (1) of the Lemma follows from the
construction of f0 and fj . It remains to show that
                                           X
                                                   1
                                                 |gxq (f )| ≤ |σ|.              (179)
                                                    q∈VQ,(i−1)

First, by the decomposition of σ, we have
                                  X
                          |σ| =        (|σj,0 | + |σj,1 | + |σj,left | + |σj,right |) .                                          (180)
                                          j∈Xx (2)

In particular,                                X
                                  |σ| ≥                 σj,0 | + |e
                                                      (|e         σj,1 | + |e
                                                                            σj,left | + |e
                                                                                         σj,right |) ,                           (181)
                                          j∈Xx (2)

since the weight of σ on each region is at least the parity of the syndrome in that region.
                                2 (f ) = 0, we have
    By step 3 of the proof and gxq  0
                    X                             X          X
                                1                                     1
                              |gxq (f )| =                          |gxq (fj )|
                 q∈VQ,(i−1)                  q∈VQ,(i−1) j∈Xx (2)
                                               X                                                                                 (182)
                                        =                 τj,0 | + |e
                                                        (|e         τj,1 | + |e
                                                                              τj,left | + |e
                                                                                           τj,right | − |e
                                                                                                         τj,0 + τej,1 |) .
                                             j∈Xx (2)

By our choice of correction f0 , it only changes the parities in the regions Yx,j,0 . Therefore

                                 τej,1 = σ
                                         ej,1 ,         τej,left = σ
                                                                   ej,left ,        τej,right = σ
                                                                                                ej,right .                       (183)

Comparing (181) and (182), we obtain
                     X                  X
                             1
                           |gxq (f )| +     σj,0 | − |e
                                          (|e         τj,0 | + |e
                                                                τj,0 + τej,1 |) ≤ |σ|.                                           (184)
                         q∈VQ,(i−1)                   j∈Xx (2)


Thus, to prove statement (2), it is enough to show that
                               X                                                      X
                                       τj,0 | − |e
                                     (|e         τj,0 + τej,1 |) ≤                             |e
                                                                                                σj,0 |.                          (185)
                                      j∈Xx (2)                                      j∈Xx (2)

This follows from
                X                                              X                      X                      X
                              τj,0 | − |e
                            (|e         τj,0 + τej,1 |) ≤               |e
                                                                         τj,1 | =              |e
                                                                                                σj,1 | ≤              |e
                                                                                                                       σj,0 |.   (186)
                 j∈Xx (2)                                    j∈Xx (2)               j∈Xx (2)               j∈Xx (2)

The first inequality follows from the triangle inequality; the equality uses Equation (183), and the last
inequality follows from the assumption in Equation (172). This proves statement (2).




                                                                    54
4.3.2   Cleaning the error from CX
After cleaning the syndrome from CX , we have
                                       X
                            e1 ≜ e +          fx ,                δi1 e1 ∈ CQ
                                                                            2
                                                                              ⊕ CZ2 .               (187)
                                        x∈VX,(i−1)


For x ∈ VX,(i−1) , let e1,x ≜ e1 |Yx . Since δi1 e1 has no component in CX
                                                                         2 , we have δ 1 e
                                                                                      x 1,x = 0, so
        1
e1,x ∈ Z (Cx , δx ).

Lemma 4.10. Given an error with no syndrome in the local complex, i.e. e1,x ∈ Z 1 (Cx , δx ), there
exists a stabilizer sx ∈ Cx0 such that e1,x + δx0 sx = 0.

Proof. Because H 1 (Cx , δx ) = 0, every local 1-cocycle is a local coboundary, i.e.       Z 1 (Cx , δx ) =
B 1 (Cx , δx ), and the statement immediately follows.

Corollary 4.11 (Cleaning the error from CX ). Given an error e1 such that δi1 e1 ∈ CQ
                                                                                    2 ⊕ C 2 , there
                                                                                         Z
exists a stabilizer                            X
                                       sX =          sx                                       (188)
                                                     x∈VX,(i−1)

that cleans the error from CX , i.e.
                                          e′1 ≜ e1 + δi0 sX ∈ CQ
                                                               1
                                                                 .                                  (189)
                                                                           0 + g0
Proof. For each x ∈ VX,(i−1) , choose sx by Lemma 4.10. Recall that δi0 = δloc        0
                                                                                XQ + gQZ , where
 0      0 → C 1 and g 0 : C 0 → C 1 . Denoting Y =
                                                    F
gXQ : CX      Q      QZ     Q       Z           X     x Yx , we have:
                                                   X            X
                         e′1 |YX = e1 |YX + δloc
                                             0
                                                             sx =  (e1,x + δx0 sx ) = 0.            (190)
                                                     x              x

                               1 and C 1 ∼ 0, this implies e′ ∈ C 1 .
Since e′1 is not supported in CX      Z =                   1    Q


4.3.3   Cleaning the syndrome from CQ
After cleaning the syndrome from CX , we obtained
                                              X
                                 σ1 = σ + δi1          2
                                                 fx ∈ CQ ⊕ CZ2 .
                                                         x

For each q ∈ VQ,(i−1) , let σq := σ1 |Yq . After cleaning the error from CX , we may assume σ1 = δi1 e′1
with e′1 ∈ CQ
            1 . Therefore, σ ∈ B 2 (C , δ ).
                             q         q q

Lemma 4.12 (Cleaning the syndrome from CQ ). Given a syndrome σq ∈ B 2 (Cq , δq ), there exists a
local correction fq ∈ Cq1 that:

 (1) removes the syndrome from Cq , i.e. δq1 fq = σq ;
                            1 (f )| ≤ |σ |.
              P
 (2) satisfies z∈VZ,(i−1) |gqz  q       q




                                                         55
Proof. We will drop the subscript q in many of the variables in this proof for the sake of succinctness.
For example, we will write σ for σq and f for fq .
     Since σ ∈ B 2 (Cq , δq ), there exists h ∈ Cq1 such that δq1 h = σ. We choose any such h and decompose
it into a part supported on the boundary and a part supported in the interior of Cq : h = h∂ + hint . See
Figure 9 for an illustration. Only the h∂ part can create syndrome in the neighboring Cz complexes,
so                                              X
                                                         1
                                                       |gqz (h)| = |h∂ |.                              (191)
                                          z∈VZ,(i−1)

Thus, we would like to show that there exists a choice of h such that |h∂ | ≤ |σ|.
    Let z ∈ ∂Xq ⊆ VZ,(i−1) index the boundaries of the complex Cq . We denote the values of the
1-cochain h on the two qubits of boundary z as h∂,z,0 and h∂,z,1 . Call σmid,z the syndrome on the z-th
boundary. Then, we have
                                      σmid,z = h∂,z,0 + h∂,z,1 .
There are two cases that we would like to consider:

   • σmid,z = 1: In this case, |h∂,z,0 | or |h∂,z,1 | is 1, and we automatically have |h∂,z | = |h∂,z,0 | +
     |h∂,z,1 | ≤ |σmid,z |.

   • σmid,z = 0: the pair (h∂,z,0 , h∂,z,1 ) is either (0, 0) or (1, 1). Recall that Cq has an all-1 1-cocycle.
     Adding this all-1 vector to h does not change its coboundary inside Cq , but exchanges the (0, 0)
     and (1, 1) pairs. Thus, we may choose h such that, among the pairs with σmid,z = 0, the number
     of (1, 1) pairs is less or equal to the number of (0, 0) pairs. Pair each (1, 1) pair with a distinct
     (0, 0) pair. Consider one s uch pair, indexed by z and z ′ . Since h∂,z,0 ̸= h∂,z ′ ,0 , there must be
     at least one syndrome between these two points; similarly for h∂,z,1 ̸= h∂,z ′ ,1 . Hence, for each
     (h∂,z,0 , h∂,z,1 ) = (1, 1) there exists two distinct syndrome points in σ.

Collecting everything together, we obtain
                                                    X
                                         |h∂ | ≤           |h∂,z | ≤ |σ|.                                (192)
                                                   z∈∂Xq

Taking fq = h proves the lemma.

Corollary 4.13. Suppose that for each q ∈ VQ,(i−1) , we found a local correction fq ∈ Cq1 satisfying
Lemma 4.12. Define                                  X
                                   σ2 = σ1 + δi1          fq .
                                                           q∈VQ,(i−1)

Then
                                                   |σ2 | ≤ |σ1 |.                                        (193)




                                                        56
            Figure 9: An example of complex Cq illustrating the regions mid, ∂, and int.

                          1 + g 1 + g 1 , where g 1
Proof. Recall that δi1 = δloc  XQ    QZ
                                                       1    2      1     1    2
                                                 XQ : CX → CQ and gQZ : CQ → CZ . Then, we write
                                                 X                   X
                                |σ2 | = σ1 +         δq1 (fq ) +             1
                                                                            gqz fq                   (194)
                                                 q                    q,z
                                                 X          X
                                                                      1
                                     = σ1 +          σq +            gqz (fq )                       (195)
                                                 q          q,z
                                                 X          X
                                                                        1
                                     ≤ σ1 +          σq +             |gqz (fq )|                    (196)
                                                 q             q,z
                                                 X             X
                                     ≤ |σ1 | −       |σq | +           |σq | = |σ1 |,                (197)
                                                 q                q

where the last lines holds from the definition σq := σ1 |Yq and statement (2) of Lemma 4.12.

4.3.4   Coarse-grained syndrome σ ′ and correction f
After the first three steps of coarse-graining, we obtained the cleaned syndrome σ ∈ B 2 (C(i) )
                                                X               X
                                 σ2 = σ + δi1         fx + δi1        fq                             (198)
                                            x∈VX,(i−1)                  q∈VQ,(i−1)


that satisfies σ2 ∈ CZ2 , and updated error
                                      X                     X                         X
                            e2 = e +        fx + δi0                        sx +                fq   (199)
                                   x∈VX,(i−1)           x∈VX,(i−1)                 q∈VQ,(i−1)


                                                      57
                     1 and δ 1 e = σ .
that satisfies e2 ∈ CQ      i 2     2

                                           1 and δ 1 e = σ ∈ C 2 , then:
Lemma 4.14 (RG step). Given an error e2 ∈ CQ      i 2     2   Z

                            2 , and thus, we can define σ ′ = F −1 (σ ). Moreover, it satisfies
 (1) σ2 is in the image of Fi−1                                i−1 2
      ′     2
     σ ∈ B (C(i−1) ).

 (2) Futhermore, we have |σ ′ | ≤ 12 |σ|.

Proof. Recall that H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                  = F2 . For each q ∈ VQ,(i−1) , the component eq = e2 |Yq is a cocycle in
the local complex Cq , i.e. eq ∈ Z 1 (Cq , δq ). Thus, we can consider
                                                                        VQ,(i−1) ∼ 1
                                                      H 1 (Cq , δq ) ∼
                                            M
                            [e2 ]loc ∈                               = F2        = C(i−1)           (200)
                                         q∈VQ,(i−1)

                                  −1
Therefore, we can define e′ = Fi−1   (e2 ). We will define the coarse-grained syndrome as σ ′ = δi−1
                                                                                                 1 e′
                           2
which is automatically in B(i−1) . Consider now

                       Fi−1 (σ ′ ) = Fi−1 (δi−1
                                            1
                                                e′ ) = δi1 Fi−1 (e′ )
                                                                      −1
                                                                                                    (201)
                                                         = δi1 Fi−1 (Fi−1 (e2 )) = δi1 e2 ≡ σ2

which establishes statement (1).
   Statement (2) follows from combining the action of F −1 with the results of Corollaries 4.9 and 4.13.


Finally, we prove the main theorem of this subsection.

Proof of Theorem 4.7. Using Lemmas 4.8 and 4.12, we set
                                       X            X
                                f=          fx +                              fq .                  (202)
                                              x∈VX,(i−1)         q∈VQ,(i−1)


and σ2 = σ + δi1 f . fx and fq are locally computable by construction.
                                                        −1
   Using Lemma 4.14 σ2 = Fi−1 (σ ′ ), we obtain σ ′ = Fi−1 (σ2 ) and obtain

                                               σ = δi1 f + Fi−1 (σ ′ ),                             (203)

and
                                                               1
                                                       |σ ′ | ≤ |σ|                                 (204)
                                                               2
as required.


5     Memory lifetime
We now use the decoder of the previous section to prove the memory lifetime bound stated in Theo-
rem 3.16. In Sec. 2.5, we reviewed some of the known memory lifetime bounds
                                                                          Pin the operator notation.
Given a CSS code C(2k) , we consider the stabilizer Hamiltonian H2k = − i s(2k),i where s(2k),i are
the Pauli stabilizer generators of the code. The system evolves under the master equation shown in
Sec. 2.5, with Hamiltonian H2k and the set of jump operators E for the Lindbladian. We take E to be

                                                            58
the set of all single-qubit Pauli operators, although the proof idea can be readily generalized to larger
support and non-Pauli jump operators.
                                                                                                      1
    We use the following convention. The support of an Pauli-X error is given by a 1-cochain eX ∈ C(2k)
and its syndrome is σX = δ2k  1 e ∈ B 2 (C
                                 X          (2k) ). The support of a Pauli-Z error is represented by a 1-
chain in the dual chain complex, and its syndrome is its boundary. Given a state with syndrome
σ = (σX , σZ ), the decoder constructed in Sec. 4 finds a correction 1-cochain fX for Pauli-X er-
rors and a correction 1-chain fZ for Pauli-Z errors. This determines the Pauli correction operator
X fX (σX ) Z fZ (σZ ) .
    The main idea of the memory lifetime proof is to construct the projector Pstable onto a subspace
where the dressed logical operators are protected from all jump operators in E. By Claim 2.5, it can
be defined as a subspace of states with syndrome σ satisfying
                    X fX (σZ ) Z fZ (σX ) |σ, ±L ⟩ = X fX (σX +σE,X ) Z fZ (σZ +σE,Z ) E |σ, ±L ⟩
for any E ∈ E, where σE = (σE,X , σE,Z ) is the syndrome of the error E. This definition explicitly relies
on specifying a decoder. We will then show that the probability of the complement of this subspace
under the Gibbs measure on syndrome configurations is exponentially small:
                                  Tr(1 − Pstable )ρβ ≤ exp −Θ(nηk ) .
                                                                   

Combining this with Theorem 2.6 yields the desired lower bound on the memory lifetime.

5.1   Unstable and stable syndrome configurations
Because X and Z sectors can be treated separately, we first analyze Pauli-X errors and their syn-
dromes. We therefore suppress the X subscript throughout this discussion; for example, we will use
f (σ) to denote fX (σX ).
    Recall from Section 4.1 that the decoder operates via a sequence of coarse-graining maps. Starting
from the level-2k syndrome σ2k := σ ∈ B 2 (C(2k) ), the decoder maps it to the syndrome at each level
to the coarse-grained syndrome at the next level σ2k−1 ∈ B 2 (C(2k−1) ) and the correction f2k ∈ C(2k)
                                                                                                  1 .

Doing this successively produces the coarse-graining map σi 7→ (σi−1 , fi ), which satisfies
                                            σi = δi1 fi + Fi−1 (σi−1 ),                             (205)
where Fi−1 : C(i−1) → C(i) is the cochain map FRX ,i−1 or FRZ ,i−1 depending on parity of the iteration
index.
   We now give a sufficient condition for a state with level-2k syndrome σ2k to lie in the stable
subspace Pstable . This is simply a (co)homological formulation of Claim 2.5.
Definition 5.1. A syndrome σ2k ∈ C(2k)   2    is unstable with respect to the decoder if there exists a
           1   1           1
1-cochain e ∈ C(2k) with |e | = 1 (i.e., a single X flip) such that
                                                             1 1
                                        f (σ2k ) + f (σ2k + δ2k e ) + e1
belongs to a nontrivial cohomology class H 1 (C(2k) ). Otherwise, it is called stable.
This definition depends on the choice of the decoder. Informally, if a single X-flip acting on some
syndrome changes the decoding outcome, then that syndrome is said to be unstable with respect to
that decoder.
   In this subsection, we will formulate a convenient necessary condition for a syndrome configuration
to be unstable with respect to a decoder, which we will use in our memory lifetime bound. Before
that, we will slightly modify our decoder.

                                                         59
5.1.1    Modification of the decoder
One can show that the syndrome reduction property of the decoder discussed in Sec. 4.1.1 guarantees
the error-correction properties of the decoder, namely that the decoder will correct the errors up to
size poly(n2k ), where n2k is the size of the code. However, for simplicity of some of the proofs, we
would like to equip the decoder with a more explicit error-correction guarantee. For this, we will
simply change the definition of the coarse-graining operations at level 2 and above (i.e. at levels 2,1,
and 0).
    Namely, at level 2, we define the coarse-graining step to be the map σ2 7→ f2 where the correction
       1 satisfies
f2 ∈ C(2)
                                                   δ21 f2 = σ2 .                                             (206)
We note that the code C(2) = RZ ◦ RX (C(0) ) has constant size (namely, O(ℓ4 )), and the distance is
at least O(ℓ). We choose any decoder (which can be done in many ways, including using a lookup
table) for this finite-size code that fulfills the condition above and corrects all sufficiently small errors.
For the proofs below, it is sufficient that the decoder corrects all errors whose syndrome fits inside a
radius-2 ball in graph distance.
    With this modification, we automatically have σ1 = 0, σ0 = 0, and thus, we do not need to define
coarse-graining at these levels.

5.1.2    Necessary condition for unstable configurations
We now prove the following condition for a syndrome to be stable with respect to the decoder we
constructed.
Lemma 5.2. Syndrome σ2k is stable if, upon applying the coarse-graining steps of the decoder itera-
tively, σ2 = 0.
Proof. We first prove some structural properties of the coarse-graining procedures. These properties
will be used afterwards to prove the lemma.
Level i is even: RZ coarse-graining. Consider two syndrome configurations σi and σ                ei that differ
inside a subcomplex X(i),x ⊆ T(i) for some x ∈ VX,(i) . Then, there exists an xi−1 ∈ VX,(i−1) such that
σi and σei only differ in the set {Y(i),z : z ∈ ∂X(i−1),xi−1 }. This set contains all complexes Y(i),x′ such
that disti (x′ , xi−1 ) ≤ 2 (recall that disti (·, ·) is the directed distance on the decoding graph defined in
Def. 4.3). Therefore, by local computability of the decoder, the corrections for σi and σ         ei , which we
                                                                                                     −1
call fi and fi , will only differ in the same set. Thus, after applying the correction and FR
              e
                                                                                                       Z ,i−1
                                                                                                              , the
coarse-grained syndrome σi−1 and σ       ei−1 will differ only in ∂X(i−1),xi−1 ⊆ X(i−1),xi−1 .
Level i − 1 is odd: RX coarse-graining. Consider now level i − 1. There exists xi−2 ∈ VX,(i−2)
such that the subcomplex X(i−1),xi−1 is contained in the set

{Y(i−1),xi−2 } ∪ {Y(i−1),q : q ∈ VQ,(i−2) , q ∼ xi−2 } ∪ {Y(i−1),z : z ∈ VZ,(i−2) , ∃q ∈ VQ,(i−2) , z ∼ q ∼ xi−2 }.

This union already contains all complexes Y(i),w such that disti (w, xi−2 ) ≤ 2. Therefore, by the local
computability of the decoder, the associated corrections fi−1 and fei−1 only differ within the union of
                                                       −1
these sets. Thus, after applying the correction and FR  X ,i−2
                                                               , the coarse-grained syndrome σi−2 and
σ
ei−2 will differ only in X(i−2),xi−2 .
Proving the Lemma. Now, we use the intermediate results above to prove the Lemma. Consider
σ2k ∈ B 2 (C(2k) ); call e2k ∈ C(2k)
                                1                     1 e . Let e1 ∈ C 1
                                     such that σ2k = δ2k 2k           (2k) be an arbitrary weight-1


                                                        60
error |e1 | = 1, and call σ      1 e
                          e2k = δ2k        1 (e
                                    e2k = δ2k         1                            1 1
                                                2k + e ). The syndrome difference δ2k e is supported in
∂X(2k),q2k ⊆ X(2k),x2k for some x2k ∈ VX,(2k) and q2k ∈ VQ,(2k) .
    Thus, we can repeatedly apply the conclusions from the two intermediate results above. In partic-
ular, we can conclude that at level 2, we arrive at syndrome configurations σ2 and σ   e2 which differ in
X(2),x2 for some x2 ∈ VX,(2) . By assumption, σ2 = 0, so σ e2 must be entirely supported in X(2),x2 .
    Next, we claim that there exists some h2 ∈ C(2)    1 that is supported entirely in X
                                                                                          (2),x such that
 1
δ2 h2 = σ
        e2 . To show this, note that coarse-grained errors obey

                                        ej = Fj−1 (ej+1 + fj+1 + δ 0 sj+1 )                                   (207)
                                        eej = Fj−1 (e
                                                    ej+1 + fej+1 + δ 0 sej+1 )                                (208)

From the intermediate results and by local computability, at each level, fj+1 + fej+1 , and δ 0 sj+1 +δ 0 sej+1
are supported in X(i+1),xi+1 for some xi+1 ∈ VX,(i+1) . Using this, we find that then ej + eem is also
supported in X(i),xi for some xi ∈ VX,(i) . Repeatedly applying this argument starting from level 2k
until level 2, we obtain e2 + ee2 , which must be supported in X(2),x2 . We define h = e2 + ee2 and obtain

                                         δ21 h = δ21 e2 + δ21 ee2 = δ21 ee2 = σ
                                                                              e2

as desired.
    Since both e2 + ee2 and σ       e2 = δ21 (e2 + ee2 ) are supported in X(2),x2 , there exists a correction fe2
applied by the level-2 decoder that is supported in X(2),x2 so that e2 + ee2 + fe2 has no syndrome and is
supported in X(2),x2 . For large enough ℓ, X(2),x cannot contain a logical operator at level 2 and thus
[e2 + ee2 + fe2 ]2 is a trivial element of H 1 (C(2) ), where [α]k denotes the homology class of α in H 1 (C(k) ).
No corrections will be applied at level 1 and level 0. Repeatedly applying the map Fi the way back
to level 2k, we get
                                                           1 1
   [e2 + ee2 + fe2 ]2 = [e2k + ee2k + f (σ2k ) + f (σ2k + δ2k e )]2k = [e1 + f (σ2k ) + f (σ2k + δ2k
                                                                                                  1 1
                                                                                                     e )]2k   (209)
                              1 e1 ) must in the trivial homology class of H 1 (C
and e1 + f (σ2k ) + f (σ2k + δ2k                                                  (2k) ), implying that σ2 is
stable by Def. 5.1.

Define Σ2k (β) to be the classical probability distribution over syndrome configurations such that

                                       e−β|σ2k |                          X
                           P(σ2k ) =             ,   where Z =                          e−β|σ2k | .
                                         Z
                                                                    σ2k ∈B 2 (C(2k) )

                          P
Corollary 5.3. Define Pe = σ2k :σ2 =0 |σ2k ⟩⟨σ2k |. Then,
                                                              
                            Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) = Tr 1 − Pe ρβ ≥ Tr(1 − P )ρβ .

Proof. Follows from the previous Lemma.

Thus, we simply need to find an upper bound on Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0). To do so, we will show that the
event σ2 ̸= 0 requires σ2k to be of a very large weight. By bounding the number of distinct large-weight
configurations, we will show that for β large enough, Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) is doubly exponentially small
in k. In physics, this proof method often goes under the name of a Peierls argument.


                                                           61
5.2    Recording coarse-graining history in the decoding graph
In Sec. 4.3, we defined the decoding graph G. We will use it to track the history of the coarse-graining
steps in decoding, i.e.
                             σ2k , (σ2k−1 , f2k ), (σ2k−2 , f2k−1 ), ..., (σ0 , f1 ), f0 .
More specifically, we will store the indices of local complexes that contain the support of the syndrome
and the coboundaries of local corrections. In particular, the decoding graph at level i, denoted Gi ,
has the same structure as the 1-skeleton of the Tanner graph T(i−1) . Note that G is bounded-degree,
and we will call the maximum degree ∆ = O(ℓ2 ). We will also define ∆level to be the maximum degree
of any subgraph Gi , which is independent of ℓ.
    For a particular choice of decoder, the highest-level syndrome σ2k uniquely determines the history
of coarse-graining steps under decoding. At each level i, we track the supports of the syndrome as well
as where the syndrome intermittently moved when we add local corrections δfi,v for v ∈ T(i−1) (0); we
then mark the nodes in G consistent with these supports. These induce a subgraph of G that we call
Gσ2k . A formal definition is given below:

Definition 5.4 (Subgraph induced by syndrome σ2k ). Given σ2k and the associated coarse-graining
data, define an induced subgraph Gσ2k ⊆ G. The edges and vertices of Gσ2k are determined by the
following procedure:

  1. For each 2 ≤ i ≤ 2k:

      (1.1) Include each v ∈ Gi if σi Yv ̸= 0.
      (1.2) Include each v ∈ Gi if fi,v ̸= 0 or δfi,v′ Yv ̸= 0 for some v ′ in T(i−1) (0).
      (1.3) If two nodes v and v ′ in Gσ2k are connected by an edge (v, v ′ ) in Gi , include (v, v ′ ) in Gσ2k .

  2. If any node v ∈ G2 is included in Gσ2k , include all nodes v ′ ∈ G1 where v ∈ Y(1),v′ .

  3. If any node v ∈ G1 is included in Gσ2k , include the node v (0) ∈ G0 .

  4. For each 0 ≤ i ≤ 2k: if v ∈ Gi−1 and v ′ ∈ Gi are included in Gσ2k and are connected by an edge
     (v, v ′ ) in G, include (v, v ′ ) in Gσ2k .

A schematic example of decoding subgraph is marked black in Figure 4. An illustration of how to
determine a decoding subgraph is shown in Fig. 10 for the RX iteration. For RZ iterations, the
structure of the subgraph Gσ2k is simpler since corrections are only ever applied in Cz subcomplexes;
thus, only z-type nodes can be added to Gσ2k at such iterations.
    The induced subgraph Gσ2k consists of a set of connected components. We will now show that
because of the local computability property, the weight of the syndrome in each connected component
of GσS2k
         is reduced independently. Call K a connected component of Gσ2k , S     and decompose it into
K = i Ki where Ki = K ∩ Gi . Define σKi to be the syndrome supported in v∈Ki Y(i),v .

Claim 5.5. Consider two different connected components of Gσ2k , which we denote K and K ′ . The
syndrome σKi−1 only depends on σKi and not on σKi−1
                                                 ′  .

Proof. Consider any v ∈ Ki ⊆ K labeling local complex Y(i),v . Suppose (for the sake of contradiction)
                        ′
that there exists u ∈ Ki−1  ⊆ K ′ corresponding to Y(i−1),u such that the syndrome restricted to



                                                       62
Figure 10: Left: the orange points indicate the syndrome at level i, while the orange lines indicate
the local corrections at the associated coarse-graining step. Right: the circled vertices and bold links
on the right indicate the nodes and edges to be added to the induced subgraph Gσ2k at level i.

Y(i−1),u , denoted σi−1,u = σi−1 Y         , depends on the syndrome restricted to Y(i),v , denoted σi,v . We
                                   (i−1),u
can compute the functional dependence of σi−1,u on the syndrome in σi via
                                                                     X
                     F −1 (σi−1 Y      ) = F −1 (σi−1 ) Uu = σi +            δi1 fi,v′ Uu
                                                                                      
                                                                                                        (210)
                                (i−1),u
                                                                      v ′ ∈T(i−1) (0)

where Uu = {Y(i),w : w ∈ Y(i−1),u }.
    We now have two cases to consider. First, if σi Uu depends on σi,v , then Y(i),v must be contained
in Uu . Note that both v and u must be in Gσ2k . By Def. 5.4, v must be connected to u, contradicting
the assumption that K and K ′ are different connected components.
    Second, suppose that for some v ′ ∈ T(i−1) (0), (δi1 fi,v′ ) Uu depends on σi,v . By local computability,
v must be within directed distance 1 away from v ′ . Because fi,v′ is nonzero, v ′ must be in Gσ2k . By
Def. 5.4, the neighboring v ′ and v must be in the same connected component.
    For (δi1 fi,v′ ) Uu to be nonzero, δi1 fi,v′ must have support in Y(i),w ∈ Uu for some w. Thus, v ′ and w
are both in Gσ2k and are in the same connected component; however, by definition, w is in the same
connected component as u. From Def. 5.4, this implies that u and v must be in the same connected
component, contradicting the assumption.


   The main result of this subsection is below, which shows that we can analyze the action of the
decoder independently on each connected component.
Lemma 5.6. Consider a connected component K of Gσ2k . Denote σi′ the part of syndrome σi contained
in local regions associated with K, and denote σ ′ = ∪i σi′ . Define fi′ , to be the sum of local corrections
in fi that depend on σi′ .
                                                  −1
 (1) σi′ + δi1 fi′ is in the image of Fi−1 , and Fi−1   ′ ) = σ′ + δ1f ′.
                                                      (σi−1    i    i i

 (2) For the RZ iteration,
                                                    ′
                                                  |σi−1 | ≤ |σi′ |.                                    (211)
      and for the RX iteration,
                                                   ′      1
                                                 |σi−1 | ≤ |σi′ |.                                     (212)
                                                          2
Proof. Follows from local computability of the coarse-graining map, Claim 5.5, as well as Theorem 4.6
and Theorem 4.7.

                                                     63
5.3   Witness
The subgraph Gσ2k induced by syndrome σ2k can be split into disjoint connected components. If
it contains a component that contains the node v (0) , we call such a component a witness subgraph.
Because of how the subgraph Gσ2k is defined, if a witness subgraph is present, the syndrome config-
uration σ2k must be unstable. We formalize this below and use this definition to upper bound the
number of such subgraphs and lower bound their minimum size.
Definition 5.7 (Witness subgraph and witness syndrome). Consider a syndrome configuration σ2k
and construct the associated subgraph Gσ2k according to Def. 5.4. We call the connected component of
the subgraph containing v (0) the witness subgraph of σ2k (which could be empty), which we denote Gτ .
    Define τi to be the syndrome in σi restricted to the regions used toSdefine the witness subgraph
at level i. Define the witness syndrome τ of σ2k to be the union τ = i τi . We call τi the witness
syndrome at level i.
We note that different witness syndrome configurations (we will call these “witnesses” moving forward)
can correspond to the same witness subgraph. We will account for this later on in the proof.
Lemma 5.8. The level-2k witness syndrome of σ2k , denoted τ2k , is a coboundary of some 1-cochain
h1 ∈ C(2k)
      1 .


Proof. We provide a construction of h1 . Recall that the vertices in the witness subgraph of σ2k ,
denoted Gτ , form a connected component. By Lemma 5.6, τi + δi1 fi (τi ) = F(τi−1 ). Define
                               X
                                                                          1
                          p=     F2k−1 ◦ F2k−2 ◦ · · · ◦ Fi (fi (τi )) ∈ C(2k)              (213)
                                 i≥2

Applying Lemma 5.6 iteratively, we obtain that F2k−1 ◦ · · · ◦ F2 (τ2 ) = τ2k + δ2k   1 p. By definition of
                                                                 2
the witness subgraph and witness syndrome, τ2 = σ2 ∈ B (C(2) ). Using that Fi is a cochain map, it
                                                                                              1 .
follows F2k−1 ◦ · · · ◦ F2 (τ2 ) is also a coboundary of some 1-cochain, which we call e ∈ C(2k)
    Finally, we have τ2k = δ2k   1 e + δ 1 p. Identifying h = e + p shows the statement of the Lemma.
                                         2k

We will now bound the number of all possible subgraphs corresponding to valid witnesses. We then
argue that the size of the witness subgraph can be related to the weight of the level-2k witness |τ2k |.
Lemma 5.9. The number of witness subgraphs with m nodes is ≤ |V2 |(∆ + 1)2m .
Proof. For a connected component of Gσ2k to be a witness subgraph, it is sufficient for it to contain
any v (2) ∈ G2 . Thus, we will need to bound the number of connected subgraphs of size m containing
v (2) and multiply by |V2 | for an upper bound.
     To prove this, perform a depth-first traversal of the graph Gτ starting at a given node v (2) . More
specifically, for a given node with ∆ incident edges, we assign distinct integers 1, 2, · · · , ∆ to each
edge. A traversal of Gτ can then be labeled by a list of integers {n1 , n2 , n3 , · · · }, with ni ∈ [0, ∆].
This list can be interpreted the following way: if one is at node u and the element at the front of the
list is ni , we move along the ni -th edge if ni ∈ [1, ∆], and backtrack along the edge that brought us
to u if ni = 0. We then pop ni from the list and repeat until the list is empty. It follows that for a
depth-first traversal of a graph with m nodes, the number of elements in the list is at most 2m. The
number of possible lists is then at most ≤ (∆ + 1)2m .
     Finally, since Gτ is an induced subgraph, different witness subgraphs will have different traversal
lists, implying the thesis.

                                                    64
Now we provide a lower bound on the number of nodes in the witness subgraph corresponding to an
unstable configuration. This is the key lemma in which the results of the previous section are used.

Lemma 5.10. An unstable configuration of the level-2k construction has a witness subgraph with
≥ 2k−1 nodes.
                                                                                            S
Proof. Call Vτ its vertex set of the witness subgraph Gτ . We can decompose Vτ = i Vτ,i where
Vτ,i = Vτ ∩ Vi denotes the vertices of the witness subgraph at level i. Consider the witness τi at level
i. Each syndrome point in τi accounts for at least one node in the witness subgraph in Vτ,i+1 , namely
the one labeled by v ∈ VZ,(i) . This is because, if there is a syndrome point in τi , some subcomplex at
a lower level Y(i+1),v must contain either τi+1 , or the correction at level i + 1, or the coboundary of
the correction at level i + 1.
    Thus, the total number of nodes in the witness subgraph obeys
                                                  2k
                                                  X                 2k
                                                                    X
                                        |Vτ | =         |Vτ,i | ≥         |τi−1 |.                (214)
                                                  i=2               i=3

By the cluster syndrome reduction property in Lemma 5.6, we have |τi−1 | ≤ |τi |/r where r = 1 for the
RZ iteration and r = 2 for the RX iteration. Since an unstable configuration must have at least one
syndrome at level 2, summing the geometric series gives |Vτ | ≥ 2k−1 .

Lemma 5.11. The witness τ of syndrome σ2k satisfies 2k
                                                       P
                                                          i=0 |τi | ≤ 4|τ2k |.

Proof. We first note that τi is a union of connected components; we label each τic . From Lemma 5.6,
after applying a coarse-graining step, the syndrome supported in the same units that τi is in, denoted
τi′ , satisfies                               X           X
                                     |τi′ | ≤   |τi′c | ≤   |τic | ≤ |τi |                       (215)
                                                  c             c

By Lemma 5.6 |τi−1 | ≤ |τi |/r where r equals 1 or 2 depending on the iteration. Therefore,
                                  2k                      ∞  i
                                  X                       X  1
                                        |τi | ≤ 2|τ2k |                   ≤ 4|τ2k |.              (216)
                                                                    2
                                  i=0                     i=0




Lemma 5.12. Suppose the witness subgraph of Gσ2k has m nodes. Then, the total number of nodes
in the witness subgraph whose associated local subcomplex contains at least one syndrome point is
≥ m/(1 + ∆4level ).

Proof. Call Gσ2k ,i = Gσ2k ∩ Gi and Gτ,i = Gτ ∩ Gi . Recall that a node is added to Gσ2k if either
the subcomplex labeled by this node contains syndrome at that level or if it contains the correction
1-cochain (or the coboundary of the correction) at this level. By construction of Gσ2k , if v ∈ Gσ2k ,i
but the associated subcomplex Y(i),v does not have syndrome points, then the correction fi,v must be
nontrivial. By local computability of the correction, there must be a node u in the same connected
component a graph distance 1 from v such that Y(i),u has at least one syndrome point associated
with σi . The correction fi,v can deposit syndrome in Y(i),w where w is distance 1 from v and in the
same connected component; thus, u and w are at most graph distance 2 from each other. Thus,
any node v ∈ Gσ2k ,i must be within graph-distance 2 away from some node v ′ ∈ Gσ2k ,i in the same

                                                          65
connected component whose associated subcomplex Y(i),v contains at least one syndrome point in σi
(if the distance is 0, then v ′ = v). Because Gτ ⊆ Gσ2k and forms a single connected component, this
statement is also true for Gτ .                       P
     Suppose there are mi nodes in Gτ,i , and thus, i mi = m. The number of nodes responsible for
at least one syndrome point is lower-bounded by the distance-4 domination number of Gτ,i , denoted
γ4 (Gτ,i ). Then, the total number of such nodes is
                                  X                X     mi            m
                                ≥     γ4 (Gτ,i ) ≥     4         = 4          .               (217)
                                   i               i
                                                     ∆ level + 1  ∆ level + 1



5.4   Main result
Finally, we use the above results to argue that the probability of an unstable configuration is very
small, by combining the bound on the number of possible distinct witnesses with the minimum energy
of such a witness. This uses a standard Peierls argument.
                                                                                 k−1
Theorem 5.13. The probability Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) is ≤ 2 · 2−2                      for β > βc with βc finite.

Proof. Suppose σ2 has at least one syndrome. Then, σ2k must contain a level-2k witness, i.e. τ2k ⊆ σ2k .
Assuming σ2k ∼ Σ2k (β), the probability of σ2k containing a fixed τ2k is
                                                        1        X
                      Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (τ2k ⊆ σ2k ) =                          e−β|σ2k |                                (218)
                                                        Z
                                                            σ2k :τ2k ⊆σ2k
                                                                                    −β|τ2k +σ2k |
                                                                  P
                                                                     σ2k :τ2k ⊆σ2k e
                                                 ≤ e−β|τ2k |                                                         (219)
                                                                                   Z
                                                 ≤ e−β|τ2k |                                                         (220)

In the third line, we use the fact that τ2k + σ2k is a 2-coboundary (which follows from Lemma 5.8
and σ2k being a 2-coboundary by definition); thus, all terms in the numerator are also present in the
denominator.
    Next, we use the Lemmas from the previous subsection. From Lemma 5.10 the number of nodes
in the witness subgraph is ≥ 2k−1 . Then, we may write
                                             X
                   Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) ≤    Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (τ2k ⊆ σ2k )                      (221)
                                            valid τ2k
                                               X                 X
                                        ≤                                   Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (τ2k ⊆ σ2k )               (222)
                                            subgraphs τ2k consistent
                                               K          with K
                                               X                 X
                                        ≤                                   e−β|τ2k |                                (223)
                                            subgraphs τ2k consistent
                                               K          with K
                                              X              X               X
                                        ≤                                               e−β|τ2k |                    (224)
                                            m≥2k−1 K:|VK |=m τ2k consistent
                                                                 with K

where: K denotes a witness subgraph, the statement “τ2k consistent with K” means that K is a
validly constructed subgraph given τ2k , and the Lemma is used in the last line. Now, we focus on the

                                                            66
inner sum.                         X                                X                β P2k
                                               e−β|τ2k | ≤                        e− 4  i=1 |τi |           (225)
                              τ2k consistent                    τ2k consistent
                                  with K                            with K

where we used Lemma 5.11. Suppose for the fixed choice of K with vertex set VK satisfying |VK | = m,
the set of nodes whose associated subcomplexes contain at least one syndrome point is VeK . Then, we
may write
                            X          β P2k         X  X          β P2k
                                    e− 4 i=1 |τi | ≤            e− 4 i=1 |τi |                  (226)
                         τ2k consistent                         VeK τ2k consistent
                             with K                                   with K,VeK
                                                                X Y
                                                            ≤                Wv                             (227)
                                                                VeK v∈VeK

where Wv is the weighted sum over all valid syndrome configurations σv with |σv | ≥ 1 in the subcomplex
corresponding to v:
                                   Mℓ       
                                  X      Mℓ −βj/4
                            Wv ≤              e     = (e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1.                          (228)
                                          j
                                        j=1

where Mℓ = O(ℓ2 ) is the maximum size of the local complex. This implies
                           X                          X
                                        e−β|τ2k | ≤    ((e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1)|VK |                             (229)
                                                                           e

                       τ2k consistent                 VeK
                           with K
                                                                              4
                                                    X
                                                  ≤  ((e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1)m/(1+∆level )                       (230)
                                                      VeK
                                                                                                    4
                                                  ≤ 2m ((e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1)m/(1+∆level )                     (231)

where in the second line we assume (e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1 < 1 and invoked Lemma 5.12. Putting this
together,
                                                                             4
                                       X   X
             Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) ≤           2m ((e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1)m/(1+∆level )   (232)
                                            m≥2k−1 K:|VK |=m
                                                                                                        4
                                              X
                                        ≤            (∆ + 1)2m 2m ((e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1)m/(1+∆level ) .        (233)
                                            m≥2k−1

where in the second line we use Lemma 5.9. Finally, if
                                                            1/(1+∆4
                                                                       level )
                                                                                               1
                             2 (e−β/4 + 1)Mℓ − 1                                 (∆ + 1)2 ≤                 (234)
                                                                                               2
which upon using log(1 + x) ≤ x log 2 for x ∈ [0, 1] implies
                                                              ∆4 +1 
                                                            1     level
                                             log 1 + 4(∆+1)2
                                       1
                           e−β ≤ 2                                                                          (235)
                                   ∆level Mℓ              log 2



                                                             67
or β ≥ βc ≍ ∆4level log(ℓ), then
                                                        X  1 m          k−1
                           Pσ2k ∼Σ2k (β) (σ2 ̸= 0) ≤             ≤ 2 · 2−2 .                          (236)
                                                         k−1
                                                             2
                                                       m≥2



                                                                                          k−1
Corollary 5.14. The memory lifetime of the 3D passive quantum memory is ≳ 22                      at inverse
temperatures β ≥ βc , with βc determined from Thm. 5.13.
Proof. From Cor. 5.3 and Thm. 5.13, we have
                                               k−1
                                       2 · 2−2       ≥ Tr(1 − PX )ρβ ,
where the subscript indicates we are restricting to X-type errors. Next, we must treat Z-type errors.
The analysis is identical apart from the RX and RZ iterations being exchanged, and we get a similar
             k−1
bound 2 · 2−2     ≥ Tr(1 − PZ )ρβ . The right hand side of Thm. 2.6 can be bounded by
                                                                   k−1
                                      Tr(1 − Pstable )ρβ ≤ 4 · 2−2       .
                                                                                        k−1
Thus, from Thm. 2.6, the norm e−i[H,·]t+Lt ◦ Enc(ρ) − Enc(ρ) 1 ≤ ϵ for all t ≲ ϵ · 22         .


6     Construction with explicit embedding
Up to this point, we have established the existence of a 3D self-correcting quantum memory, where
the embedding in R3 is achieved via a random perturbation method. This construction can be made
deterministic using a deterministic algorithm for the Lovász local lemma [37]. However, it still incurs
a large scale factor ℓ ≲ 1024 . As a result, the exponent η defined via tmem ∼ exp(nη ) is only ∼ 10−2 .
While this estimate can be improved with a more careful analysis of the random perturbation, it
remains desirable to obtain a more explicit 3D construction that might achieve an even larger value
for η.
    In this section, we present an explicit construction with scale factor ℓ = 8. We achieve this through
an inductive argument. Rather than perturbing the code randomly, we instead identify a finite number
of “local structures” and specify an explicit replacement rule for each structure. These rules allow us
to generate the code at the next step while ensuring locality in R3 .
    As a warm-up, we first illustrate the underlying idea in a simpler classical setting before turning
to the quantum code. While the construction in Sec. 3 is based on the Tanner square complex, here
we instead use the sheaf codes formalism, discussed in Sec. 2.4. An equivalent framework is that of
topological defect networks [14, 30].

6.1   Warm-up: classical code
The authors of Ref. [20] posed the following question: does there exist a 2D classical code with parity-
check matrix H such that both the code with parity-check matrix H and the code with parity-check
matrix H T are self-correcting classical memories? We answer this question in the affirmative.
Theorem 6.1. There exists a scaling family of two-dimensional classical LDPC codes with parity-
check matrices Hk such that both the code associated with Hk and the code associated  with HkT are
                                                                            η 
classical memories. Moreover, their memory lifetime satisfies tmem ≥ exp Θ(nk ) , where nk → ∞ as
k → ∞ is the number of physical bits and η > 0 is a constant.

                                                       68
The goal of this section is to construct such a code family. As in the quantum construction described
in Sec. 3, the construction again consists of two types of iterations, denoted by RRep and RPar .

6.1.1   Notation and framework
In this section, we specialize to the case of 1-dimensional sheaf codes, which correspond to a classical
geometrically local code C(X, F, I) defined by the following data:
  1. A 1-dimensional cell complex X, with vertex set X(0) and edge set X(1).
  2. Sheaf data F, which assigns to each vertex v of degree ̸= 2 a color, either black or white.
  3. An embedding I : X → R2 .
    We will assume that each edge of X is incident to two distinct vertices. For a vertex v, denote
                                                                                                  X (1)
X≥v (1) to be the set of edges incident to v. If v is black, then the associated local code Fv ⊆ F2 ≥v
is taken to be the repetition code; for example, when |X≥v (1)| = 3, we set Fv = {000, 111}. If
v is white, then Fv is taken to be the parity-check code; for example, when |X≥v (1)| = 3, we set
Fv = {000, 011, 101, 110}. For vertices of degree 2 we always set Fv = {00, 11}, which is both a
repetition code and a parity-check code. For this reason, we do not explicitly assign a color to degree-
2 vertices.
    As we will see, the embedding I is local and has bounded density. In our construction, each vertex
is mapped to a lattice point in Z2 , and each edge is mapped to a unit-length segment joining two
adjacent lattice points. Moreover, no two edges of X are mapped to the same edge of the integer
lattice.
    We again use ℓ to denote the scaling factor at each iteration. While the construction is valid for
all ℓ ≥ 3, we focus on the case ℓ = 4.

6.1.2   Construction
We begin with a finite-size code C(0) and define two procedures, RRep and RPar . This produces a
family of codes

  C(0) , C(1) = RRep (C(0) ), C(2) = RPar (C(1) ), · · · , C(2k−1) = RRep (C(2k−2) ), C(2k) = RPar (C(2k−1) ), · · ·
                                                                                                               (237)

Base case.     The initial code C(0) is specified by the following data:
  1. The 1-cell complex X(0) consists of four 0-cells and four 1-cells arranged in a loop.
  2. Each vertex v has degree 2, and hence the sheaf structure at every vertex is fixed to be F(0) (v) :=
     {00, 11}.
  3. The four edges are embedded in R2 as the boundary of a unit square.
   It is clear that the classical code C(0) encodes a single bit.

Iterations RRep and RPar .         Each iteration consists of two steps:
  1. Refinement: X 7→ X ′ .
  2. Doubling: X ′ 7→ Y = (X ′ ⊔ Xcopy
                                  ′    ⊔ Xcyl )/∼.



                                                        69
    During refinement, the geometry is modified from X to X ′ , while the underlying topological
structure remains unchanged. During the doubling step, the complex X ′ is replaced by a new complex
Y consisting of two copies of X ′ together with a cylinder Xcyl joining them. The equivalence relation
∼ identifies the two boundaries of Xcyl with the corresponding attachment regions in the two copies
of X ′ . These structures will be specified explicitly below.
    The two types of iteration, RRep and RPar , differ only in the sheaf data assigned during the
doubling step. We therefore begin by describing the common geometric part of the construction,
namely the complex X and its embedding I, and then specify the corresponding sheaf data for the
RRep and RPar iterations.

Refinement. The refinement step is straightforward, consisting of a scaling and subdivision pro-
cedure. We scale the entire complex by a factor of ℓ and subdivide each edge into ℓ segments. The
resulting complex X ′ inherits a natural embedding I ′ , obtained by scaling the original embedding I.
    The sheaf data F ′ is induced directly from F: each vertex of X ′ of degree different from 2 inherits
the color of the corresponding vertex of X.

Doubling. Starting from the subdivided complex X ′ , we form a second copy, denoted Xcopy        ′   , and
                                                        ′       ′
translate it by the vector (1, 1). We then connect X and Xcopy by an auxiliary cylinder-like complex,
denoted Xcyl .
    To define Xcyl , we first specify the attaching regions X0′ ⊂ X ′ and Xcopy,0
                                                                                ′         ′
                                                                                     ⊂ Xcopy  . These are
                                                    ′
0-dimensional subcomplexes. The vertices in X0 are paired with corresponding vertices in Xcopy,0    ′     ,
and Xcyl is obtained by a collection of unit-length edges between each pair.
    More concretely, suppose that (a, b) − (a + 1, b) is an edge of X. In the subdivided complex X ′ , this
edge is replaced by a path of ℓ unit segments joining (ℓa, ℓb) to (ℓ(a + 1), ℓb). In the translated copy
  ′
Xcopy , the corresponding path joins (ℓa +1, ℓb +1) to (ℓ(a + 1)+ 1, ℓb + 1). We define the corresponding
attaching regions to consist of the interior vertices on these two paths that can be joined vertically:

                     X0′ ⊇ {(ℓa + 2, ℓb), (ℓa + 3, ℓb), . . . , (ℓa + (ℓ − 1), ℓb)},                 (238)
                  ′
                 Xcopy,0 ⊇ {(ℓa + 2, ℓb + 1), (ℓa + 3, ℓb + 1), . . . , (ℓa + (ℓ − 1), ℓb + 1)}.     (239)

These vertices pair naturally to form the unit-length segments in Xcyl :

                    Xcyl ⊇ {(ℓa + m, ℓb) − (ℓa + m, ℓb + 1) : m ∈ {2, 3, . . . , ℓ − 1}}.            (240)

Thus, for each edge of X, the corresponding paths in X ′ and Xcopy
                                                              ′    , together with the added edges in
Xcyl , form a subcomplex shaped like a ladder.

Sheaf data. It remains to assign a color to each vertex of Y whose degree is not 2. There are two
types of such vertices. The first consists of vertices in X ′ and Xcopy
                                                                     ′   that do not lie in the attaching
regions. The second consists of vertices lying in the attaching regions.
    Vertices of the first type inherit the color of the corresponding vertex in X. Vertices of the second
type are colored black in the iteration RRep and white in the iteration RPar .
    This completes the construction of the code C(i+1) from C(i) . In particular, the size of C(k) grows
exponentially in k.




                                                       70
Figure 11: The first two iterations for ℓ = 4, showing X(0) , X(1) , and X(2) . Black edges are obtained
from scaling and copying X(0) . Purple edges are the new cylinder edges added in X(1) , and brown
edges are the new cylinder edges added in X(2) .
   Every lattice point that appears as a degree-2 or degree-3 vertex in the figure indeed represents
a vertex of the complex incident to all adjacent edges shown. By contrast, a lattice point that
appears to be a degree-4 vertex actually represents two distinct degree-2 vertices that overlap under
the embedding. Equivalently, the two lines crossing at such a point are not connected in the complex.




   Figure 12: The first two iterations for ℓ = 4, showing C(0) , C(1) = RRep (C(0) ), C(2) = RPar (C(1) ).



                                                     71
6.1.3   Proof of embedding
By construction, the embedding I(i) at each level i satisfies the following basic property.
Claim 6.2. Each vertex is mapped to a point of Z2 , and each edge is mapped to a unit-length segment
joining two adjacent lattice points.
   We use the following lemma to control possible overlaps in the embedding. It will be used later to
prove locality and bounded density.
Lemma 6.3. No two distinct edges of X(i) are mapped by I(i) to the same edge of the integer lattice.
Proof. We say that a lattice segment has coordinate a if it is contained in a lattice line of the form
x = a or y = a. For example, the segment (a, b) − (a, b + 1) has coordinate a.
   We prove the statement by induction on i. The base case i = 0 holds by construction. Assume
that the statement holds for X(i) . We show it also holds for
                                           ′       ′
                                                                    
                               X(i+1) = X(i)  ⊔ X(i),copy ⊔ X(i),cyl /∼.                         (241)
   By construction, the three pieces occupy disjoint coordinate classes:
   • edges of X(i)
               ′ are mapped to lattice segments with coordinate congruent to 0 (mod ℓ),


   • edges of X(i),copy
               ′        are mapped to lattice segments with coordinate congruent to 1 (mod ℓ),
   • edges of X(i),cyl are mapped to lattice segments with coordinate congruent to one of 2, 3, . . . , ℓ−1
     (mod ℓ).
Thus, edges belonging to different pieces cannot be mapped to the same lattice segment.
    It remains to rule out overlaps within each of the three pieces. For X(i)       ′ , this follows from the

induction hypothesis: scaling and subdivision replace each edge of X(i) by a chain of distinct lattice
                                               ′
segments. The same argument applies to X(i),copy     , since translation preserves this property.
    It remains to consider X(i),cyl . Each edge of X(i),cyl is associated with an edge of X(i) . For example,
if an edge of X(i) is mapped to the lattice segment (a, b) − (a + 1, b), then the corresponding edges of
X(i),cyl are
                        {(ℓa + m, ℓb) − (ℓa + m, ℓb + 1) : m ∈ {2, 3, . . . , ℓ − 1}}.
These lattice segments are disjoint.
   Moreover, edges of X(i),cyl associated with different edges of X(i) are supported in disjoint rectan-
gular regions. Indeed, the edges associated with a horizontal segment (a, b) − (a + 1, b) are contained
in
                                        (1, ℓ) × (0, 1) + (ℓa, ℓb),
and the edges associated with a vertical segment (a, b) − (a, b + 1) are contained in
                                          (0, 1) × (1, ℓ) + (ℓa, ℓb).
These regions are disjoint over (a, b) ∈ Z2 . Thus, no two distinct edges of X(i),cyl map to the same
lattice segment. This completes the induction.
Corollary 6.4. I(i) is a (4, 1)-embedding of X(i) in R2 . In particular, every open disk of diameter 1
in R2 intersects at most 4 edges of the image of X(i) and adjacent 0-cells are mapped to points with
distance at most 1.
Proof. Locality follows since each edge of X(i) is mapped to a unit-length segment. Since each lattice
edge is the image of at most one edge of X(i) , it follows that every open disk of diameter 1 intersects
at most 4 edges.

                                                      72
6.1.4   Properties of the code
In the previous subsubsection, we showed that C(X(i) , F(i) , I(i) ) is a geometrically local classical code
in R2 . In this subsubsection, we discuss its code properties including the codewords and the code
associated with HiT .
    One property of C(X, F, I) is that it has codewords that appear at different scales. In particular,
iterations C(i) = RRep (C(i) ) do not change the number of codewords. However, iterations C(i) =
RPar (C(i) ) add new local codewords. Thus, after many iterations, C(2k) will have codewords at many
scales that were introduced by parity iterations. None of these smaller codewords should have a long
memory lifetime, but larger codewords should. However, to define the encoded bit for the larger
codewords, one must treat the smaller codewords as “gauge codewords” of a subsystem code, which
is discussed further in App. C.
    Now, we determine the properties of the transpose code. Let H be the parity-check matrix of the
code C(X, F, I). As discussed in Section 2.4 the code associated with the parity-check matrix H T
shares all of its properties with C(X, F ⊥ , I) up to constant factors, where F ⊥ is the sheaf obtained
from F by setting Fv⊥ = (Fv )⊥ for each vertex v. In our construction, this operation corresponds to
exchanging the black and white coloring, while leaving all other data unchanged.

6.1.5   Discussion of self-correction
We briefly sketch the argument for the exponential scaling of the memory lifetime. We do not provide
a full proof; however, it is very similar to the analysis for the quantum code with random embedding.
As in Section 4, we construct two decoders, one for RRep and one for RPar . Each decoder is built from
coarse-graining maps that take a syndrome σi at level i to a syndrome σi−1 at level i − 1, together with
a correction fi . These coarse-graining maps again satisfy syndrome reduction and local computability.
    For the code C(X, F , I), we have:

   • for RPar , |σi−1 | ≤ |σi |;

   • for RRep , |σi−1 | ≤ 21 |σi |.

For the code C(X, F ⊥ , I), we have:

   • for RPar , |σi−1 | ≤ 21 |σi |;

   • for RRep , |σi−1 | ≤ |σi |.

This guarantees that after an RRep iteration followed by an RPar iteration, the syndrome weight
contracts by a constant factor:
                                                      1
                                             |σi−2 | ≤ |σi |.                                     (242)
                                                      2
These coarse-graining maps are then incorporated into the decoding graph to define witnesses, and
the remainder of the analysis (i.e. constructing the decoding graph, witness subgraph, and the Peierls
argument) proceeds analogously to that of Section 5.
    There are two main differences. One of them lies in the explicit description of the coarse-graining
maps. Since the present construction is formulated in the sheaf-theoretic setting, a fully rigorous
treatment would require translating the earlier framework into this language. This translation is
largely cosmetic and notational, and we do not pursue it here. Starting from σi , in contrast to the
construction in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3, we clean the syndrome within a ladder-like region. This


                                                    73
is the reason for choosing ℓ = 4, which corresponds to a ladder with two rungs. If there are two
(or more) rungs, one can clean the syndrome from the interior ladder region without increasing the
syndrome weight. After this cleaning, the syndrome is supported on the boundaries of the ladder, i.e.
precisely on the vertices corresponding to those in Xi−1 , which allows us to apply the inverse map
F −1 to obtain σi−1 .
    The other difference is that, while the quantum code encodes a single logical qubit, the classical code
has a hierarchy of codewords at different scales. The RRep iterations are responsible for increasing the
memory lifetime of large-scale codewords, whereas the RPar iterations introduce new local codewords
at the smallest scale and do not increase the memory lifetime. To define an encoded bit we must treat
the small codewords as “gauge codewords”, borrowing terminology from subsystem codes (see also
App. C).

6.2     Quantum code
We now describe the quantum code construction with an explicit embedding. Intuitively, it can be
viewed as a one-dimension-higher generalization of the classical construction, but with a more involved
refinement step. As before, the code is obtained by alternating between RX and RZ iterations.

6.2.1    Notation and framework
In this section, we specialize to the case of 2-dimensional sheaf codes, where a geometrically local code
Q(X, F, I) is defined by the following data:
  1. A 2-dimensional cell complex X, with vertex set X(0), edge set X(1), and face set X(2).
  2. Sheaf data F, which assigns to each edge e a color, either blue or red, whenever the face degree
     of e, i.e. the number of faces incident to e, is ̸= 2
  3. An embedding I : X → R3 .
   For an edge e, denote X≥e (2) to be the set of faces that contain e. If e is blue, then the associated
                   X   (2)
local code Fe ⊆ F2 ≥e      is taken to be a repetition code; for example, when |X≥e (2)| = 3, we set
Fe = {000, 111}. If e is red, then Fe is taken to be a parity-check code; for example, when |X≥e (2)| = 3,
we set Fe = {000, 011, 101, 110}. Edges of face degree 2 are treated separately: in that case, we set
Fe = {00, 11}, which is simultaneously a repetition code and a parity-check code. For this reason, we
do not explicitly assign a color to edges with face degree 2.
    As we will see, the embedding I is local and has bounded density. In our construction, each
vertex is mapped to a point of Z3 . Most faces are squares and are mapped to lattice unit squares,
with occasional exceptions given by triangular or pentagonal faces. The triangular faces are mapped
to degenerate regions of zero area, while the pentagonal faces are mapped to lattice unit squares.
Moreover, at most two faces of X can occupy the same lattice square upon embedding; most lattice
unit squares are occupied by exactly one face of X.
    We will use ℓ to denote the scaling factor at each iteration. While the construction is valid for all
ℓ ≥ 7, we focus on the case ℓ = 8.
    We use orthogonal projection for all 3D drawings in this section; interactive 3D renderings will be
provided in a future version of the paper. The triad in the lower-left corner of each figure indicates
the orientation of the axes and the unit length in each direction.
    The visual conventions are as follows. Translucent planes represent faces of the embedded square
complex. Edges are drawn with three line thicknesses: thick edges have face degree not equal to 2


                                                    74
and therefore carry nontrivial sheaf data (with the exception of the boundary edges, which can have
a smaller face incidence and still carry sheaf data); medium edges indicate potential attaching regions
(used for doubling) present in the subdivided complex X ′ but not in X; thin lines are only visual
guides marking creases between planes and do not correspond to edges of the complex.
    A black dot marks the origin of the local coordinate system in each figure. Unless explicitly stated
in the caption, colors are used only to distinguish different planes and structures, not to indicate sheaf
data. However, edge colors are chosen consistently with the local code, so that edges of the same
color carry the same local code. In particular, after the steps within one iteration, edges inherit the
local code of the corresponding same-colored edges from the previous stage. See Figure 13 for an
illustration.




                                                           (1, 0, 0)


                                    z

                                                1
                                        y
                                            x




Figure 13: Illustration of the pictorial conventions used in the figures, in particular the three different
edge thicknesses.

6.2.2   Construction overview
We begin with a finite-size code Q(0) and define two iterative procedures, RX and RZ . Analogously
to the classical case, this produces a family of codes

  Q(0) , Q(1) = RX (Q(0) ), Q(2) = RZ (Q(1) ), · · · , Q(2k−1) = RX (Q(2k−2) ), Q(2k) = RZ (Q(2k−1) ), · · ·
                                                                                                       (243)

Base case:    The initial code Q(0) is specified by the following data:
  1. The 2-cell complex X(0) is a single square.
  2. The two horizontal edges are colored blue, and the two vertical edges are colored red.
  3. The square is embedded in R3 as a unit square.
   It is clear that the corresponding code is nontrivial and encodes a single logical qubit.

Iterations RX and RZ :       Each iteration consists of two steps:
   • Refinement: X(i) 7→ X(i)
                          ′



                                                    75
   • Doubling: X(i)
                ′ 7→ X          ′      ′
                      (i+1) = (X(i) ⊔ X(i),copy ⊔ X(i),cyl )/ ∼

    During the refinement step, the geometry is modified from X(i) to X(i)        ′ , while the underlying

topological structure remains unchanged. This step consists of scaling, subdivision, and an additional
(deterministic) perturbation when necessary.
    During the doubling step, the complex X(i)   ′ is replaced by a new complex X
                                                                                     (i+1) consisting of two
             ′
copies of X(i) , together with a cylinder-like structure X(i),cyl joining them. One copy remains in place
                             ′
while the other, denoted X(i),copy  , is obtained by translating X(i)′ by the vector (1, 1, 1). The cylinder

X(i),cyl is formed by connecting X(i)  ′ and X ′
                                                 (i),copy with a collection of unit-width bands. The two
boundaries of X(i),cyl are then identified with the corresponding attaching regions in the two copies of
  ′ .
X(i)
    The two types of iteration, RX and RZ , differ only in the sheaf data assigned during the doubling
step. We therefore begin by describing the common geometric part of the construction, namely the
geometry X(i) and the embedding I(i) , and then specify the corresponding sheaf data assigned during
the RX and RZ iterations.
    Before going into further technical detail, we begin with three examples. The purpose of these
examples is to illustrate the basic mechanism before discussing the general construction.
    There are several possible ways in which a unit-square face of X(i) can change during one iter-
ation. We begin with the simplest case where no perturbation occurs in the refinement step. We
focus primarily on the interior structure of the construction. The boundary regions will have a more
complicated geometry due to their interaction with neighboring regions, as we will discuss later.

Example 6.5. We direct reader to Figure 14 for this example. The panels are ordered as follows: (1)
top left, (2) top center, (3) top right, (4) bottom center, and (5) bottom right.
    In panel (1), we start with a unit square in X(i) . In panel (2), after scaling and subdivision in the
refinement step, this square becomes an 8 × 8 grid of unit squares in X(i)     ′ . The candidate attaching

regions, later called candidate ribs, are the three vertical and three horizontal segments running through
the middle of the grid. In the doubling step, some of these candidate ribs are promoted to actual
attaching regions. They lie in the planes x = 3, 4, 5 and y = 3, 4, 5.
    In panel (3), we enter the doubling step. We form a copy of the subdivided complex and translate
it by (1, 1, 1). The figure now shows a portion of X(i)   ′ in orange and a portion of X ′
                                                                                           (i),copy in brown.
                           ′
The candidate ribs of X(i),copy are translated accordingly, so they lie in the planes x = 4, 5, 6 and
y = 4, 5, 6. Thus, the candidate ribs of X(i) ′ and X ′
                                                       (i),copy lying on x = 4, 5 and y = 4, 5 are separated
by distance 1 and are promoted to actual attaching regions.
    In panel (4), we connect the attaching regions at coordinate 4 and 5 by the complex X(i),cyl ,
shown in pink. By construction, this complex is contained entirely in planes x = 4, 5 and y = 4, 5.
Geometrically, X(i),cyl is a hashtag-shaped subcomplex extruded by a unit segment in the z-direction.
Note that the horizontal and vertical bands are identified at their intersection, rather than passing
through one another. In particular, the complex X(i),cyl is connected.
    Finally, in panel (5), we assign colors to the newly formed edges with face degree ̸= 2. These
consist of the attaching regions, i.e. the two hashtag-shaped subcomplexes, together with the four
segments contained in X(i),cyl . The color is determined by the type of iteration: blue for RX and red
for RZ .

   In the example above, the portion after refinement shown in panel (2) is obtained solely by scaling
and subdivision, and is therefore perfectly flat. In general, however, the refinement step may include
a perturbation, so this portion need not remain flat. Nevertheless, these perturbations occur only


                                                     76
                                                                         (1, 1, 1)           4 5 6
                                                3 4 5
      z                              345
                                                           =8                                      1
                            z              =8                        z               3 4 5
          y
              x                 yx                                       yx




                                                   4 5 6                                     4 5


                            z          3 4 5                         z                 4 5
                                yx                                       yx




                  Figure 14: The doubling step for a unit square in X(i) in the simple case.


near the boundary of the scaled square, so the candidate ribs can still be defined in the middle. We
illustrate this point with another example.

Example 6.6. We direct the reader to Figure 15 for this example. The panels are ordered as follows:
(1) top left, (2) top right, (3) bottom center, and (4) bottom right.
    In panel (1), we begin with a perturbed portion of the subdivided complex X(i)       ′ , occurring near

the boundary of the scaled square. The candidate ribs still lie in planes x = 3, 4, 5 and y = 3, 4, 5.
    In panel (2), we form a copy of the subdivided complex and translate it by (1, 1, 1). The figure now
shows a portion of X(i)   ′ in orange and a portion of X ′                                           ′
                                                           (i),copy in brown. The candidate ribs of X(i),copy
are translated accordingly, so they lie in the planes x = 4, 5, 6 and y = 4, 5, 6. Thus, the candidate
           ′ and X ′
ribs of X(i)         (i),copy lying on x = 4, 5 and y = 4, 5 are separated by distance 1 and are promoted
to actual attaching regions.
    In panel (3), we connect the attaching regions by the complex X(i),cyl in pink. By construction,
this portion of the complex is contained entirely in planes x = 4, 5 and y = 4, 5. Near the center,
X(i),cyl retains the form of a hashtag-shaped subcomplex extruded by a unit segment in the z-direction,
although there is now an additional perturbation near the boundary.
    Finally, in panel (4), we assign colors, as before, to the newly formed edges with face degree ̸= 2.
The color is determined by the type of iteration: blue for RX and red for RZ .

    In the example above, we see that because we choose the candidate ribs to lie in the middle of the
grid, perturbation near the boundary of the scaled square does not affect the general behavior of the
                                                                                    ′ occupies planes
doubling step. As we will see later, the perturbation applied to such a square in X(i)
with x ≡ −2, 0, 2 (mod 8) and y ≡ −2, 0, 2 (mod 8). This is why we choose the candidate ribs to lie
in the middle planes x = 3, 4, 5 and y = 3, 4, 5.

                                                                77
                              345

                                          3 4 5
                      2
                                                  =8
             z            2         2=6                              z
                 yx                                                      yx




             z                                                       z
                 yx                                                      yx




                               Figure 15: The doubling step with a perturbed scaled square.


    We now illustrate another type of perturbation, which explains the choice of the distance-2 shifts.
When a unit square is occupied by two faces of X(i) , scaling and subdivision alone would cause the
candidate ribs of the two faces to coincide. During doubling, the corresponding portions of the complex
X(i),cyl may create additional overlapping faces8 . This is undesirable: as the iteration proceeds, the
number of overlapping faces would grow without bound, so the resulting embedding would fail to have
bounded density.
    The solution is to perform a perturbation: we shift one of the scaled squares by distance 2 in the
z-direction. This shift is large enough to ensure that the corresponding portions of the complex X(i),cyl
are completely disjoint, as illustrated below.

Example 6.7. We direct the reader to Figure 16 for this example. The panels are ordered as follows:
(1) top left, (2) top center, (3) top right, (4) bottom center, and (5) bottom right.
    In panel (1), we begin with two copies of a unit square in X(i) , stacked on top of one another.
In panel (2), during the perturbation step, we shift one of the scaled squares by distance 2 in the z-
direction so that the two scaled squares no longer overlap. In particular, the two families of candidate
ribs become completely disjoint.
    In panel (3), we form a copy of the subdivided complex and translate it by (1, 1, 1). Note that the
                         ′ and X ′
four scale squares in X(i)          (i),copy are completely disjoint from one another.
    In panel (4), we connect the attaching regions by the complex X(i),cyl , shown in pink. Since the
shift between X(i)′ and X ′                                                    ′
                           (i),copy is 1, whereas the two scaled squares in X(i) are separated by distance
   8
     Technically, the additional overlap arises near the boundary and is not visible in the local region illustrated here. In
particular, this issue appears in the doubled T-junction configuration, as we will see later.


                                                             78
2, the two corresponding portions of X(i),cyl do not intersect one another. In particular, in this portion
of X(i+1) , each unit square is occupied only once.
    Finally, in panel (5), we assign colors to the newly formed edges with face degree ̸= 2, as in the
previous examples.


                                                                                           4 5 6
                                            3 4 5
                                 345
      z                                                              (1, 1, 1)
                                                2
          y                                            =8                                       1
              x         z              =8                        z               3 4 5
                            yx                                       yx




                                               4 5 6                                      4 5




                        z          3 4 5                                            4 5
                                                                     z
                            yx                                           yx




                      Figure 16: The doubling step for two overlapping squares.

   We summarize the key lessons from the examples above. We occasionally use the expression planes
with coordinates to mean planes whose relevant coordinate takes the specified values. For example,
planes with coordinates 3, 4, 5 refer to planes of the form x = 3, 4, 5, y = 3, 4, 5, or z = 3, 4, 5.
   • The doubling step is performed by first forming a copy of X(i)
                                                                ′ , denoted X ′
                                                                             (i),copy , and shifting it
     by (1, 1, 1).
   • The candidate ribs of the two copies in places with coordinates 4, 5 are separated by distance 1,
     which allows us to connect them by unit-width bands forming X(i),cyl .
   • The choice of planes with coordinates 3, 4, 5 for the candidate ribs in X(i)
                                                                              ′ keeps them away from

     perturbations near the boundary of the scaled square.
   • The perturbation shift the scaled structure by distance 2, so that no unit-squares in X(i)
                                                                                            ′ and
      ′
     X(i),copy are stacked on top of one another after the shift by (1, 1, 1).
    We have so far taken a bottom-up view by studying simple examples. We now take a top-down
view by listing the relevant local structures.
    The following local structure in X(i) have the property that, after scaling, they are already in a
form suitable for the doubling step, with no perturbation required. We refer to them as simple local
structures in X(i) , as illustrated in Figure 17:

                                                            79
        z                                  z                                z


            y                                   y                                   y
                   x                                   x                                  x



                       Figure 17: The three types of simple local structures in X(i) .


   • a lattice unit-length segment that is the image of a single edge of X(i) and is incident to at most
     three faces of X(i) ;

   • a lattice unit square that is the image of a single face of X(i) ;

   • a lattice unit-length segment that is the common image of two edges of X(i) , each incident to at
     most two faces of X(i) , such that the corresponding faces form locally flat sheets meeting along
     the segment.

   After scaling, these simple local structures respectively produce the following local configurations
                                ′ , as illustrated in Figure 18:
near the attaching regions in X(i)

                T-junction                          Glued cross                         Free cross



        z                                   z                                   z


            y                                   y                                   y
                  x                                    x                                   x



Figure 18: The three types of local configurations near the attaching regions: T-junctions, glued
crosses, and free crosses.

 (a) T-junctions, where an edge is incident to three faces (shown in red), with ribs running perpen-
     dicular to the edge (shown in blue);

 (b) glued crosses, where two ribs belonging to the same face intersect at a vertex;

 (c) free crosses, where two ribs intersect at a vertex in the embedding map, but belong to two
     distinct faces of X ′ .



                                                           80
    There are also more complicated local structures in X(i) beyond the simple types listed above.
These require perturbations during the refinement step. We mark such structures by enclosing them
in boxed regions; as described in the next subsubsection, there are four types of boxed local structures
that require perturbation.
    Finally, Figure 19 provides a schematic diagram showing how the local structures transform under
refinement and doubling.




            T-junctions                        1                  2




                                                                               T-junctions
          Glued crosses                        3                              Glued crosses
                                                                              Free crosses




           Free crosses                        4




                                             Simple


Figure 19: A schematic diagram showing how local structures transforms under refinement (in pink)
and doubling (in orange). The arrows indicate the transitions between different types of local struc-
tures under the corresponding gadgets. The circles labeled 1, 2, 3, 4 represent the four types of local
structures that require special treatment during refinement. The circle Simple represents the local
structure that is ready for doubling without perturbation. The rectangles represent the local struc-
tures near the candidate ribs.


6.2.3                             ′
        Refinement step: X(i) 7→ X(i)
Motivated by the examples in the previous subsubsection, we provide a formal definition of the re-
finement step. Recall that in the classical construction, the refinement step consists simply of scaling
followed by subdivision. In the quantum construction, however, additional perturbations are required.
These perturbations are performed inside the boxes prescribed by the doubling step in the previous
iteration.
    There are four types of local structures that require special treatment, each contained in a corre-
sponding box:
 (1) doubled T-junctions;

                                                   81
 (2) recursive T-junction-derived structures, generated by doubled T-junctions and recursively by
     structures of this same type;

 (3) doubled glued crosses;

 (4) doubled free crosses;

   For each of these four types, we specify a local perturbation gadget. The gadget modifies the
portion of the embedded complex inside the corresponding box, while leaving the complex unchanged
outside the box. It also specifies the candidate ribs that will be used in the next doubling step. The
perturbation gadgets are designed to satisfy the following requirements:

  1. They must only be supported in the corresponding box, so that the perturbations in different
     boxes do not affect one another;

  2. They produce only three types of local structures near candidate ribs: T-junctions, glued crosses,
     and free crosses (allowing also for subcomplexes of these types). This ensures that the next
     doubling step can be performed correctly;

  3. They ensure that the perturbed structure is supported only on planes satisfying

              x ≡ 0, 2, ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ),   y ≡ 0, 2, ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ),   z ≡ 0, 2, ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ),
                       ′
     so that the copy X(i),copy                                                                  ′ .
                                , shifted by (1, 1, 1), does not overlap with the original copy X(i)

    Before introducing the gadgets that describe the refinement step for each type of local structure,
we make a few general comments.
    For types (1) and (2), applying the corresponding gadget result in regions where there are still
complicated local structures. These regions are again contained in boxes, but importantly they are
precisely of type (2). Thus, they will be perturbed again in the next iteration.
    For types (3) and (4), applying the corresponding gadget results in a simple local structure, with no
complicated regions remaining. See Figure 19 for a schematic illustration of how these local structures
transform under refinement.
    A few general remarks apply to all of these gadgets. In each figure, the leftmost panel shows the
original local structure in X(i) , while the remaining panels show the corresponding subdivided and
perturbed structure in X(i)′ . Only the region inside the enlarged box, indicated by dashed wirelines,

is perturbed; outside the box, the structure is simply rescaled.
    In some cases, the local structure is too complicated to display clearly in a single panel, so we
split it across several panels. We use a consistent color scheme for surfaces and edges to indicate
the correspondence between X(i) and X(i)   ′ . Although the geometry is perturbed, the subdivided and

perturbed complex X(i) ′ inherits the local code (i.e. sheaf data) from X .
                                                                          (i)
    In most cases, the complex X(i) can be read off directly from the embedding because the faces
lie on lattice unit squares. There are, however, some exceptions in the local structures arising from
T-junctions. In these cases, some faces are triangles or pentagons; we discuss an example below.

Example 6.8. Consider the two gadgets shown in Figure 20. In each case, we list the faces in the
displayed portion of incident to path O − P − Q, which overlaps with another set of segments. We
group the faces according to their position relative to the path O − P − Q.
    For the panel on the left, corresponding to the doubled T-junction, the faces are as follows:


                                                   82
   • Above O − P − Q: O − R − Q − P and R − A0 − A1 − Q.

   • To the right of O − P − Q: O − P − D0 and P − Q − C1 − C0 − D0 .

   • Below O − P − Q: O − P − D1 − B1 − B0 and P − Q − D1 .

    For the gadget on the right, corresponding to type (1), where we zoomed in to the box near the
origin the faces are as follows:

   • Above O − P − Q: O − A0 − A1 − P and P − A1 − R − Q.

   • To the right of O − P − Q: O − P − C0 , P − Q − C1 − C0 , and C1 − Q − R − C3 − C2 .

   • Below O − P − Q: O − P − B1 − B0 , P − Q − B2 − B1 , Q − B4 − B3 − B2 , and Q − R − B5 − B4 .

   There are a few other cases in which non-square faces appear, such as the other box in type (1)
and the box in type (2). The faces in these cases can be determined by an analogous procedure to that
described above. In all of these cases, the non-square faces are either triangles or pentagons. Under
the embedding map, some of these faces collapse to segments, while the others are mapped to lattice
unit squares.



               A0 = (0, 0, 2)                    A1 = (1, 0, 2)
                                                                                             A0 = (0, 0, 1)             A1 = (1, 0, 1)         B5 = (2, 1, 1)
                                                                                                                                         R = (2, 0, 1)
                                                   Q = (1, 0, 1)                                                                                       C3 = (3, 0, 1)
               R = (0, 0, 1)
                                                                   C1 = (2, 0, 1)                               P = (1, 0, 0)  Q = (2, 0, 0)
                                                                                             O = (0, 0, 0)                                  B4 = (2, 1, 0)
                                                                                         z
                                P = (1, 0, 0)                                                                   C0 = (1, 0, 0) C1 = (2, 0, 0)       C2 = (3, 0, 0)
               O = (0, 0, 0)                       D0 = (1, 0, 0)
           z                                                     C0 = (2, 0, 0)               y                                         B3 = (2, 1, 1)
                                                 D1 = (1, 0, 0)                                         x
                y                                                                            B0 = (0, 0, 1) B = (1, 0, 1)
                                                                                                             1            B2 = (2, 0, 1)
                          x
               B0 = (0, 0, 1)                   B1 = (1, 0, 1)



Figure 20: Examples of the non-square faces appearing in the gadgets associated with T-junctions.
We slightly distort the position of some vertices to make overlapping vertices visible.


    Below we display figures showing all of the gadgets. The accompanying captions describe what
local structures they are responsible for and the sizes of boxes that surround them after subdivision
and perturbation.




                                                                                    83
                                                                                                      A0 = (0, 0, 16)
                                                                                                                                   A1 = (8, 0, 16)


                                   ( 16/7, 16/7)
                                                                                (8, 2, 8)                                                      Q
( 2/7, 2/7)                                                                                                                                          C1 = (16, 0, 8)

( 2/7, 9/7)                 ( 16/7, 8 + 16/7)
                                                                                (6, 0, 2) = 8
    z
                                  (0, 2, 0)                                                            P
        y     ( 2/7, 9/7)
              x                                    2                        2                                                                        C0 = (16, 0, 0)
                                                                                (10, 2, 0)
                                                       2
                                                        ( 16/7, 8 + 16/7)       (8, 2, 2)

                            z                                                                   z
                             yx                                                                  yx         B0 = (0, 0, 8)
                                                                                                                             B1 = (8, 0, 8)




                            z                                                                   z
                             yx                                                                  yx




Figure 21: This gadget depicts how a doubled T-junction is perturbed in the first step of one iteration.
On the right, the left panels depict the planes corresponding to faces in X(i−1)      ′                     ′
                                                                                           (orange) and X(i−1),copy
(brown), while the right panels depict the planes corresponding to faces in X(i−1),cyl (pink). Recall
                 ′
that X(i) = (X(i−1)        ′
                      ⊔ X(i−1),copy   ⊔ X(i−1),cyl )/ ∼, as obtained from the previous iteration. We use three
slightly different hues of pink to visually distinguish the three surfaces near this local configuration,
spanned by the paths A0 − P − Q − A1 , B0 − P − Q − B1 , and C0 − P − Q − C1 . The bottom panels
further show the candidate ribs.
    The key role of the gadget is to separate the double edges (overlapping blue and red edges) and
the degenerate faces that appear in X(i) . Two sets of double edges remain in X(i)             ′ . These are boxed

and will be subdivided and perturbed in the next iteration using the gadget in Figures 22 and 23.
                                   2        2            2     2       2     2
    The bottom-left box is (− ℓ−1     , 2+ ℓ−1 )×(− ℓ−1    , ℓ−1 )×(− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) shifted by (0, −2, 0). The upper-
                   2   2          2      2             2     2                                    2      2
right box is (− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 )×(− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 )×(−2− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) shifted by (ℓ, 2, ℓ). Since 2+ ℓ−1      ≤ ℓ−1  ℓ = 16/7,
                                                                                                  2           2
the perturbation and the newly induced boxes are contained in the scaled box (− ℓ−1 ℓ, (1 + ℓ−1                 )ℓ) ×
     2     2           2            2
(− ℓ−1 ℓ, ℓ−1 ℓ) × (− ℓ−1 ℓ, (1 + ℓ−1  )ℓ).




                                                                                     84
                                                                                     2 = 16


                                                      ( 16/7, 16/7)
               ( 2/7, 2/7)                           (0, 2, 0)
           _ ( 2/7,z 2/7)                           ( 16/7, 16/7)
                                                                      2                            2
                     y           ( 2/7, 2 + 2/7)                          2
                             x                                                ( 16/7, 16 + 16/7)
                                                                                                       (16, 2, 0)
                                                   z                                                                z
                                                    yx                                                               yx




                                                   z                                                                z
                                                    yx                                                               yx




Figure 22: This gadget depicts how a doubled T-junction is perturbed in the first step of the iteration
procedure, specifically with respect to the lower-left box in Figure 21. On the right, the left panels
depict the planes induced from X(i−1)    ′     (orange) from the previous iteration, while the right panels
depict the planes induced from X(i−1),cyl (pink) from the previous iteration. We use three slightly
different hues of pink to visually distinguish the three surfaces near this local configuration. The
bottom panels further show the candidate ribs.
    The key role of the gadget is to separate the double edges (overlapping blue and red edges) and the
degenerate faces that appear in X(i) . One set of double edges remains in X(i)         ′ . It is boxed and will be

subdivided and perturbed in the next iteration using the same gadget.
                            2          2            2     2         2     2
    The new box is (− ℓ−1       , 2 + ℓ−1  ) × (− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) shifted by (0, −2, 0). Since 2 +
 2        2
ℓ−1  ≤  ℓ−1  ℓ =  16/7, the perturbation      and  the  newly  induced   boxes  are contained in the scaled box
     2           2            2      2           2      2
(− ℓ−1 ℓ, (2 + ℓ−1 )ℓ) × (− ℓ−1 ℓ, ℓ−1 ℓ) × (− ℓ−1 ℓ, ℓ−1 ℓ).




                                                      ( 16/7, 16/7)
              ( 2/7, 2/7)                            (0, 2, 0)
           _ ( 2/7,z 2/7)                           ( 16/7, 16/7)
                                                                      2                            2
                     y           ( 2/7, 2 + 2/7)                          2
                             x                                                ( 16/7, 16 + 16/7)
                                                                                                       (16, 2, 0)
                                                   z                                                                z
                                                    yx                                                               yx




Figure 23: This gadget depicts how a doubled T-junction is perturbed in the first step of one iteration,
specifically with respect to the upper right box in Figure 21. The structure is rotated so that it appears
nearly identical to the previous gadget. Candidate ribs are not drawn, but they are the same as in
the previous figure.
   As before, the key role of the gadget is to separate the double edges (overlapping blue and red
edges) and the degenerate faces that appear in X(i) . One set of double edges remains in X(i)     ′ . It is

boxed and will be subdivided and perturbed in the next iteration using the same gadget.
   Similarly, the perturbation and the newly induced boxes are contained in the scaled box.


                                                                                                         85
                                           ( 16/7, 16/7)


       ( 2/7, 2/7)

      ( 2/7, 9/7)                   ( 16/7, 8 + 16/7)
                                                                                      =8
          z
                 y ( 2/7, 2/7)
                      x                                                2

                                                        ( 16/7, 16/7)


                                  z                                                             z
                                   yx                                                            yx



Figure 24: This gadget depicts how a doubled glued cross is perturbed in the first step of the iteration
procedure. The panels on the right depict the structure with and without the candidate ribs. The key
role of the gadget is to separate the edge incident to four faces into two edges, each incident to three
                      2
faces. Because 2 < ℓ−1  ℓ = 16/7, the perturbation is contained in the scaled box.




                                       ( 16/7, 16/7)


     ( 2/7, 2/7)

     ( 2/7, 9/7)                 ( 16/7, 8 + 16/7)
                                                                                           =8
         z

             y     ( 2/7, 9/7)                          2
                   x                                                            2 2
                                                            ( 16/7, 8 + 16/7)

                                 z
                                  yx




                                 z                                                              z
                                  yx                                                             yx




Figure 25: This gadget depicts how a doubled free cross is perturbed in the first step of the iteration
procedure. The panels on the right depict the structure with and without the candidate ribs. The
candidate ribs are shown in two separate panels to better illustrate the structure. The key role of the
                                                                       2
gadget is to separate double faces that appear in X(i) . Because 2 < ℓ−1  ℓ = 16/7, the perturbation is
contained in the scaled box.

                                                                                      86
                         ′ 7→ X          ′      ′
6.2.4    Doubling step: X(i)   (i+1) = (X(i) ⊔ X(i),copy ⊔ X(i),cyl )/ ∼

Starting from the refined complex X(i)′ , we form a copy, denoted X ′                          ′
                                                                    (i),copy , by translating X(i) by the
vector (1, 1, 1). We then connect the two complexes by the complex X(i),cyl , which consists locally of
unit-width bands running between the two copies. In general, the local configurations can be more
intricate, and the attaching regions need not be simple straight segments. These more intricate local
configurations are the focus of this subsubsection.
         ′ the candidate ribs lie in the planes
    In X(i)

        x = 3, 4, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   y = 3, 4, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   z = 3, 4, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ).
                        ′
In the translated copy X(i),copy , the candidate ribs lie in the planes

        x = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ),   y = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ),   z = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 2   (mod ℓ).

The doubling step promotes compatible candidate ribs to ribs, which serve as the actual attaching
regions, and connects them using X(i),cyl . By construction, X(i),cyl is entirely contained in the planes

        x = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   y = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   z = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ).
                                                                ′ whose doubling requires special
    There are three types of local structures near the ribs in X(i)
attention:

 (a) T-junctions, located at edges of face degree 3;

 (b) glued crosses, located near the center of the scaled square, as seen in the examples in the overview;

 (c) free crosses, located near the boundary of the scaled square, where the routing of the perturbation
     gadget produces two ribs lying in distinct orthogonal planes whose images intersect.

    For each of these three types, we specify a local doubling gadget. The gadget describes the local
                                                                 ′ . It also specifies the boxed region
structure of X(i),cyl near the corresponding local structure in X(i)
indicating where perturbations will occur in the next refinement step. The doubling gadgets are
designed to satisfy the following requirements:

  1. If the rib is in the plane x = x0 then the support of X(i),cyl in the gadget is also in same plane
     x = x0 . The possible planes are

           x = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   y = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ),   z = 4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3   (mod ℓ).

  2. They result in boxes marking any local structures beyond T-junctions, glued crosses, and free
     crosses that would arise under simple rescaling without perturbation. The perturbations in the
     next refinement step are contained within scaled versions of these boxes;

  3. They ensure that the boxes are disjoint, so that the perturbations in the next refinement step
     do not interfere with one another.

    Below we display figures showing all of the gadgets. The accompanying captions describe the local
structures handled by each gadget and the sizes of the boxes placed around the degenerate features
that appear after doubling.

                                                         87
                                                  A0 = (0, 0, 2)                   A1 = (1, 0, 2)

                                                                                        Q = (1, 0, 1)            ( 2/7, 2/7)

                                                                                               C1 = (2, 0, 1)
                                                                                                                ( 2/7, 9/7)
                                              O = (0, 0, 0)                             P = (1, 0, 0)
             z                                  z                                              C0 = (2, 0, 0)    z

                 y                                     y                                                              y            ( 2/7, 9/7)
                         x                                   x                                                                 x
                                                   B0 = (0, 0, 1)             B1 = (1, 0, 1)

Figure 26: The gadgets describing the doubling structure near a T-junction. The blue medium-thick
segments are the attaching regions for X(i),cyl . The complexes X(i)′ , X′
                                                                         (i),copy , and X(i),cyl are shown
in orange, brown, and pink, respectively. In the figure, we slightly distort the position of P to make
the two overlapping edges visible. In this neighborhood, X(i),cyl consists of three surfaces spanned by
the vertex chains A0 − O − P − Q − A1 , B0 − O − P − Q − B1 , and C0 − O − P − Q − C1 , meeting
along the red edge from O to P to Q.
   After embedding, the segments from (0, 0, 0) to (0, 0, 1) and from (0, 0, 1) to (1, 0, 1) each contain
                                                                                            2         2
two overlapping edges of X(i+1) . We therefore place a box around these segments: (− ℓ−1       , 1 + ℓ−1 )×
    2     2          2         2
(− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , 1 + ℓ−1 ).


                                                                   P = (0, 0, 1)
                                                                                                                      ( 2/7, 2/7)


                                                                                                                     ( 2/7, 9/7)

                 z                                     z                                                             z

                                                                   O = (0, 0, 0)                                                   ( 2/7, 2/7)
                     y                                     y                                                              y
                             x                                       x                                                               x

Figure 27: The gadgets describing the doubling structure near a glued cross. The blue medium-thick
                                                                 ′ , X′
segments are the attaching regions for X(i),cyl . The complexes X(i)   (i),copy , and X(i),cyl are shown in
orange, brown, and pink, respectively. In this neighborhood, X(i),cyl consists of four surfaces meeting
along the blue edge from O to P .
   To ensure that each edge is incident to at most three faces, we place a box around the edge OP :
    2     2          2     2          2         2
(− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , 1 + ℓ−1 ).

                                                  A0 = (0, 0, 2)                   A1 = (1, 0, 2)

                                                                                                                 ( 2/7, 2/7)
                                     C1 = ( 1, 0, 1)
                                                                                               D1 = (2, 0, 1)
                                                                                                                ( 2/7, 9/7)
                                     C0 = ( 1, 0, 0)
             z                                  z                                              D0 = (2, 0, 0)    z

                 y                                     y                                                              y            ( 2/7, 9/7)
                         x                                   x                                                                 x
                                                   B0 = (0, 0, 1)             B1 = (1, 0, 1)

Figure 28: The gadgets describing the doubling structure near a free cross. The blue and green
medium-thick segments are the attaching regions for X(i),cyl . The complexes X(i)  ′ , X′
                                                                                          (i),copy , and
X(i),cyl are shown in orange, brown, and pink, respectively. In this neighborhood, X(i),cyl consists of
two disjoint surfaces spanned by the vertex chains A0 − B0 − B1 − A1 and C0 − D0 − D1 − C1 .
   After embedding, the two surfaces overlap along a unit square. We therefore place a box around
                 2         2          2     2          2         2
this square: (− ℓ−1 , 1 + ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , ℓ−1 ) × (− ℓ−1 , 1 + ℓ−1 ).


                                                                         88
   Some configurations may appear as subcomplexes of a T-junction, such as the examples shown in
Figures 29 and 30. In this case, the same doubling procedure is applied to the relevant subcomplex.




                        z                                z

                            y                                y
                                x                                x




Figure 29: A subcomplex of a T-junction. Compared with Figure 26, only one of the three surfaces
in X(i),cyl is retained, namely the surface spanned by the vertex chain A0 − O − P − Q − A1 . The box
is technically not necessary since no degeneracy occurs. Nevertheless, for uniformity of the proof, and
to avoid introducing an additional gadget, we still treat it as a subcomplex of the T-junction.




                        z                                z

                            y                                y
                                x                                x




Figure 30: Another subcomplex of a T-junction. Compared with Figure 26, only two of the three
surfaces in X(i),cyl are retained, namely those spanned by the vertex chains B0 − O − P − Q − B1 and
C0 − O − P − Q − C1 . Unlike in Figure 26, the corresponding edge here is not colored red because it
is now incident to only two faces. In this case, the sheaf data is defined implicitly as {00, 11}.

Sheaf data: It remains to assign a color to each edge of X(i+1) whose face degree differs from 2.
                                                                     ′ and X ′
There are two types of such edges. The first consists of edges in X(i)        (i),copy that do not lie in
the attaching regions. The second consists of edges in X(i),cyl introduced during the doubling step.
These include edges in the attaching regions, as well as interior edges of X(i),cyl , which arise in the
doubling of T-junctions and glued crosses.
    Edges of the first type inherit the color from the corresponding edge of X(i) . Edges of the second
type are, in most cases, colored blue in the iteration RX and red in the iteration RZ . The only
exception occurs in the doubling of a T-junction, where the edge along O − P − Q inherits the color
of the degree-3 edge of the original T-junction.
    This uniquely specifies the construction of the code Q(i+1) from Q(i) .

                                                   89
6.2.5   Correctness of the geometric construction and the proof of embedding
The correctness of the construction for X(i) , I(i) and the proof of locality and bounded density of the
embedding are closely related, so we will verify them together. The main goal of the proof is to ensure
that
   • X(i)
      ′ is supported on planes with coordinates −2, 0, 2 (mod ℓ),


   • X(i),copy
      ′        is supported on planes with coordinates −1, 1, 3 (mod ℓ),

   • X(i),cyl is supported on planes with coordinates 4, ..., ℓ − 3 (mod ℓ).
These congruence classes keep the three sets of regions separated and allow us to rule out unwanted
overlaps.
   More systematically, we decompose R3 into four types of regions, which will be analyzed separately:
                                                
   • W0 = [−2.5, 3.5] × [−2.5, 3.5] × [−2.5, 3.5] + (ℓZ)3 ,
            S                                                  
   • W1 =        perm [−2.5, 3.5] × [−2.5, 3.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5]  + (ℓZ)3 ,
            S                                                      
   • W2 =        perm [−2.5, 3.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5]   + (ℓZ)3 ,
                                                          
    • W3 = [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] + (ℓZ)3 .
      S
Here perm denotes the union over all permutations of the three coordinate intervals. Intuitively, the
regions W0 and W1 contain the perturbations performed near the boundaries of the scaled squares,
while the regions W2 captures the interior regions of the scaled squares, which we are already familiar
with from the examples in the overview.
    After the subdivision and perturbation step, inspection of the gadgets in Figures 21 to 25 shows
                              ′ are as follows (see the beginning of Subsubsec. 6.2.3 for the labeling
that the local structures in X(i)
(1)-(4) of gadgets):
   • In W0 , there are no ribs, but there may be boxes arising from gadgets (1) and (2).

   • In W1 , there are no boxes, but there may be isolated T-junctions and free crosses.

   • In W2 , there are no boxes, but there may be isolated glued crosses.

   • In W3 , there are no local structures.
   Each of the gadgets (1)-(4) is equipped with a box: we will say that these boxes are of type (1)-(4).
After the doubling step, inspection of the gadgets in Figures 26 to 28 shows the possible regions that
boxes in X(i+1) are located in:
   • In W0 , there are boxes inherited from X(i)
                                              ′ and from its translated copy X ′
                                                                              (i),copy . These boxes
     are of type (2). No additional boxes are induced by X(i),cyl .

   • In W1 , boxes are induced by the doubling of T-junctions and free crosses, giving boxes of types
     (1) and (4), respectively.

   • In W2 , boxes are induced by the doubling of glued crosses, giving boxes of type (3).

                                                        90
   Region             Boxes                             Ribs                   New boxes after doubling
    W0        From gadgets (1) and (2)                    ∅                        Need gadget (2)
    W1                  ∅                    T-junctions and free crosses      Need gadgets (1) and (4)
    W2                  ∅                           Glued crosses                  Need gadget (3)
    W3                  ∅                                 ∅                               ∅

                      Table 1: Summary of the behavior before and after doubling.

   • In W3 , there are no boxes.
   We summarize the behavior in the regions W0 , W1 , W2 , W3 before and after doubling in Table 1.
We now establish the key lemma for the induction. The proof proceeds by analyzing the four regions
separately.
Lemma 6.9. Suppose that X(i) and I(i) , together with the boxed regions, satisfy the following proper-
ties:
   • the boxes are disjoint;
   • the structure outside the boxes consists only of simple local structures.
Then the construction describe above is well defined. Moreover, X(i+1) and I(i+1) , together with the
new boxed regions, satisfy the same two properties.
Proof. By the induction hypothesis, the boxes are disjoint. Thus, the perturbations in the refinement
step can be performed independently, so the complex X(i)   ′ is well defined.

    For the doubling step to be well defined, we must verify that local structures near the attaching
              ′ are T-junctions, glued crosses, or free crosses.
regions of X(i)
    We first check this outside the scaled boxes coming from X(i) . By the induction hypothesis, the
structure outside the boxes in X(i) consists only of simple local structures. After scaling, these simple
local structures produce only T-junctions, glued crosses, or free crosses near the attaching regions.
    We now check this inside the scaled boxes. By inspecting the perturbation gadgets in Figures 21
to 25, we verify that the local structures near the attaching regions are again T-junctions, glued
crosses, or free crosses.
    Therefore, the doubling step can be defined by specifying the doubling gadgets for these three
types of local structures, and hence X(i+1) is well defined.
    We verify the two properties of X(i+1) one by one.
Claim 6.10. The boxes in X(i+1) are disjoint.

Proof. We verify that the boxes are disjoint in all four regions W0 , W1 , W2 , W3 . We use the shorthand
({−2, 0}, 0, 0) to denote the set of vectors (−2, 0, 0) and (0, 0, 0), and similarly for expressions such as
({−2, 0, 2}, {−2, 0, 2}, z).
   • For each component of W0 , [−2.5, 3.5]×[−2.5, 3.5]×[−2.5, 3.5] +(ℓx′ , ℓy ′ , ℓz ′ ), where x′ , y ′ , z ′ ∈
                                                                           

      Z, there may be a box of the form
                                                                           
                       2         2             2       2              2      2
                   −       ,2 +        × −         ,        × −          ,        + ({−2, 0}, 0, 0)
                     ℓ−1        ℓ−1          ℓ−1 ℓ−1                ℓ−1 ℓ−1
                                                                                          ′
      up to permutation of the coordinates. The corresponding box in the translated copy X(i),copy is
      obtained by shifting the box by (1, 1, 1). These boxes are disjoint.

                                                       91
   • In the component [−2.5, 3.5] × [−2.5, 3.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] + (ℓZ)3 of W1 , the boxes induced by the
     doubling of T-junction and free crosses have the form
                                                                 
           2         2           2           2             2       2
       −      ,1 +        × −        ,1 +         × −          ,        +({−2, 0, 2}, {−2, 0, 2}, z)+(ℓZ)3 ,
         ℓ−1       ℓ−1         ℓ−1        ℓ−1             ℓ−1 ℓ−1

      where z ∈ {4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3}. The other components of W1 are treated in the same way, up to
      permutation of the coordinates. These boxes are disjoint.

   • In the component [−2.5, 3.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] × [3.5, ℓ − 2.5] + (ℓZ)3 of W2 , the boxes induced by
     the doubling of glued crosses have the form
                                                                   
              2          2            2       2              2      2
           −     ,1 +         × −          ,        × −          ,        + ({−2, 0, 2}, y, z) + (ℓZ)3 ,
             ℓ−1       ℓ−1          ℓ−1 ℓ−1                ℓ−1 ℓ−1

      where y, z ∈ {4, 5, ..., ℓ − 3}. The other components of W2 are treated in the same way, up to
      permutation of the coordinates. These boxes are disjoint.

   • In W3 , there are no boxes.



Claim 6.11. The structure outside of the boxes in X(i+1) consists only of simple local structures.
   Recall that the simple local structures consist of one square type and two for segment types:

   • a lattice unit square that is the image of a single face of X(i+1) ;

   • a lattice unit-length segment that is the image of a single edge of X(i+1) and is incident to at
     most three faces of X(i+1) ;

   • a lattice unit-length segment that is the common image of two edges of X(i+1) , each incident to
     at most two faces of X(i+1) , such that the corresponding faces form locally flat sheets meeting
     along the segment.

Proof. We verify the claim in all four regions W0 , W1 , W2 , W3 .

   • In W0 , the structure consists of the portions of X(i)
                                                         ′ and X ′                          ′
                                                                 (i),copy . First consider X(i) by itself,
     ignoring the translated copy. By inspecting the gadgets in Figures 21 to 25, we verify that,
     outside of the boxed regions, each lattice unit square is occupied at most once, and that each
     lattice unit-length segment is one of the two permissible types. The same statement holds for
                            ′
     the translated copy X(i),copy considered by itself.
         It remains to rule out unwanted overlaps between the two copies: namely that a lattice unit
                                   ′ and once by X ′
      square is occupied once by X(i)                (i),copy , or that a lattice unit-length segment is
      occupied once by each copy in a way not covered by the two types.
                                                                       ′ have coordinates in {−2, 0, 2},
        The first possibility cannot occur, since the unit squares in X(i)
                                     ′
      whereas the unit squares in X(i),copy have coordinates in {−1, 1, 3}.
          The only possible overlaps occur along lattice unit-length segments, and in this case the
      corresponding faces form locally flat sheets meeting along the segment. Hence these overlaps are
      of the last type listed above.

                                                    92
   • In W1 , the structure is formed by doubling of T-junction and free crosses. By inspecting the
     gadgets in Figures 26 and 28, we verify that, outside of the boxed regions, each lattice unit
     square is occupied at most once, and that each lattice unit-length segment is one of the two
     permissible types.

   • In W2 , the structure is formed by doubling of glued crosses. By inspecting the gadget in Fig-
     ure 27, we verify that, outside of the boxed regions, each lattice unit square is occupied at most
     once, and that each lattice unit-length segment is one of the two permissible types.

   • In W3 , there are no faces or edges.



This proves the Lemma.

Corollary 6.12. The code family we constructed above is well defined.
    Furthermore, I(i) is a (30, 1)-embedding of X(i) in R3 . In particular, every open ball of diameter 1
in R3 intersects at most 30 faces of the image of X(i) and adjacent 0-cells are mapped to points with
distance at most 1.

Proof. It is straightforward to check that the initial code Q(0) contains only simple local structures,
so the base case of the induction is satisfied. The induction step is verified by Theorem 6.9. Hence
the code family is well defined.
    Since the construction is well-defined, geometric locality follows immediately: each edge of X(i) is
mapped to a unit-length segment or collapsed to a point, so adjacent 0-cells are mapped to points at
distance at most 1.
    It remains to verify bounded density. Outside the boxed regions, Theorem 6.11, implies that each
lattice square is the image of at most one face of X(i) . Inside the boxed regions, the disjointness of the
boxes, established in Theorem 6.10, allows us to analyze each box independently. The gadgets show
that each lattice unit square inside a box is the image of at most two nondegenerate faces of X(i) . In
addition, there is at most one degenerate face supported on each lattice unit-length segment.
    Since every open ball of diameter 1 intersects at most 12 lattice unit squares and at most 6 lattice
unit-length segments, it follows that every such ball intersects at most 2 × 12 + 6 = 30 faces of the
image of X(i) .

6.2.6   Discussion of self-correction
We briefly sketch the argument for the exponential scaling of the memory lifetime, which follows closely
with proof in the construction with random embedding. As in Section 4, we construct two decoders,
one for RX and one for RZ . Each decoder is built from coarse-graining maps that take a syndrome
σi at level i to a syndrome σi−1 at level i − 1, together with a correction fi . These coarse-graining
maps again satisfy syndrome reduction and local computability.
    In particular, for the code Q(X, F, I), we have:

   • for RZ , |σi−1 | ≤ |σi |;

   • for RX , |σi−1 | ≤ 21 |σi |.

For the code Q(X, F ⊥ , I), we have:


                                                    93
    • for RZ , |σi−1 | ≤ 12 |σi |;

    • for RX , |σi−1 | ≤ |σi |.

    These coarse-graining maps are then incorporated into the decoding graph to define witnesses, and
the remainder of the analysis (i.e. constructing the decoding graph, witness subgraph, and the Peierls
argument) proceeds analogously to that of Section 5.
    There are two main differences. The first lies in the explicit description of the coarse-graining
maps. Starting from a syndrome σi , we use a different cleaning strategy from those in Section 4.2 and
Section 4.3. Here the basic unit is the doubling of a square illustrated in Figure 14. This is the reason
for choosing ℓ = 8: the resulting unit contains two parallel horizontal ribs and two parallel vertical
ribs. Having two parallel ribs allows us to clean the syndrome from the interior of the unit without
increasing its weight, whereas with only one rib in each direction such a cleanup could increase the
syndrome weight.
    After this cleaning, the syndrome is supported on the boundaries of unit, precisely on the edges
corresponding to those in Xi−1 . We can then apply the inverse map F −1 to obtain the coarse-grained
syndrome σi−1 .
    The second difference concerns the symmetry between X and Z errors. In the earlier discrete
description, this symmetry is explicit. In the sheaf-code formulation, we instead use Poincaré duality,
as stated in Theorem 2.2. In particular, if we show that C(X, F ) is self-correcting against X errors,
then the same argument shows that C(X, F ⊥ ) is self-correcting against X errors. By Theorem 2.2,
this implies that C(X, F) is self-correcting against Z errors.


7     Acknowledgments
We thank Elia Portnoy for helpful discussions about embedding. ChatGPT 5.5 was helpful in improv-
ing the clarity of our manuscript. S.B. and M.D. were supported by the Walter Burke Institute for
Theoretical Physics at Caltech and by the Institute for Quantum Information and Matter, an NSF
Physics Frontiers Center (NSF Grant PHY-2317110). TCL was supported in part by funds provided
by the U.S. Department of Energy (D.O.E.) under the cooperative research agreement DE-SC0009919
and by the Simons Collaboration on Ultra-Quantum Matter, which is a grant from the Simons Foun-
dation (652264 JM).


Appendix
A      Explicit verification of the homological perturbation lemma
In the homological perturbation lemma, we start with the following data:

    • a chain complex (C, d),

    • a smaller chain complex (H, dH ),

    • chain maps i : H → C, p : C → H, and h : C → C[−1].

    These maps are required to satisfy

    1. pi = idH ,

                                                   94
  2. ip = idC + hd + dh,

  3. hi = 0,

  4. ph = 0,

  5. h2 = 0.

Conditions (1) and (2) say that (H, dH ) is a deformation retract of (C, d), while conditions (3)–(5) are
the annihilation conditions on h. Although the annihilation conditions are not always assumed, the
initial data can always be altered to satisfy them. If (3) and (4) fail, replace h by (dh + hd) h (dh + hd);
if (5) then still fails, replace h by hdh.
    We now perturb the differential on C by δ, so the new differential is

                                               d′ = d + δ,                 (d′ )2 = 0.                             (244)

   The homological perturbation lemma asserts that, under a suitable smallness condition on δ, this
perturbation transfers to H. In other words, there exist new maps

                                                   d′H ,       i′ ,    p′ ,       h′                               (245)

such that (H, d′H ) is again a deformation retract of (C, d′ ).
   The key intermediate quantity is the geometric-series sum
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                    Σ=         (δh)k δ = δ + δhδ + δhδhδ + · · · ,                                 (246)
                                         k=0

and the new data are given explicitly by

                 d′H = dH + pΣi,         i′ = i + hΣi,                     p′ = p + pΣh,       h′ = h + hΣh.       (247)

We will verify that the new data satisfy the 5 conditions above.
    To verify condition (1), note that the annihilation conditions hi = 0, ph = 0, and h2 = 0 kill three
of the four cross terms:

                                     p′ i′ = (p + pΣh)(i + hΣi)                                                    (248)
                                          = pi + pΣhi + phΣi + pΣhhΣi                                              (249)
                                          = idH                                                                    (250)

   For condition (2), we must show i′ p′ = idC + d′ h′ + h′ d′ . We compute each side and show they
agree. For the left-hand side:

   i′ p′ = (i + hΣi)(p + pΣh)                                                                                      (251)
       = ip + hΣip + ipΣh + hΣipΣh                                                                                 (252)
                                ′                                                          ′   ′               ′
       = (idC + hd + dh) + h δ(idC + hd + dh) + (idC + hd + dh)δh + h δ(idC + hd + dh)δh                           (253)
                                ′          ′               ′           ′
       = (idC + hd + dh) + h δhd + h δ + dhδh + δh                                                                 (254)
             ′            ′     ′    ′         ′       ′          ′           ′
         + h δdh + hdδh + h δδh + h δhdδh + h δdhδh ,                                                              (255)

where we used ip = idC + hd + dh and hΣ = h′ δ, Σh = δh′ .

                                                                  95
    For the right-hand side:

                   idC + h′ d′ + d′ h′ = idC + (h + hΣh)(d + δ) + (d + δ)(h + hΣh)                                 (256)
                                                                                       ′                   ′
                                            = idC + hd + hΣhd + h δ + dh + dhΣh + δh                               (257)
                                                                                   ′           ′       ′       ′
                                            = (idC + hd + dh) + h δhd + h δ + dhδh + δh .                          (258)

    Subtracting, we must show the remainder vanishes:

                          h′ δdh + hdδh′ + h′ δδh′ + h′ δhdδh′ + h′ δdhδh′                                         (259)
                                   ′           ′           ′                   ′           ′   ′   ′   ′
                           = (h δdh + h δdhδh ) + (hdδh + h δhdδh ) + h δδh                                        (260)
                               ′       ′       ′    ′              ′       ′
                           = h δdh + h dδh + h δδh                                                                 (261)
                           = h′ (d′ )2 h′                                                                          (262)
                           = 0.                                                                                    (263)

In the second line we used d2 = 0 and d′ = d + δ.
    Conditions (3)–(5) follow immediately from the annihilation conditions hi = 0, ph = 0, h2 = 0,

                   h′ i′ = (h + hΣh)(i + hΣi) = hi + hhΣi + hΣhi + hΣhhΣi = 0,                                     (264)
                    ′ ′
                   p h = (p + pΣh)(h + hΣh) = ph + phΣh + pΣhh + pΣhhΣh = 0,                                       (265)
                     ′2                    2
                    h = (h + hΣh) = hh + hhΣh + hΣhh + hΣhhΣh = 0.                                                 (266)

    It remains to verify that (d′H )2 = 0:

                               d′H d′H = (dH + pΣi)(dH + pΣi)                                                      (267)
                                           = d2H + dH pΣi + pΣidH + pΣipΣi                                         (268)
                                           = 0 + pdΣi + pΣdi + pΣipΣi                                              (269)
                                           = pdΣi + pΣdi + pΣ(idC + hd + dh)Σi                                     (270)
                                               ′                       ′
                                           = p dΣi + pΣdi + pΣΣi                                                   (271)
                                               ′    ′          ′       ′       ′   ′
                                           = p dδi + p δdi + p δδi                                                 (272)
                                               ′   ′ 2 ′
                                           = p (d ) i                                                              (273)
                                           = 0.                                                                    (274)


B     Deferred embedding proofs
Here, we will provide a proof of the following claim, which is used to show that there exists a per-
turbation inducing a (t′ , ℓ)-embedding in R3 . We refer the reader to the description of step 1 in the
random construction for the relevant notation.
Claim B.1. Given a fixed unit ball B ′ (1) ⊂ B(αλ), the probability that a 2-simplex in B(αλ) intersects
B ′ (1) after perturbation is ≤ Γ/λ for some constant Γ > 0.
Proof. To prove this (including the constants), suppose under perturbation, a 2-simplex σ with the
normal vector n̂ intersects B ′ (1). Next, consider all triples of points a, e, f such that: a is a vertex of
the 2-simplex, f is a point on the opposite edge, e is the closest point in B ′ (1) to f such that a, e and f
are collinear. Define d as the maximum length of line segment ef over all valid triples. For the vertex

                                                                       96
a that maximizes d, call Ca the corresponding cap and pa the perturbation vector on Ca . Construct a
plane P passing through pa with normal vector n̂. If we moved a by d′ n̂ or −d′ n̂, by similar triangles,
                           d
e must be moved by ≥ (2α+1)λ   d′ (in the direction of n̂) to be collinear with a and f . We would like
to determine how much a would need to be moved such that the 2-simplex no longer intersects B ′ (1).
This is achieved when a is moved a distance d′ satisfying (2α+1)λ
                                                              d
                                                                  d′ ≥ 1, or d′ ≥ (2α+1)λ
                                                                                     d    . The equation
describing P is n̂ · (x − pa ) = 0. Define the thickened plane Pt by |n̂ · (x − pa )| ≤ (2α+1)λ      d    . If pa is
replaced with a vector lying outside of Pt ∩ Ca (but inside Ca ), the simplex would avoid B ′ (1). The
area of Pt ∩ Ca is at most 4παλ (2α+1)λ  d      .
    If pa , pb and pc are vectors chosen in caps Ca , Cb , Cc , we want to bound the probability of the
corresponding simplex intersecting with B ′ (1), over a product measure µ = Unif(Ca ) × Unif(Cb ) ×
Unif(Cc ). Define 1(pa , pb , pc ) = 1 if the corresponding simplex intersects with B ′ (1) and 1(pa , pb , pc ) =
0 otherwise. Further define lab(pa , pb , pc ) ∈ {a, b, c} to be the label of the vertex whose position is
varied. Then
                                                                       1 X
             P[σ ∩ B ′ (1) ̸= ∅] = Epa ,pb ,pc ∼µ [1(pa , pb , pc )] ≤ 3                 1(pa , pb , pc )
                                                                              X
                                                                                                              (275)
                                                                      Q     pa ,pb ,pc :
                                                                             l=a,b,c
                                                                                       lab(pa ,pb ,pc )=l

where Q is the cap area. To compute the inner sum, suppose without loss of generality that l = a.
Then, sum over all pairs (pb , pc ) such that ∃pa : lab(pa , pb , pc ) = a. For such a pair (pb , pc ), the total
measure of pa satisfying 1(pa , pb , pc ) = 1 is ≤ 4παλ (2α+1)λ
                                                           d      by the above argument. Thus,
                                                                                (2α + 1)λ
                                                    1(pa , pb , pc ) ≤ 4παλQ2
                                     X
                                                                                          .                   (276)
                                  pa ,pb ,pc :                                      d
                               lab(pa ,pb ,pc )=l

                                  (2α+1)λ
and P[σ ∩ B ′ (1) ̸= ∅] ≤ 12παλ
                            Q         d   . The final step is to argue that this quantity scales like 1/λ.
                          2 2            α1
The cap area is Q = 2πα λ (1 − cos 2α ) where α1 λ is the arc length of the cap.
    Next, we need a lower bound on d. Any point y inside σ can be parametrized as y = θa a + θb b + θc c
with θa + θb + θc = 1 and θa , θb , θc ≥ 0. Consider such a point that is also in B ′ (1), i.e. y ∈ B ′ (1) ∩ σ.
Denoting q to be the point where the line through a and y intersects bc, we can write y = θa a+(1−θa )q.
Then, we have ∥y − q∥ = θa ∥a − q∥ ≥ θa γλ by the bound on the simplex width in Claim 3.5. By
definition of d, and denoting z the location of the center of the ball B ′ (1), we have

                                          d = max            min           ∥y − q∥.                           (277)
                                                    a,z y∈B ′ (1)∩σ,q∈bc

Because of the first maximum, we have θa ≥ 1/3, and d ≥ γλ/3. Therefore, there indeed exists a
constant
                                                     18(2α + 1)
                               Γ(α, α2 , α1 , δ) ≤            α1
                                                                 
                                                   αγ 1 − cos 2α
such that P[σ ∩ B ′ (1) ̸= ∅] ≤ Γ/λ.


C     A tensor product construction
In this appendix, we briefly discuss an alternative construction of a 3D self-correcting quantum memory
which is based on the tensor, or homological, product of two chain complexes associated with two
classical codes. We keep the discussion somewhat informal, but all the details can be made rigorous.

                                                              97
   Consider first the classical code introduced in Subsec. 6.1

                                         C(2k) = (RT ◦ R)k (C(0) )                                   (278)
                   T . Let Q
and call D(2k) := C(2k)     (2k) be the quantum CSS code associated with the homological product

                                                                   T
                                 Q(2k) := C(2k) ⊗ D(2k) = C(2k) ⊗ C(2k) .                            (279)

We claim that Q(2k) has self-correction properties after one specifies an appropriate “subsystem” en-
coding scheme. The need for this comes from the fact that the construction of C(2k) creates codewords
at many length scales. In particular, each RT step introduces many O(1)-distance codewords, while
each R step doubles the distance of existing codewords. For C(2k)    T , the roles of R and RT are in-

terchanged. Hence, the quantum code Q(2k) inherits small logical operators, and the logical qubits
associated with these operators cannot themselves be self-correcting. We therefore define a protected
subsystem by treating the small logical operators as “gauge operators”, borrowing terminology from
subsystem codes. The physical Hamiltonian is still the stabilizer Hamiltonian associated with Q(2k) ,
but the encoding and decoding are defined only modulo the small logical operators. Our claim is that
using this encoding scheme yields protected qubits whose X- and Z-type logical distances are both
large and whose memory lifetime is exponential (in a power of the system size) at sufficiently low
temperature.
    More formally, we express C(2k) as a two-term chain complex C1 → C0 , where bits label the basis
of the degree-1 vector space, and the checks label the basis of the degree-0 vector space. The number
                                                   poly(n)
of codewords of this code scales as H1 (C(2k) ) ∼
                                                = F2                                      ′
                                                           . We define an auxiliary code C(2k) , which is a
3-term chain complex:
                                          C2′ −→ C1 −→ C0 ,
where B1 (C2′ ) captures the space of all the small-distance codewords, which are now treated as gauge
degrees of freedom. Thus, we have H1 (C(2k) ′  ) = F2 . The generator of this homology class defines the
“large” codeword of C(2k) . One can then lower-bound the memory lifetime for C(2k) with this encoding.
In particular, one can show that the modified isoperimetric inequality

                                        |∂c| ≥ σ      min ′
                                                                   |c + b|η                          (280)
                                                   b∈B1 (C(2k) )

                                                                   T
for all c ∈ A1 and constants σ, η > 0 is satisfied. Since D(2k) = C(2k) has analogous properties, we can
                                          ′
define an analogous auxiliary complex D(2k)    and show an analogous isoperimetric inequality for D(2k) .
    We now describe the protected subspace of the product code. The Z-type logical operators of
Q(2k) are captured by H1 (Q(2k) ). By the Künneth formula:

                     H1 (Q(2k) ) ∼
                                 = H1 (C(2k) ) ⊗ H0 (D(2k) ) ⊕ H0 (C(2k) ) ⊗ H1 (D(2k) )             (281)

Consider first the first summand, H1 (C(2k) ) ⊗ H0 (D(2k) ). In the protected subsystem, we keep only the
                                                        ′
large codeword of C(2k) , replacing H1 (C(2k) ) by H1 (C(2k) )∼
                                                              = F2 . We must also isolate the corresponding
large class in H0 (D(2k) ).
    H0 (D(2k) ) is associated with the relations between the checks of the code D(2k) ; it turns out that
this code has a large poly(n) number of relations. To remove the “small” relations from the protected
subsystem, we extend D(2k)  ′  to a 4-term chain complex via:
                                      ′′
                                     D(2k) : D2′ → D1 → D0 → D−1
                                                              ′



                                                       98
where the part D0 → D−1 ′   removes all the small zeroth homology classes, leaving H0 (D(2k) ′′ ) ∼ F .
                                                                                                   = 2
            ′′                                      ′      ∼      ′′     ∼
We define C(2k) analogously. We also note that H1 (C(2k) ) = H1 (C(2k) ) = F2 , so we can use the 4-level
chain complexes in the context of subsystem encoding from now on.
   Collecting everything together, the protected Z-type logical sectors are
                         ′′
                    H1 (C(2k)          ′′
                              ) ⊗ H0 (D(2k) )∼
                                             = F2 ,               ′′
                                                             H0 (C(2k)          ′′
                                                                       ) ⊗ H1 (D(2k) )∼
                                                                                      = F2 .             (282)

The corresponding X-type protected logical sectors are defined via the cohomology
                          ′′
                    H 1 (C(2k)           ′′
                               ) ⊗ H 0 (D(2k) )∼
                                               = F2 ,              ′′
                                                             H 0 (C(2k)           ′′
                                                                        ) ⊗ H 1 (D(2k) )∼
                                                                                        = F2 .           (283)

Using the homology-cohomology pairing, together with the relation D(2k) = C(2k)  T , gives a nondegener-

ate pairing between these protected Z- and X-type sectors. Thus, the protected subsystem contains
two logical qubits. The remaining logical operators of the stabilizer code Q(2k) are treated as gauge
operators for the purposes of encoding and decoding.
    Having defined the subsystem encoding, we can bound the memory lifetime in the X and Z
logical sectors separately, as in Sec. 5. The main difference is that, although the Hamiltonian is the
local stabilizer Hamiltonian of Q(2k) , the decoder treats errors modulo the small logical operators.
Equivalently, the decoder corrects only the protected subsystem. Using the Peierls-type argument
analogous to that in Sec. 5 gives self-correction for the protected logical qubits. Though we were able
to formally prove this, the proof is quite lengthy, and thus we do not provide it here.
    We also claim that the random embedding technique from the main text applies to this construc-
tion. If ℓ is chosen sufficiently large, the code can be embedded in R3 . To see this, one can express
the construction of Q(2k) as a four-step construction geometrically similar to that in Subsec. 1.2.1. In
particular, Subsec. 1.2.1 explains the four-step version of the main construction, which consists of per-
turbation, subdivision, thickening, and degree reduction. For Q(2k) the perturbation and subdivision
steps remain unchanged; thickening and degree reduction steps are modified. Given the code Q(i) , we
obtain a new code Q′(i) after perturbation and subdivision; then, we perform the next steps.

     3. Thickening: The local patches of the surface code in Q′(i) are replaced by thickness-1
     slabs of the (1, 3)-type 4D surface code, with the additional boundary surfaces chosen to be
     “volume-operator” condensing. In the RX iteration, the volume-like operators are X-type;
     in the RZ iteration, they are Z-type. Thus, the thickening step increases the energy cost
     of either X-type or Z-type errors, depending on the iteration.
     In the RX iteration, this step corresponds to taking a tensor product Q′(i) ⊗ K, where

                                        K:      K 0 −→ K 1 −→ K 2                                (284)

     is the cochain complex of a single square face, with four edges and four corner vertices,
     equipped with the natural incidence maps. We then keep only the two-skeleton of the
     product complex, i.e. the terms of total degree at most 2.
     In the RZ iteration, we instead take a tensor product Q′ ⊗ K,e where
                                                                       (i)


                                       K
                                       e :    e −2 −→ K
                                              K       e −1 −→ K
                                                              e0                                 (285)

     is the dual cochain complex of K. We then keep only the terms of total degree at least 0.


                                                        99
The details of the degree reduction step also change, but the rough idea is the same. Recall that
the role of the degree reduction step is to restore the maximum edge and vertex degrees to universal
constants ze and zv ; this is done by removing some of the redundant checks and some of the bits
paired with checks in a way that preserves the total number of logical qubits in the code. In fact,
this removal can be simply chosen to remove some of the elements in Q′(i) such that this construction
identically reproduces the product construction.
    Finally, the parameters in the perturbation step can be chosen so that the construction is equipped
with a local and bounded-density embedding map I(k) : Q(2k) −→ R3 . Within the 4-step framework,
the analysis of the perturbation step is nearly identical to the one from the main text, and would
imply a (t, ℓ)-embedding map for the product code for constants t and ℓ.
    As a remark, because this construction contains many small logical operators, its perturbative
stability is a subtle question that we leave to future work. We hope that the protected subsystem
is perturbatively stable, in which case, from the physics standpoint, the code Hamiltonian could
correspond to an unusual gapless phase of matter. In particular, there are different encoding subspaces
at each level k, and a Hamiltonian perturbation can split the degeneracy associated with the subspace,
opening a gap of size exp(−O(k)) at level k.


References
 [1] Eric Dennis, Alexei Kitaev, Andrew Landahl, and John Preskill. Topological quantum memory.
     Journal of Mathematical Physics, 43(9):4452–4505, 2002.

 [2] Benjamin J Brown, Daniel Loss, Jiannis K Pachos, Chris N Self, and James R Wootton. Quantum
     memories at finite temperature. Reviews of Modern Physics, 88(4):045005, 2016.

 [3] Robert Alicki, Michal Horodecki, Pawel Horodecki, and Ryszard Horodecki. On thermal stability
     of topological qubit in Kitaev’s 4D model. Open Systems & Information Dynamics, 17(01):1–20,
     2010.

 [4] Robert Alicki, Mark Fannes, and Michal Horodecki. On thermalization in Kitaev’s 2D model.
     Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 42(6):065303, 2009.

 [5] Sergey Bravyi and Barbara Terhal. A no-go theorem for a two-dimensional self-correcting quan-
     tum memory based on stabilizer codes. New Journal of Physics, 11(4):043029, 2009.

 [6] Beni Yoshida. Feasibility of self-correcting quantum memory and thermal stability of topological
     order. Annals of Physics, 326(10):2566–2633, 2011.

 [7] Jeongwan Haah. Local stabilizer codes in three dimensions without string logical operators.
     Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, 83(4):042330, 2011.

 [8] Sergey Bravyi and Jeongwan Haah. Quantum self-correction in the 3d cubic code model. Physical
     review letters, 111(20):200501, 2013.

 [9] Karthik Siva and Beni Yoshida. Topological order and memory time in marginally-self-correcting
     quantum memory. Physical Review A, 95(3):032324, 2017.

[10] Jeongwan Haah. Commuting Pauli Hamiltonians as maps between free modules. Communications
     in Mathematical Physics, 324(2):351–399, 2013.


                                                 100
[11] Kamil P Michnicki. 3d topological quantum memory with a power-law energy barrier. Physical
     review letters, 113(13):130501, 2014.
[12] Elia Portnoy. Local quantum codes from subdivided manifolds, 2023. URL: https://arxiv.
     org/abs/2303.06755, arXiv:2303.06755.
[13] Ting-Chun Lin, Adam Wills, and Min-Hsiu Hsieh. Geometrically local quantum and classical
     codes from subdivision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16104, 2023.
[14] Dominic J Williamson and Nouédyn Baspin. Layer codes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16503, 2023.
[15] Shouzhen Gu, Libor Caha, Shin Ho Choe, Zhiyang He, Aleksander Kubica, and Eugene Tang.
     Layer codes as partially self-correcting quantum memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06659,
     2025.
[16] Dominic J Williamson. Partial self-correction in layer codes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09218,
     2025.
[17] Nouédyn Baspin. The Free Energy Barrier: An Eyring-Polanyi bound for stabilizer Hamiltonians,
     with applications to quantum error correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17356, 2025.
[18] Courtney G Brell. A proposal for self-correcting stabilizer quantum memories in 3 dimensions
     (or slightly less). New Journal of Physics, 18(1):013050, 2016.
[19] Alessandro Vezzani. Spontaneous magnetization of the Ising model on the Sierpinski carpet
     fractal, a rigorous result. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 36(6):1593, 2003.
[20] Ting-Chun Lin, Hsin-Po Wang, and Min-Hsiu Hsieh. Proposals for 3d self-correcting quantum
     memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.03115, 2024.
[21] Misha Gromov and Larry Guth. Generalizations of the Kolmogorov–Barzdin embedding es-
     timates. Duke Mathematical Journal, 161(13):2549–2603, 2012. URL: https://doi.org/10.
     1215/00127094-1812840.
[22] Stefano Chesi, Daniel Loss, Sergey Bravyi, and Barbara M Terhal. Thermodynamic stability
     criteria for a quantum memory based on stabilizer and subsystem codes. New Journal of Physics,
     12(2):025013, 2010. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/0907.2807.
[23] Sergey Bravyi, Matthew B. Hastings, and Spyridon Michalakis. Topological quantum order:
     Stability under local perturbations. Journal of Mathematical Physics, 51(9), 2010. URL: http:
     //dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3490195, doi:10.1063/1.3490195.
[24] Yabo Li, Zijian Song, Aleksander Kubica, and Isaac H Kim. Domain walls from SPT-sewing.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11967, 2024.
[25] Thiago Bergamaschi, Reza Gheissari, and Yunchao Liu. Rapid mixing for Gibbs states within a
     logical sector: a dynamical view of self-correcting quantum memories. In Proceedings of the 2026
     Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 3407–3422. SIAM, 2026.
[26] Anurag Anshu, Nikolas P. Breuckmann, and Quynh T. Nguyen. Circuit-to-hamiltonian from
     tensor networks and fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC ’24, page 585–595. ACM, 2024. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
     1145/3618260.3649690, doi:10.1145/3618260.3649690.

                                                101
[27] Xingjian Li, Ting-Chun Lin, and Min-Hsiu Hsieh. Transform arbitrary good quantum ldpc codes
     into good geometrically local codes in any dimension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01769, 2024.

[28] Andrew C Yuan. Unified framework for quantum code embedding.                Physical Review A,
     113(2):022438, 2026.

[29] nLab authors.    homological perturbation theory.     https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/
     homological+perturbation+theory, April 2026. Revision 13.

[30] David Aasen, Daniel Bulmash, Abhinav Prem, Kevin Slagle, and Dominic J. Williamson.
     Topological defect networks for fractons of all types. Physical Review Research, 2(4), Oc-
     tober 2020. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.043165, doi:10.1103/
     physrevresearch.2.043165.

[31] Uriya A. First and Tali Kaufman. On good 2-query locally testable codes from sheaves on high
     dimensional expanders, 2024. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.01778, arXiv:2208.01778.

[32] Pavel Panteleev and Gleb Kalachev. Maximally extendable sheaf codes, 2024. URL: https:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2403.03651, arXiv:2403.03651.

[33] Ting-Chun Lin. Transversal non-clifford gates for quantum ldpc codes on sheaves, 2024. URL:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14631, arXiv:2410.14631.

[34] Yiming Li, Zimu Li, Zi-Wen Liu, and Quynh T Nguyen. Poincar\’e duality and multiplicative
     structures on quantum codes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21922, 2025.

[35] Robin A Moser and Gábor Tardos. A constructive proof of the general Lovász local lemma.
     Journal of the ACM (JACM), 57(2):1–15, 2010. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/
     1667053.1667060.

[36] Robin A Moser. A constructive proof of the Lovász local lemma. In Proceedings of the forty-first
     annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 343–350, 2009. URL: https://dl.acm.
     org/doi/abs/10.1145/1536414.1536462.

[37] Karthekeyan Chandrasekaran, Navin Goyal, and Bernhard Haeupler. Deterministic algorithms
     for the lovász local lemma. SIAM Journal on Computing, 42(6):2132–2155, 2013.




                                                 102
