Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted
and Mean-Payoff Games
Bruno Loff #
LASIGE, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Mateusz Skomra #
LAAS-CNRS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, Toulouse, France

      Abstract
We devise a policy-iteration algorithm for deterministic two-player discounted and mean-payoff
games, that runs in polynomial time with high probability, on any input where each payoff is chosen
independently from a sufficiently random distribution and the underlying graph of the game is
ergodic.
    This includes the case where an arbitrary set of payoffs has been perturbed by a Gaussian,
showing for the first time that deterministic two-player games can be solved efficiently, in the sense
of smoothed analysis.
    More generally, we devise a condition number for deterministic discounted and mean-payoff
games played on ergodic graphs, and show that our algorithm runs in time polynomial in this
condition number.

    Our result confirms a previous conjecture of Boros et al., which was claimed as a theorem [18] and
later retracted [19]. It stands in contrast with a recent counter-example by Christ and Yannakakis [24],
showing that Howard’s policy-iteration algorithm does not run in smoothed polynomial time on
stochastic single-player mean-payoff games.
    Our approach is inspired by the analysis of random optimal assignment instances by Frieze and
Sorkin [39], and the analysis of bias-induced policies for mean-payoff games by Akian, Gaubert and
Hochart [6].
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Algorithmic game theory
Keywords and phrases Mean-payoff games, discounted games, policy iteration, smoothed analysis
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2024.147
Category Track B: Automata, Logic, Semantics, and Theory of Programming
Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03975
Funding Funded by the European Union (ERC, HOFGA, 101041696). Views and opinions expressed
are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union
or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can
be held responsible for them. Also supported by FCT through the LASIGE Research Unit, ref.
UIDB/00408/2020 and ref. UIDP/00408/2020.
Acknowledgements MS would like to thank Xavier Allamigeon, Stéphane Gaubert, and Ricardo D.
Katz for many useful discussions on mean-payoff games, policy iteration, and the operator approach,
for exchanging ideas about the problem of smoothed analysis, for their remarks on a preliminary
version of this paper, and for being a perpetual source of friendship and inspiration.


 1      Extended Abstract

1.1     A history of discounted and mean-payoff games
John von Neumann proved his minimax theorem in 1928, founding game theory by showing
the existence of optimal strategies in zero-sum matrix games. In 1953, Lloyd Shapley [75]
considered what happened if two players repeatedly played a zero-sum matrix game. The
overall game proceeds as follows. We have n states, and to each state i ∈ [n] corresponds
             © Bruno Loff and Mateusz Skomra;
                                                                                                      EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                      TC S




51st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2024).
Editors: Karl Bringmann, Martin Grohe, Gabriele Puppis, and Ola Svensson;
Article No. 147; pp. 147:1–147:16
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
147:2   Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


        a zero-sum matrix game Gi . At each round, the two players are in some state i ∈ [n] and
        play the corresponding game Gi , with each player simultaneously choosing an action out of
        a finite set of possible actions. The two players’ choice of actions determines not just the
        payoff, but also the state at the next round. This is repeated ad-infinitum.
            In these games, randomness is possible in two different ways. First, the state at the next
        round can be chosen stochastically, or deterministically, based on the current state and on
        the players’ chosen actions. This gives us two variants: stochastic games, and deterministic
        games, with the latter being a special case of the former. Second, the players’ choice of
        action can itself be pure (a single action), or mixed (a distribution over the possible actions).
            In an infinite game such as this there are two natural ways of determining the winning
        player. In the discounted variant, payoffs received at round t are multiplied by a discount
        factor of γ t (for some 0 ⩽ γ < 1), and we wish to know the total discounted payoff in the
        limit as the number of rounds goes to infinity. This is equivalent to saying that the game is
        forced to stop after every round with probability 1 − γ, and asking for the expected payoff
        at the limit. In the mean-payoff variant, we measure the liminf or limsup, as the number
        of rounds goes to infinity, of the average payoff received so far (i.e. total payoff divided by
        the number of rounds). Shapley [75] proved the existence of a value and optimal (mixed)
        strategies for the stochastic, discounted variant.
            Concurrently to Shapley’s work, Bellman [16] studied a class of problems which he termed
        Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). MDPs model decision making when the result of one’s
        actions can be partly random, and they can be seen as single-player variant of stochastic
        games. At each round, the player finds himself in a given state out of a finite number of
        states, and chooses an action. Depending on his choice he receives a payoff, and transitions
        to a different state. This transition can be either deterministic or stochastic. The player’s
        goal is to maximize the discounted payoff or mean payoff at the limit, as the number of
        rounds goes to infinity. Bellman provided a method to find an optimal pure strategy in the
        discounted variant.
            In both MDPs and in discounted games the optimal strategies can be made memoryless, in
        that the choice of what to do only depends on the current state i, and not on the past history.
        In the general case of discounted stochastic games where the players play simultaneously, the
        optimal memoryless strategies must be mixed. In the case of MDPs, the optimal memoryless
        strategy can further be made pure.
            As for the mean-payoff variant, Gillette [42] gave an example of a mean-payoff two-player
        game, where the players play simultaneously at each round, whose optimal strategies cannot
        be memoryless.1 With this in mind, Gillette introduced a turn-based variant of Shapley’s
        infinite game, where two players play in turns. At each round, the game is in some state i,
        and one of the players (depending on i) chooses an action, which determines the next state
        (stochastically or deterministically) and a resulting payoff. One player is trying to maximize
        the payoff at the limit, and the other tries to minimize it. Gillette claimed that turn-based
        two-player games have a value and that optimal strategies exist for both players which are
        both memoryless and pure. Gillette’s proof was actually wrong, but it was later corrected
        by Liggett and Lippman [60], so the statement is true. It also implies the corresponding
        statement for the mean-payoff variant of MDPs, as a special case.


        1
            In fact, it was only in the 1980s [63] that simultanous-move mean-payoff games were proven to have
            a value. For every ε > 0, optimal (not memoryless) strategies exist for each player ensuring that the
            payoff is ε-close to the value.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                        147:3


   A pure, memoryless strategy for such games is called a policy, and it is a finite object:
one can represent it as a finite function σ : States → Actions specifying the chosen action
at each state. In this paper, we will not concern ourselves with simultaneous two-player
games, and only consider single-player games and turn-based two-player games. We will use
the informal nomenclature “deterministic/stochastic single-player/two-player discounted/
mean-payoff game” to denote each of the eight variants of (non-simultaneous) games just
mentioned. Let us also use the term “discounted and mean-payoff games” to refer to these
games as whole.

1.2    Algorithms
The above results show that all eight variants have a value, and that optimal strategies
are policies, hence finite objects. It then makes sense to consider the algorithmic problem
of solving such a game: given as input a specification of the game with rational weights
(and with rational discount factor, if applicable), compute the value of the game, and
optimal policies for the players.2 The study of discounted and mean-payoff games has always
been accompanied by the development of algorithms for solving them. Most algorithms
for solving discounted and mean-payoff games can be broadly classified into three families:
value-iteration algorithms3 , algorithms for MDPs that use linear programming4 , and, of
particular importance to us, policy iteration algorithms.
    Policy iteration algorithms have been invented for solving all variants of games described
above. These algorithms maintain a policy in memory, and proceed by repeatedly modifying
the policy, so that its quality improves monotonically according to some measure, until it
can no longer be improved, at which point the measure must guarantee that we have found
an optimal strategy for both players.
    The first policy iteration algorithm was invented by Howard [52], and finds an optimal
strategy for deterministic (and some stochastic) Markov Decision Processes. This was
later extended by Denardo and Fox [30] to work on all stochastic MDPs. The method
was first extended to two-player mean-payoff games by Hoffman and Karp [50], and two-
player discounted games by Denardo [29], with later developments by many other authors
[70, 67, 25, 40, 69, 26]. A good historical overview with more technical details appears in
[3], where a policy iteration algorithm first appeared that can handle all the variants of
mean-payoff games. In the case of discounted games, an optimal strategy can be found in
                       1
time polynomial in 1−γ    [78, 47]. Otherwise, for mean-payoff games, or for discount factors γ
exponentially close to 1, no upper-bound is known on the number of iterations, significantly
better than the number of policies, which is exponential in the number
                                                                     √
                                                                             n of states. More
precisely, the best upper-bound on the number of iterations is 2Õ( n) [46, 48].

1.3    Policy iteration versus the simplex method
When one first studies policy iteration algorithms, one gets a sense of familiarity, as if policy
iteration algorithms are analogous to the simplex method for linear programming. The
intuitive sense is that the choice of policy plays the same role as the choice of basic feasible
solution in the simplex method, with a change in policy being analogous to a pivot operation.


2
  It can be shown that the value of such a game with rational weights (and discount factor) is a rational
  number of comparable size.
3
  The first algorithm ever invented was a value iteration algorithm [16]. For a modern value-iteration
  algorithm for single-player games, see [76], which contains a historical overview in Section 2. For two
  players see, e.g., [79, 54, 23, 13, 8].
4
  See, e.g., Chapter 2 of [37], or various sections of [68].



                                                                                                            ICALP 2024
147:4   Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


            In fact, in some cases, this analogy can be formally established. It is possible to express
        a MDP by a particular linear program, and in this particular case the connection is perfect:
        a simplex pivoting rule gives us a policy iteration algorithms for MDPs, and any policy
        iteration algorithm that switches a single node at a time gives us a pivoting rule for applying
        simplex on this particular program.
            As a result, many known counter-examples for the simplex method, showing that certain
        pivoting rules require an exponential number of pivots, were devised by first finding examples
        of MDPs for which certain policy-iteration algorithms need an exponential number of
        iterations, and then translating the counter-example to work for the simplex algorithm, by
        the above connection [38, 33].
            More broadly, it turns out that deterministic two-player mean-payoff games are exactly
        equivalent to tropical linear programming, i.e., solving systems of “linear” inequalities over
        the tropical (min, +) semiring. This was first explicitly shown by Akian, Gaubert, and
        Guterman [4], strengthening earlier connections between these problems that were made
        in the literature on tropical algebra (such as [40, 32, 58]) and in works on scheduling
        problems [64].5
            Furthermore, tropical linear programs can be reduced to linear programs over the non-
        Archimedean field of convergent generalized power series [31, 11].6 This characterization has
        been exploited to show that, if there exists a strongly-polynomial-time pivoting rule for the
        simplex algorithm, where the choice of basis element to pivot is semialgebraic in a certain
        technical sense (and this is the case for many pivoting rules), then the entire algorithm can
        be tropicalized, to get a polynomial-time algorithm for deterministic two-player mean-payoff
        games [10].
            The analogy between policy iteration and the simplex method is also seen in practice. The
        aforementioned counter-examples show that policy-iteration algorithms run in exponential
        time in the worst-case. And yet, various benchmarks have shown that policy-iteration
        algorithms are very efficient at solving real-world instances, both for single-player [41, 27, 59]
        and two-player games [32, 21]. This difference between worst-case and real-life performance
        is also what happens with the simplex method. And in both cases it begs the question: why?


        1.4    Smoothed analysis
        In the case of the simplex method, the generally accepted explanation was proposed by
        Spielman and Teng [77]. They have shown that, if one takes any linear programming instance
        max{c · x | A · x ⩾ b} of dimension n, and perturbs each entry of A, b and c by a Gaussian
        with mean 0 and standard deviation ϕ1 , then the simplex method, with a particular choice of
        pivoting rule, will solve the resulting perturbed system in time poly(ϕ · n) [77, 28]. It is then
        reasonable to expect the simplex method to work efficiently on real-world instances, since
        they incorporate real-world data which is prone to such perturbations. It was this result
        of Spielman and Teng that founded the area of smoothed analysis, where one studies the
        efficiency of algorithms on such perturbed inputs.


        5
          Stochastic two-player mean-payoff games, on the other hand, are equivalent to tropical semidefinite
          programming [14].
        6
          A linear program over such a field can be thought of as a parametric family of linear programs over
          R. It follows from the above reduction that deterministic mean-payoff games can be encoded as linear
          programs with coefficients of exponential bit-length. Such an encoding was first derived by Schewe [73],
          without reference to non-Archimedean fields.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                               147:5


    The question then naturally follows: are policy-iteration algorithms efficient in the sense
of smoothed analysis?
    Recent evidence seems to indicate that no, they are not. The first policy-iteration
algorithm for single-player games (MDPs), by Howard [52], determines for the current policy
σ : States → Actions, and for each state i of the game, if a local improvement is possible:
would a different choice of action at i improve the value of the game when starting at i, if
the game were to be played according to σ at every other state? The algorithm then changes
the action σ(i) at every state i where such a local improvement is possible, to the best
possible local improvement. This is sometimes called Howard’s policy iteration, or the greedy
all-switches rule.
    Last year, Christ and Yannakakis [24] showed a remarkable lower bound. They showed
            c
that 2Ω(n ) iterations are necessary on a certain family of stochastic MDPs (single-player
games), even when the payoffs are perturbed. In fact, the lower bound holds not only
probabilistically, where each payoff is independently perturbed by a Gaussian with standard
              1
deviation poly(n)  , but even adversarily, where each payoff is perturbed by any value within
      1
± poly(n) .
    It is surprising that such a bound can be proven at all. However, their result only holds
for stochastic games, and does not necessarily apply to deterministic games, where it has
been previously conjectured that Howard’s rule is efficient [49]. Also, this result shows that
a particular way of improving the policy, the greedy all-switches rule, does not give us an
efficient algorithm (in the sense of smoothed analysis). This is analogous to saying that a
particular pivoting rule in the simplex algorithm is not efficient, and does not exclude the
possibility that other ways of improving the policy might work.
    Exploiting any one of these caveats could in principle allow for a smoothed analysis for
policy iteration. Our main result exploits both: we show that for deterministic two-player
games, a slightly different policy-improvement method will be efficient, in the sense of
smoothed analysis.

▶ Theorem 1 (our main theorem). There exists a policy-iteration algorithm for solving n-state
deterministic two-player (discounted or mean-payoff) games played on ergodic graphs, which
runs in time poly(ϕ · n) with high probability, on an input where normalized payoffs in [−1, 1]
have been independently perturbed by a Gaussian with mean 0 and standard deviation ϕ1 .

    It should be emphasized that the lower bound of Christ and Yannakakis holds even for the
single-player case, and our result could be contrasted with theirs, even if we only had proved
it for the single-player case. However, our policy-iteration algorithm (our upper-bound)
works even for two-player games, which are much harder. Our policy-improvement rule is
similar to the greedy all-switches rule, except that the choice of switches is allowed to depend
on an additional parameter (a discount factor) which evolves over time.

1.5    Computational complexity
Our result should also be contrasted with the case of the simplex algorithm for linear
programming. Recall that we do know polynomial-time algorithms for linear programming,
it is only the simplex algorithm which fails to run efficiently in the worst case. However,
it should be emphasized that we do not know any polynomial-time algorithms for solving
two-player discounted or mean-payoff games.
    Indeed, solving one-player discounted and mean-payoff games reduces to linear program-
ming, so we have polynomial-time algorithms. But the complexity of solving two-player
discounted and mean-payoff games is one of the great unsolved problems in computational


                                                                                                   ICALP 2024
147:6   Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


                                                              SOPL = PLS ∩ PPADS             PLS
                              UP ∩ coUP      NP ∩ coNP

                                                                  EOPL
                                                                    =
              Det2PG           Sto2PG              Tarski          CLS
                                                                    =
                                                                                PPADS        PPP     TFNP
                                                                PLS∩PPAD
                ?         ?

              FP                      pUEOPL         UEOPL             PPAD                  PPA
            Figure 1 A hierarchy of NP search problems. Det2PG and Sto2PG refer to deterministic,
        respectively stochastic, two-player games. Arrows denote inclusion or containment. By inclusion of
        a search problem in the classes UP ∩ coUP and NP ∩ coUP of decision problems, we mean that the
        problem of deciding each bit of the unique answer can be computed in these classes.



        complexity, first posed by Gurvich, Karzanov, and Khachiyan [44]. For any of the two-player
        variants, the respective decision problem (what is the i-th bit of the value) is in UP∩coUP [56],
        and the search problem (find an optimal strategy) is in the computational complexity class
        UEOPL (Unique End-of-Potential-Line) [53, 35]. In fact it is in the promise version of this
        class, which we denote pUEOPL. Even within the class pUEOPL, the problem of solving
        two-player discounted and mean-payoff games seems to be only a special, simple case: the
        sought optimal policies can be obtained from the unique fixed point of a simple monotone
        operator. This places the search problem in the class Tarski. The two complexity classes
        pUEOPL and Tarski sit at the bottom of a large hierarchy of complexity classes [34, 43]. This
        hierarchy stratifies the broad class TFNP of NP search problems [55, 62, 66]. See Figure 1.
            In this sense, the problem of solving two-player discounted and mean-payoff games is the
        simplest known problem in NP, which is not yet known to be solvable in polynomial time
                             o(1)
        (or even in time 2n ). For any problem which is not known to be in P, one may ask the
        question: is the problem still hard on a random instance? Many hard problems have been
        conjectured to have this property, of being hard to solve even for a random instance. This is
        the case for SAT [74, 36] and subset sum [72], but also for other, not necessarily NP-hard,
        problems in NP, such as lattice problems [2]. There is a broad belief that natural problems
        which are hard, remain hard on random inputs.7 In contrast, our main theorem generalizes
        to show that solving deterministic two-player games is easy, for any sufficiently random input
        distribution.


        ▶ Theorem 2 (generalization). Consider distributions on n-state deterministic two-player
        discounted or mean-payoff games played on an ergodic graph, where each payoff is chosen
        independently according to a (not necessarily identical) distribution with mean in [−1, 1] and
        standard deviation ⩽ ϕ1 and with probability density functions satisfying f (y) ⩽ ϕ for all
        y ∈ R. (This includes, for example, payoffs perturbed by a Gaussian, or payoffs sampled from
        a uniform interval of length ⩾ ϕ1 .)
             There exists a policy-iteration algorithm which runs in time poly(n, ϕ), with high probab-
        ility, on games sampled according to any such distribution.



        7
            The distributions which are considered hard must be chosen carefully to avoid trivial cases, e.g. CNF
            formulas with too many or too few clauses, but there are often simple and natural distributions.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                           147:7


1.6      A previous approach and our approach
A first, naive attempt at proving Theorem 1 could proceed along the same lines as the
Mulmuley, Vazirani and Vazirani’s isolation lemma [65]. We think of what happens to the
game when all of the payoffs of all the actions are fixed, except for one, which is sampled
independently according to some distribution as above. Let us suppose that the free payoff
is for an action of some state i. As it turns out, when every other payoff is fixed, the value
of the game at state i is a piecewise linear function of the free payoff, and one can then
hope that it has few break points. If this were indeed the case, that there were only poly(n)
break points, one could then argue similarly to the MVV isolation lemma, to show that
approximating the random payoffs using O(log(n)) bits of precision is enough to isolate the
linear piece (in the piecewise linear function). From this it would follow that optimal policies
for the truncated payoffs are also optimal for the untruncated payoffs. One could then invoke
a pseudo-polynomial-time value-iteration algorithm [79] on the truncated payoffs, and this
would run in polynomial time.
    The conference version of the paper of Boros, Elbassioni, Fouz, Gurvich, Makino and
Manthey [18] outlines a similar proof strategy. Among other results, a result similar to our
Theorem 1 was claimed [18, Theorem 4.6]. Their proof works for the one-player case, and the
authors claimed, without a careful proof, that the two-player case also follows. This claim
was later retracted in the journal version [19].8 Indeed, it turns out that the two-player case
is significantly more subtle.
    In the one-player case it can be shown that for every action there exist at most n break
points, and hence an isolation lemma can be proven. One can then conjecture, for the
two-player case, a poly(n) upper-bound on the number of break points. As it turns out, this
conjecture is wrong. An exponential example can be created using the construction of [17]
that was also used in [12] to prove that interior point methods for linear programming are
not strongly polynomial. This construction gives us a deterministic two-player game with n
states such that, leaving the payoffs of all but one of actions fixed, as the free payoff varies
between −1 and 1, the value of the game is a piecewise-linear function with 2Ω(n) break
points.
    So what do we do instead? One natural thing to try is to show that the number of break
points is poly(n), with very high probability, for randomly-chosen payoffs. This could well
be true, and an argument in the style of the MVV isolation lemma would then follow. But
we were unable to show it.
    Instead, our results depend on a deeper analysis of deterministic two-player games. We
also prove an isolation lemma, but using an approach different to MVV. Instead of attempting
to isolate an optimal policy among all possible policies, we show that sufficiently random
payoffs, with high probability, isolate a Blackwell-optimal policy. Blackwell-optimal policies
are policies that arise in discounted games with discount factor γ close to 1. Blackwell-optimal
policies are part of a family of policies which are induced by an object called a bias. Not all
optimal policies are Blackwell-optimal, or even bias-induced. Nonetheless, every two-player
discounted game has a Blackwell-optimal policy [60]. Furthermore, there exist policy-iteration
algorithms for finding a Blackwell-optimal policy [57, 51] (that are inefficient in the worst
case).


8
    In their paper, the breakpoints are chosen so that between any two breakpoints the value of the optimal
    strategy and the value of the second-best strategy are sufficiently far apart. This works for the single
    player-case, but the argument we just presented, where we only keep track of the number of break
    points in the value function, is simpler and also works.




                                                                                                               ICALP 2024
147:8   Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


            We are then able to show that, if the payoffs are sufficiently random, then with high
        probability it will happen that there is a unique bias-induced policy, which must then be
        the Blackwell-optimal policy. Furthermore, from the proof of this theorem we devise a
        condition number ∆(r), associating a number in [0, +∞] to any given choice r of payoffs. The
        uniqueness proof generalizes to show that a deterministic two-player game with sufficiently
        random payoffs will have a small condition number (∆(r) ⩽ poly(n)) with high probability.
            This is a condition number in the same sense as the known condition numbers that govern
        the complexity of algorithms for solving linear equations, semidefinite feasibility, etc, and
        broadly measure the inverse-distance to ill-posedness (see [20]). Although, strictly speaking,
        our condition number does not measure inverse-distance to some set, it does have the property
        that ∆(r) is finite if and only if the game with payoffs r has a unique bias-induced policy,
                                                                             1
        and that every payoff r̃ ∈ B∞ (r, δ), within a ball of size δ ⩽ poly(∆(r)) around r, will also
        have a unique bias-induced policy. So, at least intuitively, we can think of ∆(r) as an
        inverse-distance between r and the set of games with multiple bias-induced policies.
                                                                                1
            Finally, it can be shown that, taking a discount rate γ ⩾ 1 − poly(n,∆)   (i.e., sufficiently
        close to 1), the only optimal policy is the Blackwell-optimal policy. We can then use the
        results of [78, 47] to obtain a policy iteration algorithm for finding the Blackwell optimal
        policy in time poly(n, ∆). This algorithm runs in polynomial smoothed time, because, as
        mentioned above, sufficiently random payoffs have small condition number. This includes
        any fixed choice of payoffs that has been randomly perturbed by a Gaussian.


        1.7    Related work
        There is not a lot of work on the complexity of discounted and mean-payoff games with random
        payoffs. Besides the papers of Boros et al. [18, 19] and Christ and Yannakakis [24], which we
        mentioned above, we only know of a paper by Mathieu and Wilson [61]. They do not provide
        an algorithm, but they analyze the distribution of the value of a deterministic single-player
        mean-payoff game (deterministic MDP) played on a complete graph with i.i.d. exponentially
        distributed payoffs. Our algorithm will also work on such a payoff distribution.
            A paper of Allamigeon, Benchimol, and Gaubert [9] analyzes efficiency in a different
        random model. The shadow vertex rule is known to be efficient on average under any
        distribution over linear feasibility problems, which is symmetric up to changing of the sign
        in each linear inequality [1]. Allamigeon et al. tropicalize this result, to show that a certain
        tropical analogue of the shadow vertex rule will solve deterministic two-player mean-payoff
        games in a bipartite graph in expected polynomial time, if the distribution over the payoff
        matrix is invariant under transposition (this is the tropical analogue of the above symmetry).
        In particular, if the payoffs of some given fixed input obey the same symmetry, their algorithm
        runs in polynomial time. Of course, in general, perturbed payoffs need not be symmetric in
        this way.

            It was a paper of Frieze and Sorkin [39] that gave us the first idea of how to approach the
        problem. Frieze and Sorkin analyse the gap between optimal and second-optimal assignment
        in the assignment problem, using a bound on the reduced costs of the associated linear
        program at the optimum solution [39, Theorem 3]. In the simplex algorithm, the reduced
        cost works as a gradient, telling us the improvement in the objective function obtained by
        changing the current basic solution in a given direction. Frieze and Sorkin show that, at
        an optimum basic solution of a random assignment problem, every reduced cost is large,
        which implies that there is a large difference between the optimum and second-best solution.
        This large difference implies that the optimum solution is stable under perturbations. In
        the case of deterministic two-player games, biases will play the role of dual variables, which
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                             147:9


allows us define an analogous notion of reduced costs at the optimal solution. We then show,
analogously, that, with high probability for a random instance, every reduced cost is large at
the optimum policy, which also implies stability. Our condition number is the (normalized)
inverse of the smallest reduced cost.
    Our analysis of discounted and mean-payoff games is based on the operator approach to
study these games. Using this approach, Akian, Gaubert, and Hochart [6] have previously
shown that a generic two-player mean-payoff game has a unique bias (which must then
equal the Blackwell bias). More precisely, they show that for any stochastic or deterministic
two-player mean-payoff game, the set of payoffs where the bias is not unique has measure
zero. We give a more precise version of this result, for deterministic two-player mean-payoff
games, by showing that the policies induced by the unique bias are also unique. This further
allows us the measure “how far from having multiple bias-induced policies” is a given choice
of payoffs.
    The operator approach was also used by Allamigeon, Gaubert, Katz and Skomra [13],
who define a condition number for the value iteration algorithm. Computer experiments
indicate that value iteration converges quickly for random games [14], which strongly suggests
that the condition number of [13] is small for random games, but there is currently no formal
proof of this claim. Even though our condition number and the one from [13] are based on
the bias vector, it is not clear how these two conditions numbers compare to each other.
In particular, we do not know if the value iteration algorithm has polynomial smoothed
complexity and we leave this problem as an open question.


    2      Technical summary

For the sake of simplicity, we restrict our attention to deterministic mean-payoff games played
on an ergodic weighted directed graph G⃗ = ([n], E, r), where |E| = m and [n] is split into
vertices controlled by players Max and Min, [n] = VMax ⊎ VMin . The ergodicity is taken in the
sense of [45, 5, 7]: a graph is called ergodic if the value of any mean-payoff game played on
this graph is independent of the initial state of the game.9 A typical example of such a graph
is a complete bipartite graph, in which the bipartition is formed by VMax , VMin . Ergodic
graphs are representative for the difficulty of mean-payoff games, because solving games on
general graphs reduces to solving games on complete bipartite graphs [22]. We note however
that it is not clear if this reduction can be done in the smoothed analysis setting. We leave
the problem of extending our results to non-ergodic graphs as a question for future research.
     The weights rij of the edges in our model are chosen randomly: we suppose that (rij )
are independent absolutely continuous variables with densities fij . We further suppose that
weights are normalized – E(rij ) ∈ [−1, 1] – and that there exists a number ϕ > 0 such that
fij (y) ⩽ ϕ for all i, j, y and Var(rij ) ⩽ 1/ϕ2 . As an example, if the weights r are taken by
perturbing some fixed weights r̄ij ∈ [−1, 1] by Gaussian noise, so that rij ∼ N (r̄ij , ρ2 ), then
we can take ϕ := 1/ρ.
     Under the ergodicity assumption, it is known [44, 7] that the following ergodic equation
has a solution (λ, u) ∈ Rn+1 for all choices of weights:
        (
         ∀i ∈ VMax , λ + ui = max(i,j)∈E {rij + uj } ,
         ∀i ∈ VMin , λ + ui = min(i,j)∈E {rij + uj } .


9
    This is a notion similar to strong connectivity, but for two-player games. Intuitively, a graph is ergodic
    if no player can play in such a way as to force the game to get stuck on a sub-graph.



                                                                                                                 ICALP 2024
147:10 Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


           Furthermore, the number λ is unique and it is the value of the game (which does not
       depend on the initial state because of ergodicity)10 . The vector u ∈ Rn , called a bias, is
       never unique because the set of solutions contains at least one line: we can always add a
       constant to all coordinates of u. In general, the set of biases may consist of more than one
       line. We say that a pair of policies σ : VMax → V (of Max) and τ : VMin → V (of Min) is
       bias-induced if there is a bias u such that the edges used by σ, τ achieve the maxima and
       minima in the ergodic equation. Bias-induced policies are optimal [44], but not every optimal
       policy is bias-induced. To study the behavior of random games, we introduce the sets

             P σ,τ := {r ∈ Rm : (σ, τ ) is the only pair of bias-induced policies
                                   in the MPG with weights r},

       for any pair (σ, τ ) such that the resulting graph G⃗ σ,τ has a single directed cycle. We denote
       by Ξ the set of all such pairs of policies. We also put U := ∪P σ,τ . Using the techniques
       from [6] we are then able to show the following proposition. This proposition strengthens [6,
       Theorem 3.2] for deterministic games by showing that each maximum and minimum in the
       ergodic equation is generically achieved by a single edge.

       ▶ Proposition 3 (cf. [6, Theorem 3.2]). The sets P σ,τ are open polyhedral cones. Moreover,
       these cones are disjoint and Rm \ U is included in a finite union of hyperplanes. In particular,
       this set has Lebesgue measure zero. Furthermore, if r ∈ U, then the ergodic equation has a
       single solution (up to adding a constant to the bias), and each maximum and minimum in
       the ergodic equation is achieved by a single edge.

           This motivates the introduction of the following condition number ∆, which measures the
       difference between the edge that achieves a maximum or minimum in the ergodic equation
       and the “second best” edge, relatively to the spread of the weights around the value:

       ▶ Definition 4. Given r ∈ U, we put

                                       max{|rij − λ| : (i, j) ∈ E}
             ∆(r) :=                                                                   .
                        min{|rij − λ + uj − ui | : (i, j) ∈ E, rij − λ + uj − ui ̸= 0}

           When defined in such a way, the condition number does not change when the weights are
       multiplied by a positive constant, or when the same constant is added to all the weights.
           To analyze the behavior of random games, we introduce the following random variables.
       If i is a vertex controlled by Min, then for any edge (i, j) ∈ E we put

             Zij = inf{x ∈ R : (x, r−ij ) ∈ U and the MPG with weights (x, r−ij ) has a pair
                                  of bias-induced policies (σ, τ ) ∈ Ξ such that τ (i) ̸= j} .

       Here, (x, r−ij ) is the vector obtained from r by replacing the ijth coordinate with x. We
       analogously define the variables Zij for vertices controlled by Max, changing inf to sup. Since
       the variable Zij does not depend on rij , we get the estimate

       ▶ Lemma 5. For any α > 0, P(∃ij, |rij − Zij | ⩽ α) ⩽ 2αmϕ.


       10
            This is a fundamental result which appeared already in [44]: in the paper’s only theorem, p(v) is the
            value and c′ij = rij + uj − ui are the payoffs modified by u. In the reference [7], the existence of λ and
            u is line (iii) of the much more general Theorem 2.1, which applies to additive eigenvectors of additively
            homogeneous monotone operators.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                         147:11


      Furthermore, the variables Zij are related to the ergodic equation in the following way.

▶ Lemma 6. Suppose that r ∈ P σ,τ for some (σ, τ ) ∈ Ξ. Then, for every (i, j) ∈ E that is
not used in (σ, τ ) we have Zij = λ + ui − uj .

    The two lemmas above improve the conclusion of Proposition 3: not only each maximum
and minimum in the ergodic equation is achieved by a single edge, but with high probability
the difference between the best edge and the second best edge is large. In particular, this
shows that bias-induced policies do not change when the random weights are truncated, and
it gives an estimate of the condition number.

▶ Theorem 7. Let δ := 1/(4n(2n + 1)mϕ). Then, with probability at least 1 − 1/n, the whole
ℓ∞ ball B∞ (r, δ) is included in a single polyhedron P σ,τ .

▶ Theorem 8. Random mean payoff games are well q conditioned with high probability. More
                                        8m       2m
                                                     
formally, for every ε > 0 we have P ∆ ⩾ ε (ϕ +    ε ) ⩽ ε.

    To propose an algorithm that exploits the condition number, we use the fact that every
mean-payoff game has a pair of Blackwell-optimal policies, i.e., policies that are optimal for
all discount factors γ close to 1. Such policies are induced by the Blackwell bias, which is
defined as u∗ := limγ→1 (λ(γ) − λ)/(1 − γ), where λ(γ) is the value of the discounted game
with discount factor γ. We then show that, for well-conditioned games, the Blackwell-optimal
policies can be already found when the discount factor is low.
                                                             1
▶ Theorem 9. Suppose that r ∈ P σ,τ and fix 1 > γ > 1 − 6n2 ∆(r) . Then, (σ, τ ) is the unique
pair of optimal policies in the discounted game with discount factor γ.

   Combining Theorems 8 and 9 with the results of [78, 47] showing that policy iteration
                                                         1
has polynomial complexity for discount factor γ < 1 − poly(n) , we get our final result.11

▶ Theorem 10. The greedy-all switches policy iteration rule combined with increasing
discount factor solves random instances of deterministic discounted or mean-payoff games in
polynomial smoothed complexity.

    In the theorem above, “polynomial smoothed complexity” is defined as in [15, 71]: there
exists a polynomial poly(x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) such that for all ε ∈ ]0, 1] the probability that the
number of iterations of our algorithm exceeds poly(n, m, ϕ, 1ε ) is at most ε.


 3        Conclusion and future work
We gave an analysis of two-player discounted and mean-payoff games, that led to a condition
number, and a policy-iteration algorithm which is efficient on well-conditioned inputs. We
showed that random inputs are well-conditioned with high probability. A few remarks are in
order.

1. Our techniques work for two-player games played on ergodic graphs. In non-ergodic
   graphs, the value λi is not necessarily the same at each vertex i. A folklore reduction,
   appearing for example in [22], shows that computing the value vector of a non-ergodic


11
     To wit: since the pair of optimal policies is unique, we can find them using an algorithm for discount
                         1
     factor γ < 1 − poly(n,ϕ)  , and the same policies will be optimal for any higher γ and also for the
     mean-payoff game.




                                                                                                              ICALP 2024
147:12 Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


             game reduces to computing the value of an ergodic game. So one can ask if our algorithms
             can be used on non-ergodic games. The answer is not obvious. The reduction proceeds
             in rounds, where in the first round one finds, say, the largest coordinate λi of the value
             vector, and then discards the node i (which requires some care) and repeats. Now, if one
             takes a non-ergodic game G⃗ with sufficiently random payoffs, and applies this reduction,
             the resulting game is sufficiently random at the first round, but it is not clear what
             happens in the succeeding rounds. So, as far as we can tell, the question remains open:
             Do deterministic two-player discounted and mean-payoff games have polynomial smoothed
             complexity, when played on non-ergodic graphs? A possible way of answering this question
             is by doing an analysis of Blackwell-optimal policies in the non-ergodic case, similar to
             what we have done here for the ergodic case.
        2. Allamigeon, Gaubert, Katz and Skomra [13] show that a certain value-iteration algorithm
           runs efficiently on all ergodic instances with value λ bounded away from zero. They
                       −mini ui
           use maxi ui|λ|       as a condition number. Can we use their result to show that value
           iteration has polynomial smoothed complexity? I.e., is a sufficiently-random instance well-
           conditioned as per their condition number? This was the central question left unanswered
           in their paper, and we tried to solve it, or provide a counter-example, but have so far
           failed to do so.
        3. Our policy-iteration rule is not one of the standard rules (Howard, lexicographic, Ran-
           domFacet, etc). Do these standard rules also have polynomial smoothed complexity on
           deterministic two-player games? How about other “combinatorial” algorithms?
        4. Can we extend our results to stochastic two-player games? The counter-example of
           Christ and Yannakakis shows that the Howard all-switches rule does not have polynomial
           smoothed complexity on stochastic two-player games. This seems to indicate that the
           stochastic setting is more delicate. On the other hand, our policy iteration rule is different
           to Howard’s. So one could tentatively ask: is there a smoothed counter-example to the
           Howard rule also in the deterministic (say, two-player) setting? This would show that
           our policy-iteration rule cannot be replaced by the Howard rule.
        5. How about other problems in UEOPL? Some of these problems are combinatorial, and
           do not seem to be amenable to smoothed analysis. But one can consider, for example,
           the P-Matrix Linear Complementarity Problem (P-LCP, see [35, Section 4.3]), and ask:
           does it have polynomial smoothed complexity? More broadly speaking, one can make
           the conjecture that every problem in UEOPL becomes easy under a suitable notion of
           perturbation. This conjecture is broad and imprecise, but it might be an interesting
           starting point for further research.



               References
         1     Ilan Adler, Richard M. Karp, and Ron Shamir. A simplex variant solving an m × d linear
               program in O(min(m2 , d2 )) expected number of pivot steps. Journal of Complexity, 3(4):372–
               387, 1987.
         2     Miklós Ajtai. Generating hard instances of the short basis problem. In Proceedings of the 26th
               International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), pages 1–9,
               1999.
         3     M. Akian, J. Cochet-Terrasson, S. Detournay, and S. Gaubert. Policy iteration algorithm
               for zero-sum multichain stochastic games with mean payoff and perfect information, 2012.
               arXiv:1208.0446.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                147:13


 4   M. Akian, S. Gaubert, and A. Guterman. Tropical polyhedra are equivalent to mean
     payoff games. Int. J. Algebra Comput., 22(1):125001 (43 pages), 2012. doi:10.1142/
     S0218196711006674.
 5   M. Akian, S. Gaubert, and A. Hochart. Ergodicity conditions for zero-sum games. Discrete
     Contin. Dyn. Syst., 35(9):3901–3931, 2015. doi:10.3934/dcds.2015.35.3901.
 6   M. Akian, S. Gaubert, and A. Hochart. Generic uniqueness of the bias vector of finite zero-
     sum stochastic games with perfect information. J. Math. Anal. Appl., 457:1038–1064, 2018.
     doi:10.1016/j.jmaa.2017.07.017.
 7   M. Akian, S. Gaubert, and A. Hochart. A game theory approach to the existence and
     uniqueness of nonlinear Perron-Frobenius eigenvectors. Discrete & Continuous Dynamical
     Systems - A, 40:207–231, 2020. doi:10.3934/dcds.2020009.
 8   M. Akian, S. Gaubert, U. Naepels, and B. Terver. Solving irreducible stochastic mean-payoff
     games and entropy games by relative Krasnoselskii-Mann iteration. In 48th International
     Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2023), volume 272
     of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 10:1–10:15, Dagstuhl,
     Germany, 2023. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.
     MFCS.2023.10.
 9   X. Allamigeon, P. Benchimol, and S. Gaubert. The tropical shadow-vertex algorithm solves
     mean payoff games in polynomial time on average. In Proceedings of the 41st International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), volume 8572 of Lecture
     Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 89–100. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43948-7_8.
10   X. Allamigeon, P. Benchimol, S. Gaubert, and M. Joswig. Combinatorial simplex algorithms can
     solve mean payoff games. SIAM J. Optim., 24(4):2096–2117, 2014. doi:10.1137/140953800.
11   X. Allamigeon, P. Benchimol, S. Gaubert, and M. Joswig. Tropicalizing the simplex algorithm.
     SIAM J. Discrete Math., 29(2):751–795, 2015. doi:10.1137/130936464.
12   X. Allamigeon, P. Benchimol, S. Gaubert, and M. Joswig. Log-barrier interior point methods
     are not strongly polynomial. SIAM J. Appl. Algebra Geom., 2(1):140–178, 2018. doi:
     10.1137/17M1142132.
13   X. Allamigeon, S. Gaubert, R. D. Katz, and M. Skomra. Universal complexity bounds based
     on value iteration and application to entropy games. In 49th International Colloquium on
     Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2022), volume 229 of Leibniz International
     Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 126:1–126:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2022. Schloss
     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
14   X. Allamigeon, S. Gaubert, and M. Skomra. Solving generic nonarchimedean semidefinite
     programs using stochastic game algorithms. J. Symbolic Comput., 85:25–54, 2018. doi:
     10.1016/j.jsc.2017.07.002.
15   R. Beier and B. Vöcking. Typical properties of winners and losers in discrete optimization.
     In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
     343–352. ACM, 2004. doi:10.1145/1007352.1007409.
16   Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1957.
17   M. Bezem, R. Nieuwenhuis, and E. Rodríguez-Carbonell. Exponential behaviour of the
     Butkovič–Zimmermann algorithm for solving two-sided linear systems in max-algebra. Discrete
     Appl. Math., 156(18):3506–3509, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2008.03.016.
18   E. Boros, K. Elbassioni, M. Fouz, V. Gurvich, K. Makino, and B. Manthey. Stochastic mean pay-
     off games: smoothed analysis and approximation schemes. In Proceedings of the 38th Interna-
     tional Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), volume 6755 of Lecture
     Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 147–158. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22006-7_13.
19   Endre Boros, Khaled Elbassioni, Mahmoud Fouz, Vladimir Gurvich, Kazuhisa Makino, and
     Bodo Manthey. Approximation schemes for stochastic mean payoff games with perfect
     information and few random positions. Algorithmica, 80:3132–3157, 2018.
20   Peter Bürgisser and Felipe Cucker. Condition: The geometry of numerical algorithms, volume
     349. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.




                                                                                                     ICALP 2024
147:14 Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


        21   Jakub Chaloupka. Parallel algorithms for mean-payoff games: An experimental evaluation. In
             European Symposium on Algorithms, pages 599–610. Springer, 2009.
        22   K. Chatterjee, M. Henzinger, S. Krinninger, and D. Nanongkai. Polynomial-time algorithms
             for energy games with special weight structures. Algorithmica, 70(3):457–492, 2014. doi:
             10.1007/s00453-013-9843-7.
        23   K. Chatterjee and R. Ibsen-Jensen. The complexity of ergodic mean-payoff games. In
             Proceedings of the 41st International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming
             (ICALP), volume 8573 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 122–133. Springer, 2014.
             doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43951-7_11.
        24   Miranda Christ and Mihalis Yannakakis. The smoothed complexity of policy iteration for
             Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
             Computing (STOC), pages 1890–1903, 2023.
        25   J. Cochet-Terrasson, S. Gaubert, and J. Gunawardena. A constructive fixed point theorem for
             min-max functions. Dyn. Stab. Syst., 14(4):407–433, 1999. doi:10.1080/026811199281967.
        26   Jean Cochet-Terrasson and Stéphane Gaubert. A policy iteration algorithm for zero-sum
             stochastic games with mean payoff. Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 343(5):377–382, 2006.
        27   Jean Cochet-Terrasson Guy Cohen, Stephane Gaubert, Michael Mc Gettrick, and Jean-Pierre
             Quadrat. Numerical computation of spectral elements in max-plus algebra. In Proceedings of
             the IFAC Conference on System Structure and Control, 1998.
        28   Daniel Dadush and Sophie Huiberts. A friendly smoothed analysis of the simplex method. In
             Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
             pages 390–403, 2018.
        29   Eric V. Denardo. Contraction mappings in the theory underlying dynamic programming. Siam
             Review, 9(2):165–177, 1967.
        30   Eric V. Denardo and Bennett L. Fox. Multichain Markov renewal programs. SIAM Journal
             on Applied Mathematics, 16(3):468–487, 1968.
        31   M. Develin and J. Yu. Tropical polytopes and cellular resolutions. Exp. Math., 16(3):277–291,
             2007. doi:10.1080/10586458.2007.10129009.
        32   Vishesh Dhingra and Stéphane Gaubert. How to solve large scale deterministic games
             with mean payoff by policy iteration. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
             on Performance Evaluation Methodologies and Tools (ValueTools), pages 12–es, 2006. doi:
             10.1145/1190095.1190110.
        33   Y. Disser and N. Mosis. A unified worst case for classical simplex and policy iteration pivot
             rules. In Proceedings of the 34th International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation
             (ISAAC), pages 27:1–27:17, 2023.
        34   John Fearnley, Paul Goldberg, Alexandros Hollender, and Rahul Savani. The complexity of
             gradient descent: CLS = PPAD ∩ PLS. Journal of the ACM, 70(1):1–74, 2022.
        35   John Fearnley, Spencer Gordon, Ruta Mehta, and Rahul Savani. Unique end of potential line.
             Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 114:1–35, 2020.
        36   Uriel Feige. Relations between average case complexity and approximation complexity. In
             Proceedings of the 34th annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
             534–543, 2002.
        37   J. Filar and K. Vrieze. Competitive Markov Decision Processes. Springer, New York, 2007.
             doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4054-9.
        38   Oliver Friedmann. Exponential lower bounds for solving infinitary payoff games and linear
             programs. PhD thesis, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, 2011.
        39   Alan Frieze and Gregory B. Sorkin. The probabilistic relationship between the assignment
             and asymmetric traveling salesman problems. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36(5):1435–1452,
             2007.
        40   S. Gaubert and J. Gunawardena. The duality theorem for min-max functions. C. R. Acad.
             Sci., 326(1):43–48, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0764-4442(97)82710-3.
B. Loff and M. Skomra                                                                                 147:15


41   Loukas Georgiadis, Andrew V Goldberg, Robert E Tarjan, and Renato F Werneck. An
     experimental study of minimum mean cycle algorithms. In 2009 Proceedings of the Eleventh
     Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX), pages 1–13. SIAM, 2009.
42   D. Gillette. Stochastic games with zero stop probabilities. In M. Dresher, A. W. Tucker, and
     P. Wolfe, editors, Contributions to the Theory of Games III, volume 39 of Ann. of Math. Stud.,
     pages 179–188. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1957.
43   Mika Göös, Alexandros Hollender, Siddhartha Jain, Gilbert Maystre, William Pires, Robert
     Robere, and Ran Tao. Further collapses in TFNP. In Proceedings of the 37th Computational
     Complexity Conference (CCC), pages 1–15, 2022.
44   V. A. Gurvich, A. V. Karzanov, and L. G. Khachiyan. Cyclic games and finding minimax
     mean cycles in digraphs. Zh. Vychisl. Mat. Mat. Fiz., 28(9):1406–1417, 1988. doi:10.1016/
     0041-5553(88)90012-2.
45   V. A. Gurvich and V. N. Lebedev. A criterion and verification of the ergodicity of cyclic game
     forms. Russian Math. Surveys, 44(1):243–244, 1989. doi:10.1070/RM1989v044n01ABEH002010.
46   N. Halman. Simple stochastic games, parity games, mean payoff games and discounted
     payoff games are all LP-type problems. Algorithmica, 49(1):37–50, 2007. doi:10.1007/
     s00453-007-0175-3.
47   T. D. Hansen, P. B. Miltersen, and U. Zwick. Strategy iteration is strongly polynomial for
     2-player turn-based stochastic games with a constant discount factor. J. ACM, 60(1):1–16,
     2013. doi:10.1145/2432622.2432623.
48   T. D. Hansen and U. Zwick. An improved version of the Random-Facet pivoting rule for the
     simplex algorithm. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of
     Computing (STOC), pages 209–218. ACM, 2015. doi:10.1145/2746539.2746557.
49   Thomas Dueholm Hansen and Uri Zwick. Lower bounds for Howard’s algorithm for finding
     minimum mean-cost cycles. In International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation,
     pages 415–426. Springer, 2010.
50   A. J. Hoffman and R. M. Karp. On nonterminating stochastic games. Manag. Sci., 12(5):359–
     370, 1966. doi:10.1287/mnsc.12.5.359.
51   A. Hordijk and A. A. Yushkevich. Blackwell optimality. In E. A. Feinberg and A. Shwartz,
     editors, Handbook of Markov Decision Processes: Methods and Applications, volume 40 of
     Internat. Ser. Oper. Res. Management Sci., pages 231–267. Springer, Boston, MA, 2002.
     doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-0805-2_8.
52   Ronald A. Howard. Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes. MIT Press, 1960.
53   Pavel Hubácek and Eylon Yogev. Hardness of continuous local search: Query complexity and
     cryptographic lower bounds. SIAM Journal on Computing, 49(6):1128–1172, 2020.
54   R. Ibsen-Jensen and P. B. Miltersen. Solving simple stochastic games with few coin toss
     positions. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA),
     volume 7501 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 636–647. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-642-33090-2_55.
55   David S Johnson, Christos H Papadimitriou, and Mihalis Yannakakis. How easy is local
     search? Journal of computer and system sciences, 37(1):79–100, 1988.
56   M. Jurdziński. Deciding the winner in parity games is in UP ∩ co-UP. Inform. Process. Lett.,
     68(3):119–124, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0020-0190(98)00150-1.
57   L. Kallenberg. Finite state and action MDPs. In E. A. Feinberg and A. Shwartz, editors,
     Handbook of Markov Decision Processes: Methods and Applications, volume 40 of Internat.
     Ser. Oper. Res. Management Sci., pages 21–87. Springer, Boston, MA, 2002. doi:10.1007/
     978-1-4615-0805-2_2.
58   Ricardo David Katz. Max-plus (A, B)-invariant spaces and control of timed discrete-event
     systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 52(2):229–241, 2007.
59   Jan Křetínskỳ and Tobias Meggendorfer. Efficient strategy iteration for mean payoff in Markov
     decision processes. In International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and
     Analysis, pages 380–399. Springer, 2017.




                                                                                                      ICALP 2024
147:16 Smoothed Analysis of Deterministic Discounted and Mean-Payoff Games


        60   T. M. Liggett and S. A. Lippman. Stochastic games with perfect information and time average
             payoff. SIAM Rev., 11(4):604–607, 1969. doi:10.1137/1011093.
        61   C. Mathieu and D. B. Wilson. The min mean-weight cycle in a random network. Combin.
             Probab. Comput., 22(5):763–782, 2013. doi:10.1017/S0963548313000229.
        62   Nimrod Megiddo and Christos H Papadimitriou. On total functions, existence theorems and
             computational complexity. Theoretical Computer Science, 81(2):317–324, 1991.
        63   J.-F. Mertens and A. Neyman. Stochastic games. Internat. J. Game Theory, 10(2):53–66,
             1981. doi:10.1007/BF01769259.
        64   Rolf H. Möhring, Martin Skutella, and Frederik Stork. Scheduling with AND/OR precedence
             constraints. SIAM Journal on Computing, 33(2):393–415, 2004.
        65   Ketan Mulmuley, Umesh V Vazirani, and Vijay V Vazirani. Matching is as easy as matrix
             inversion. In Proceedings of the 19th annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
             (STOC), pages 345–354, 1987.
        66   Christos H Papadimitriou. On the complexity of the parity argument and other inefficient
             proofs of existence. Journal of Computer and system Sciences, 48(3):498–532, 1994.
        67   Anuj Puri. Theory of hybrid systems and discrete event systems. University of California at
             Berkeley, 1995.
        68   M. L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming.
             Wiley Ser. Probab. Stat. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2005.
        69   T.E.S. Raghavan and Zamir Syed. A policy-improvement type algorithm for solving zero-sum
             two-person stochastic games of perfect information. Mathematical Programming, 95(3):513–532,
             2003.
        70   S. S. Rao, R. Chandrasekaran, and K.P.K. Nair. Algorithms for discounted stochastic games.
             Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 11(6):627–637, 1973.
        71   H. Röglin and B. Vöcking. Smoothed analysis of integer programming. Math. Program.,
             110(1):21–56, 2007. doi:10.1007/s10107-006-0055-7.
        72   Steven Rudich. Super-bits, demi-bits, and NP/qpoly-natural proofs. In Proceedings of the
             International Workshop on Randomization and Approximation Techniques in Computer Science
             (RANDOM/APPROX), pages 85–93, 1997.
        73   Sven Schewe. From parity and payoff games to linear programming. In Proceedings of the
             34th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS),
             pages 675–686, 2009.
        74   Bart Selman, David G Mitchell, and Hector J Levesque. Generating hard satisfiability problems.
             Artificial intelligence, 81(1-2):17–29, 1996.
        75   L. S. Shapley. Stochastic games. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 39(10):1095–1100, 1953.
             doi:10.1073/pnas.39.10.1095.
        76   Aaron Sidford, Mengdi Wang, Xian Wu, and Yinyu Ye. Variance reduced value iteration and
             faster algorithms for solving Markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
             ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 770–787, 2018.
        77   Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng. Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the simplex
             algorithm usually takes polynomial time. Journal of the ACM, 51(3):385–463, 2004.
        78   Y. Ye. The simplex and policy-iteration methods are strongly polynomial for the Markov
             decision problem with a fixed discount rate. Math. Oper. Res., 36(4):593–603, 2011.
        79   U. Zwick and M. Paterson. The complexity of mean payoff games on graphs. Theoret. Comput.
             Sci., 158(1–2):343–359, 1996. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(95)00188-3.
