An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm

SETH PETTIE AND VIJAYA RAMACHANDRAN
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas


Abstract. We establish that the algorithmic complexity of the minimum spanning tree problem is equal
to its decision-tree complexity. Specifically, we present a deterministic algorithm to find a minimum
spanning tree of a graph with n vertices and m edges that runs in time O(T ∗ (m, n)) where T ∗ is the
minimum number of edge-weight comparisons needed to determine the solution. The algorithm is
quite simple and can be implemented on a pointer machine.
    Although our time bound is optimal, the exact function describing it is not known at present. The
current best bounds known for T ∗ are T ∗ (m, n) = Ä(m) and T ∗ (m, n) = O(m · α(m, n)), where α is
a certain natural inverse of Ackermann’s function.
    Even under the assumption that T ∗ is superlinear, we show that if the input graph is selected from
G n,m , our algorithm runs in linear time with high probability, regardless of n, m, or the permutation of
edge weights. The analysis uses a new martingale for G n,m similar to the edge-exposure martingale
for G n,p .
Categories and Subject Descriptors: F.2.0 [Analysis of Algorithms and Problem Complexity]:
General; G.2.2 [Discrete Mathematics]: Graph Theory—graph algorithms; G.3 [Probability and
Statistics]
General Terms: Algorithms, Theory
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Graph algorithms, minimum spanning tree, optimal complexity



1. Introduction
The minimum spanning tree (MST) problem has been studied for much of this
century and yet despite its apparent simplicity, the problem is still not fully under-
stood. Graham and Hell [1985] give an excellent survey of results from the earliest
known algorithm of Borůvka [1926] to the invention of Fibonacci heaps, which
were central to the algorithms in Fredman and Tarjan [1987] and Gabow et al.
[1986]. Chazelle [1997] presented an MST algorithm based on the Soft Heap
[Chazelle 2000a] having complexity O(mα(m, n) log α(m, n)), where α is a cer-
tain inverse of Ackermann’s function. Recently Chazelle [2000b] modified the

A preliminary version of this article appeared in Proceedings of the 27th International Colloquium on Automata,
Languages and Programming (ICALP) (Geneva, Switzerland). Springer-Verlag, New York, 2000.
Part of this work was supported by Texas Advanced Research Program Grant 003658-0029-1999.
S. Pettie was also supported by an MCD Graduate Fellowship.
Authors’ address: The University of Texas at Austin, Department of Computer Science, Taylor Hall 2.124
(Mailcode 0500), Austin, TX 78712, e-mail: {seth;vlr}@cs.utexas.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is
granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or direct commercial
advantage and that copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the
full citation. Copyrights for components of this worked owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute
to lists, or to use any component of this work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or
a fee. Permissions may be requested from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 1515 Broadway, New York,
NY 10036 USA, fax +1 (212) 869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
°
C 2002 ACM 0004-5411/02/0100–0016 $5.00



Journal of the ACM, Vol. 49, No. 1, January 2002, pp. 16–34.
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                         17

algorithm in Chazelle [1997] to bring down the running time to O(m · α(m, n)).
Later a similar algorithm of the same running time was presented by Pettie [1999],
which gives an alternate exposition of the O(m · α(m, n)) result. This is the tightest
time bound for the MST problem to date, though not known to be optimal.
   All algorithms mentioned above work on a pointer machine [Tarjan 1979a] un-
der the restriction that edge weights may only be subjected to binary comparisons.
If, in addition, we have access to a stream of perfectly random bits, Karger et al.
[1995] showed that the MST can be computed in linear time with high probabil-
ity. Fredman and Willard [1994] gave a deterministic linear time MST algorithm
under the unit-cost RAM model, assuming edge weights are integers represented
in binary.
   It is still unknown whether these more powerful models are necessary to compute
the MST in linear time. However, in this article, we give a deterministic, comparison-
based MST algorithm that runs on a pointer machine in O(T ∗ (m, n)) time, where
T ∗ (m, n) is the number of edge-weight comparisons needed to determine the MST
on any graph with m edges and n vertices. Additionally, we show that our algorithm
runs in linear time for the vast majority of graphs, regardless of the number of edges
in the graph or the permutation of edge weights.
   Because of the nature of our algorithm, its exact running time is not known.
This might seem paradoxical at first. The source of our algorithm’s optimality,
and its mysterious running time, is the use of precomputed “MST decision trees”
whose exact depth is unknown but nonetheless provably optimal. The technique
of obtaining optimal algorithms via precomputation was used in a simpler setting
in Larmore [1990] for searching convex matrices and in Dixon et al. [1992] for
MST sensitivity analysis. We should point out that precomputing optimal deci-
sion trees does not increase the constant factor hidden by big-Oh notation, nor
does it result in a nonuniform algorithm. A trivial lower bound on the running
time of our algorithm is Ä(m); the best upper bound, O(mα(m, n)), is due to
Chazelle [2000b].
   Our optimal MST algorithm should be contrasted with the complexity-theoretic
result that any optimal verification algorithm for some problem can be used to
construct an optimal algorithm for the same problem [Jones 1997]. Though asymp-
totically optimal, this construction hides astronomical constant factors and proves
nothing about the relationship between algorithmic complexity and decision-tree
complexity. See Section 8 for a discussion of these and other related issues.
   In the next sections, we review some well-known MST results that are used by our
algorithm. In Section 3, we prove a key lemma and give a procedure for partitioning
the graph in an MST-respecting manner. Section 4 gives an overview of our optimal
algorithm and discusses the structure and use of precomputed decision-trees for the
MST problem. Section 5 gives the algorithm and a proof of optimality. Section 6
shows how the algorithm may be modified to run on a pointer machine. In Section 7,
we show our algorithm runs in linear-time with high probability if the input graph
is selected at random. Sections 8 and 9 discuss related problems and algorithms,
open questions, and the actual complexity of MST.

2. Preliminaries
The input is an undirected graph G = (V, E) where each edge is assigned a distinct
real-valued weight. By convention, |V | = n and |E| = m. The minimum spanning
18                                                S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


forest (MSF) problem asks for a spanning acyclic subgraph of G having the least
total weight. In this article, we assume for convenience that the input graph is
connected, since otherwise we can find its connected components in linear time
and then solve the problem on each connected component. Thus, the MSF problem
is identical to the minimum spanning tree problem.
   It is well known that one can identify edges provably in the MSF using the cut
property, and edges provably not in the MSF using the cycle property. The cut
property states that the lightest edge crossing any partition of the vertex set into
two parts must belong to the MSF. The cycle property states that the heaviest edge
in any cycle in the graph cannot be in the MSF.
   2.1. BORŮVKA STEPS. The earliest known MSF algorithm is due to Borůvka
[1926]. The algorithm is quite simple: It proceeds in a sequence of stages, and in each
stage, or Borůvka step, it identifies a forest F consisting of the minimum-weight
edge incident to each vertex in the graph G, then forms the graph G 1 = G\F as the
input to the next stage. Here G\F denotes the graph derived from G by contracting
edges in F (by the cut property these edges belong to the MSF.) Each Borůvka step
takes linear time, and since the number of vertices is reduced by at least half in
each step, Borůvka’s algorithm takes O(m log n) time.
   Our optimal algorithm uses a procedure called Boruvka2(G; F, G 0 ). This proce-
dure executes two Borůvka steps on the input graph G and returns the contracted
graph G 0 as well as the set of edges F identified as part of the MSF during these
two steps.
   2.2. DIJSKTRA-JARNÍK-PRIM ALGORITHM. Another early MSF algorithm that
runs in O(m log n) time is the one by Jarnı́k [1930], rediscovered by Dijkstra [1959]
and Prim [1957]. We refer to this algorithm as the DJP algorithm. Briefly, the DJP
algorithm grows the MSF T one edge at a time. Initially, T is an arbitrary vertex.
In each step of the DJP algorithm, T is augmented with the least-weight edge
(x, y) such that x ∈ T and y 6∈ T . By the cut property, all edges added to T are in
the MSF.
   LEMMA 2.1. Let T be the tree formed after the execution of some number of
steps of the DJP algorithm. Let e and f be two arbitrary edges, each with exactly
one endpoint in T, and let g be the maximum weight edge on the path from e to f
in T. Then g cannot be heavier than both e and f .
   PROOF. Let P be the path in T connecting e and f, and assume the contrary,
that g is the heaviest edge in P ∪ {e, f }. Now consider the moment when g is
selected by DJP and let P 0 be the portion of P present in the tree. There are exactly
two edges in (P − P 0 ) ∪ {e, f } that are eligible to be chosen by the DJP algorithm
at this moment, one of which is the edge g. If the other edge is in P, then by our
choice of g it must be lighter than g. If the other edge is either e or f, then by our
assumption it must be lighter than g. In both cases, g could not be chosen next by
the DJP algorithm, a contradiction.
   2.3. THE DENSE CASE ALGORITHM. The algorithms presented in Fredman and
Tarjan [1987], Gabow et al. [1986], Chazelle [1997, 2000b], and Pettie [1999] will
find the MSF of a graph in linear time if the graph is sufficiently dense, that is,
has a sufficiently large edge-to-vertex ratio. For our purposes, sufficiently dense
will mean m/n ≥ log(3) n. All of the above algorithms run in linear time for that
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                          19

density, the simplest of which is easily that of Fredman and Tarjan [1987]. This
algorithm executes a number of phases, where the purpose of each phase is to
amplify the “nominal density” of the graph by contracting a large number of MSF
edges; here the nominal density is the ratio m/n 0 , where m, as usual, is the number
of edges in the original graph, and n 0 is the number of vertices in the current graph.
Each phase of the algorithm runs in O(m + n) time, and works by executing the
DJP algorithm many times, each for a limited number of steps. If n 0 is the number
of vertices  before a phase, the number of vertices after the phase is no more than
n 0/2m/n , hence no more than log∗ n − log∗ (m/n) phases are needed.
        0


    The procedure DenseCase(G; F) takes as input an n-node graph G and returns
the MSF F of G in linear time for graphs with density at least log(3) n.
    Our optimal algorithm will actually call DenseCase on a graph derived from
an n-node, m-edge graph by contracting vertices so that the number of vertices
is reduced by a factor of at least log(3) n. The number of edges in the contracted
graph is no more than m. Hence, DenseCase will run in O(m + n) time on such
a graph.
   2.4. SOFT HEAP. The main data structure used by our algorithm is the Soft Heap
[Chazelle 2000a]. The Soft Heap is a kind of priority queue that gives us an optimal
trade-off between accuracy and speed. It is parameterized by an error tolerance ²,
and supports the following operations:
—MakeHeap(): returns an empty soft heap.
—Insert(S, x): insert item x into heap S.
—Findmin(S): returns item with smallest key in heap S.
—Delete(S, x): delete x from heap S.
—Meld(S1 , S2 ): create new heap containing the union of items stored in S1
                 and S2 , destroying S1 and S2 in the process.
   All operations take constant amortized time, except for Insert, which takes
O(log(1/²)) time. To save time the Soft Heap allows items to be grouped together
and treated as though they have a single key. An item adopts the largest key of any
item in its group, corrupting the item if its new key differs from its original key.
Thus, the original key of an item returned by Findmin (i.e., any item in the group
with minimum key) is no more than the keys of all uncorrupted items in the heap.
The guarantee is that after n Insert operations, no more than ²n corrupted items are
in the heap. The following result is shown in Chazelle [2000a].
   LEMMA 2.2. Fix any parameter 0 < ² < 1/2, and beginning with no prior data,
consider a mixed sequence of operations that includes n inserts. On a Soft Heap,
the amortized complexity of each operation is constant, except for insert, which
takes O(log(1/²)) time. At most ²n items are corrupted at any given time.


3. A Key Lemma and Procedure
   3.1. A ROBUST CONTRACTION LEMMA. It is well known that if T is a tree
of MSF edges, we can contract T into a single vertex while maintaining the in-
variant that the MSF of the contracted graph plus T gives the MSF for the graph
before contraction.
20                                                S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


   In our algorithm, we find a tree of MSF edges T in a corrupted graph, where
some of the edge weights have been increased due to the use of a Soft Heap. In the
lemma given below, we show that useful information can be obtained by contracting
certain corrupted trees, in particular those constructed using some number of steps
from the Dijkstra–Jarnik–Prim (DJP) algorithm. Ideas similar to these are used in
Chazelle’s [1997] algorithm and more explicitly in the recent algorithm of Chazelle
[2000b] (see also Pettie [1999]).
   Before stating the lemma, we need some notation and preliminary concepts. Let
V (G) and E(G) be the vertex and edge sets of G, and n and m be their cardinality,
respectively. Let the G-weight of an edge be its weight in graph G (the G may be
omitted if implied from context).
   For the following definitions, M and C are subgraphs of G. Denote by G ⇑ M
some graph derived from G by raising the weight of each edge in M by ar-
bitrary amounts (these edges are said to be corrupted). Let MC be the set of
edges in M with exactly one endpoint in C. Let G\C denote the graph obtained
by contracting all connected components induced by C, that is, by replacing
each connected component with a single vertex and reassigning edge endpoints
appropriately.
   Definition 3.1. A subgraph C is said to be DJP-contractible with respect to G
if after executing the DJP algorithm on G for some number of steps, with a suitable
start vertex in C, the tree that results is a spanning tree for C.
  LEMMA 3.2. Let M be a set of edges in a graph G. If C is a subgraph of
G that is DJP-contractible with respect to G ⇑ M, then MSF(G) is a subset of
MSF(C) ∪ MSF(G\C − MC ) ∪ MC .
    PROOF. Each edge in C that is not in MSF(C) is the heaviest edge on some
cycle in C. Since that cycle exists in G as well, that edge is not in MSF(G). So we
need only show that edges in G\C that are not in MSF(G\C − MC ) ∪ MC are also
not in MSF(G).
   Let H = G\C − MC ; hence, we need to show that no edge in H − MSF(H ) is
in MSF(G). Let e be in H − MSF(H ), that is, e is the heaviest edge on some cycle
χ in H . If χ does not involve the vertex derived by contracting C, then it exists in
G as well and e 6∈ MSF(G). Otherwise, χ forms a path P in G whose endpoints,
say x and y, are both in C. Let the end edges of P be (x, w) and (y, z). Since H
includes no corrupted edges with one endpoint in C, the G-weight of these edges
is the same as their (G ⇑ M)-weight.
   Let T be the spanning tree of C ⇑ M derived by the DJP algorithm, Q be the
path in T connecting x and y, and g be the heaviest edge in Q. Notice that P ∪ Q
forms a cycle. By our choice of e, it must be heavier than both (x, w) and (y, z),
and by Lemma 2.1, the heavier of (x, w) and (y, z) is heavier than the (G ⇑ M)-
weight of g, which is an upper bound on the G-weights of all edges in Q. So with
respect to G-weights, e is the heaviest edge on the cycle P ∪ Q and cannot be
in MSF(G).

   3.2. THE PARTITION PROCEDURE. Our algorithm uses the Partition procedure
that is given below. This procedure finds DJP-contractible subgraphs C1 , . . . , Ck in
which edges are progressively being corrupted by the Soft Heap. Let MCi contain
only those corrupted edges with one endpoint in Ci at the time it is completed.
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                             21




                              FIG. 1. The Partition procedure.


  Each subgraph Ci will be DJP-contractible with respect to a graph derived from
G by several rounds of contractions and edge deletions. When Ci is finished, it is
contracted and all incident corrupted edges are discarded. By applying Lemma 3.2
repeatedly, we see that after Ci is built, the MSF of G is a subset of
                                  Ã                      !
            [i                          [ i       [
                                                  i           [i
               MSF(C j ) ∪ MSF G\            Cj −    MC j ∪       MC j .
            j=1                           j=1        j=1         j=1


   The Partition procedure is shown in Figure 1. The arguments appearing before the
semicolon are inputs; the others are outputs. C = {C1 , . . . , Ck } is a set of subgraphs
of G, and MC is a set of corrupted edges with endpoints in different Ci ’s. No edge
will appear in more than one of MC , C1 , . . . , Ck .
   Initially, Partition sets every vertex to be live. The objective is to convert each
vertex to dead, signifying that it is part of a component Ci with ≤ maxsize vertices
and part of a conglomerate of ≥Smaxsize vertices, where a conglomerate is a con-
nected component of the graph E(Ci ). Intuitively a conglomerate is a collection
of Ci ’s linked by common vertices. This scheme for growing components is similar
to the one given in Fredman and Tarjan [1987].
   We grow the Ci ’s one at a time according to the DJP algorithm, except that we
use a Soft Heap. A component is done growing if it reaches maxsize vertices or if
it attaches itself to an existing component. Clearly, if a component does not reach
maxsize vertices, it has linked to a conglomerate of at least maxsize vertices. Hence,
all its vertices can be designated dead. Upon completion of a component Ci , we
discard the set of corrupted edges with one endpoint in Ci .
22                                                  S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


  The running time of Partition is dominated by the heap operations, which depend
on ². Each edge is inserted into a Soft Heap no more than twice (once for each
endpoint), and extracted no more than once. We can charge the cost of dismantling
the heap to the insert operations which created it; hence, the total running time is
O(m log(1/²)). By Lemma 2.2, the number of discarded edges is bounded by the
number of insertions scaled by ²; thus, |MC | ≤ 2²m. Thus, we have
    LEMMA 3.3. Given a graph G, any 0 < ² < 1/2, and a parameter maxsize, Par-
tition finds edge-disjoint subgraphs MC , C1 , . . . , Ck in time O(|E(G)| · log(1/²))
while satisfying several conditions:
(a) For all v ∈ V (G), there is some i such that v ∈ V (Ci ).
(b) For all i, |V (Ci )| ≤ maxsize.
                                   S
(c) For each conglomerate P ∈ i Ci , |V (P)| ≥ maxsize.
(d) |E(MC )| ≤ 2² · |E(G)|.
                 S                        S
(e) MSF(G) ⊆ i MSF(Ci ) ∪ MSF(G\( i Ci ) − MC ) ∪ MC .
   We observe that the full suite of soft heap operations is not needed as we never
employ the meld operation. We can therefore use a more space-efficient version of
the soft heap where its nodes are placed in an array and the links between them
represented implicitly, as in a binary heap.


4. Overview of the Optimal Algorithm
Here is an overview of our optimal MSF algorithm.
—In the first stage, we find DJP-contractible
                                  S           subgraphs C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck with their
 associated set of edges MC = i MCi , where MCi consists of corrupted edges
 with one endpoint in Ci .
—In the second stage we S find the MSF Fi of each Ci , and the MSF F0 of the
 contracted graph G\( i CiS   ) − MC . By Lemma 3.2, the MSF of the whole graph
 is contained within F0 ∪ ( i Fi ) ∪ MC . Note that, at this point, we have not
 identified any edges as being in the MSF of the original graph G.
—In the third stage, we find some MSF edges, via Borůvka steps, and recurse on
 the graph derived by contracting these edges.
   We execute the first stage using the Partition procedure described in the pre-
vious section.
   We execute the second stage with optimal decision trees. Essentially, these are
hardwired algorithms designed to compute the MSF of a graph using an optimal
number of edge-weight comparisons. In general, decision trees are much larger
than the size of the problem that they solve and finding optimal ones is very time
consuming. We can afford the cost of building decision trees by guaranteeing that
each one is extremely small. At the same time, we make each conglomerate formed
by the Ci to be sufficiently large so that the MSF F0 of the contracted graph can be
found in linear time using the DenseCase algorithm.
   Finally, in the third stage, we have a reduction in vertices due to the Borůvka steps,
and a reduction in edges due to the application of Lemma 3.2. In our optimal algo-
rithm, both vertices and edges reduce by a constant factor, thus resulting in the re-
cursive applications of the algorithm on graphs with geometrically decreasing sizes.
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                                             23

   4.1. DECISION TREES. Consider a computation that takes as input a fixed graph
G and computes the minimum spanning tree for G for any given permutation of
edge weights. If we are only interested in the edge-weight comparisons performed,
this computation can be described in terms of an MSF decision tree for G. An
MSF decision tree is a rooted tree having an edge-weight comparison associated
with each internal node (e.g., weight (x, y) < weight (w, z)). Each internal node
has exactly two children, one representing that the comparison is true, the other
that it is false. The leaves of the tree list off the edges in some spanning tree of
the graph. An MSF decision tree for G is said to be correct if the edge-weight
comparisons encountered on any path from the root to a leaf uniquely identify
the spanning tree at that leaf as the MSF. A decision tree for G is said to be
optimal if it is correct and there exists no correct decision tree for G with
lesser depth.
   Let us bound the time needed to find optimal              decision trees for all graphs on
                                                  (r2 )
r vertices by brute force search. There are 2 such graphs and for each graph we
must check all possible decision trees bounded by a sufficient depth. Since the DJP
algorithm uses no more than r (r − 1) comparisons on any            2
                                                                        graph on r vertices, a
depth of r 2 is sufficient. Hence, the tree has fewer than 2r internal nodes. There are
<r 4 possibilities for each    internal node (its comparison must identify two edges);
                        r 2 +2
hence, there are <r 2 distinct decision trees to check. To determine if a decision
tree is correct, we generate all possible permutations of the edge weights and for
each, solve the MSF problem on the given graph. Now we simultaneously check
all permutations against a decision tree as follows: First, we place all permutations
at the root; then move them to the left or right child depending on the truth or
falsity of the edge-weight comparison with respect to each permutation. We repeat
this step until all permutations reach a leaf. If for each leaf, all permutations
sharing that leaf agree on the MSF, then the decision tree is correct. This process
takes no longer than (r 2 + 1)! for each decision tree, hence the total time required
to find an 2optimal decision tree for all graphs2 on fewer than r vertices is bounded
      2    r +2                                    r +o(r )
by 2r · r 2 · (r 2 + 1)!, which is less than 22             . Setting r = log(3) n allows us to
precompute all optimal decision trees in o(n) time.1
   Observe that, in the high-level algorithm we gave in Section 4, if the maximum
size of each component Ci is sufficiently small, the components can be organized
into a relatively small number of groups of isomorphic components (ignoring edge
weights). For each group, we use a single precomputed optimal decision tree to
determine the MSF of components in that group.
   In our optimal algorithm, we use a procedure DecisionTree(G; F ), which takes
as input a collection of graphs G, each with at most r vertices, and returns their
minimum spanning forests in F using the precomputed decision trees.


5. The Algorithm
As discussed above, the optimal MSF algorithm is as follows: First, precompute the
optimal decision trees for all graphs with ≤ log(3) n vertices. Next, divide the input
graph into subgraphs C1 , C2 , . . . , Ck , discarding the set of corrupted edges MCi as

                              √
1
    We can set r as high as       log log n − 1; however, this provides no benefit to our algorithm.
24                                                          S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


each Ci is completed. Use the decision trees found earlier to compute the MSF Fi
of each Ci , then contract each connected component spanned by F1 ∪ · · · ∪ Fk
(i.e., each conglomerate) into a single vertex. The resulting graph has ≤n/ log(3) n
vertices since each conglomerate has at least log(3) n vertices by Lemma 3.3. Hence,
we can use the DenseCase algorithm to compute its MSF F0 in time linear in m.
At this point, by Lemma 3.2 the MSF is now contained in the edge set F0 ∪ · · · ∪
Fk ∪ MC1 ∪ · · · ∪ MCk . On this graph, we apply two Borůvka steps, reducing the
number of vertices by a factor of four, and then compute recursively. The algorithm
is given below.
   Let ² = 1/8 (this is used by the Soft Heap in the Partition procedure).
   Precompute optimal decision trees for all graphs with ≤ log(3) n 0 vertices, where
n 0 is the number of vertices in the original input graph.

     OptimalMSF(G)
         If E(G) = ∅ then Return(∅)
         r := dlog(3) |V (G)|e
         Partition(G, r, ²; M, C)
         DecisionTree(C; F)
         Let k := |C| and let C = {C1 , . . . , Ck }, F = {F1 , . . . , Fk }
         G a := G\(F1 ∪ · · · ∪ Fk ) − M
         DenseCase(G a ; F0 )
         G b := F0 ∪ F1 ∪ · · · ∪ Fk ∪ M
         Boruvka2(G b ; F 0 , G c )
         F := OptimalMSF(G c )
         Return(F ∪ F 0 )

   Apart from recursive calls and using the decision trees, the computation per-
formed by OptimalMSF is clearly linear since Partition takes O(m log(1/²)) time,
and owing to the reduction in vertices, the call to DenseCase also takes lin-
ear time. For ² = 1/8, the number of edges passed to the final recursive call is
≤m/4 + n/4 ≤ m/2, giving a geometric reduction in the number of edges. Since
no MSF algorithm can do better than linear time, the bottleneck, if any, must lie in
using the decision trees, which are optimal by construction.
   More concretely, let T (m, n) be the running time of OptimalMSF. Let T ∗ (m, n)
be the optimal number of comparisons needed to determine the MSF on any graph
with n vertices and m edges and let T ∗ (H ) be the optimal number of compar-
isons needed on a specific graph H . That is, T ∗ (m, n) = max{T ∗ (H ) : |V (H )| =
n, |E(H )| = m}. We also refer to T ∗ as the decision-tree complexity of MSF, as it
corresponds to the height of an optimal decision-tree. The recurrence relation for
T is given below. For the base case, note that the graphs in the recursive calls will
be connected if the input graph is connected. Hence, the base case graph has no
edges and one vertex, and we have T (0, 1) equal to a constant
                                   X                        ³m n ´
                    T (m, n) ≤           c1 T ∗ (Ci ) + T     ,    + c2 · m.
                                     i
                                                             2 4

   It is straightforward to see that, if T ∗ (m, n) = O(m), then the above recurrence
gives T (m, n) = O(m). One can also show that T (m, n) = O(T ∗ (m, n)) for many
natural functions for T ∗ (including m · α(m, n)). However, to show that this result
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                           25

holds no matter what the function describing T ∗ (m, n) is, we need to establish some
results on the decision tree complexity of the MSF problem, which we do in the
next section.

  5.1. SOME RESULTS FOR MSF DECISION TREES. In this section, we establish
some results on MSF decision trees that allow us to establish our main result that
OptimalMSF runs in O(T ∗ (m, n)) time.
  PROPOSITION 5.1. For m, n > 2, T ∗ (m, n) ≥ m/2.
  PROPOSITION 5.2. For n 0 > n, T ∗ (m, n 0 ) ≥ T ∗ (m, n), and for m 0 > m,
T (m 0 , n) ≥ T ∗ (m, n).
  ∗


   Proposition 5.1 is true since for m, n > 2 every edge can be placed on some
cycle, and must therefore participate in at least one comparison. Proposition 5.2
holds since we can always add isolated vertices or edges of very high weight, neither
of which affects the MSF.
   We now state a property that is used by Lemmas 5.4 and 5.5.
  PROPERTY 5.3. Let H be a graph which is the union of edge-disjoint sub-
graphs C1 , . . . , Ck . The structure of H dictates that MSF (H ) = MSF (C1 ) ∪ · · · ∪
MSF (Ck ).
   If C1 , . . . ,S
                  Ck are the components returned by Partition, it can be seen that the
graph H = i Ci satisfies Definition 5.3 since every simple cycle in this graph
must be contained in exactly one of the Ci . To see this, consider any simple cycle
and let i be the largest index such that CSi contains an edge in the cycle. Since each
Ci shares no more than one vertex with j<i C j , this cycle cannot contain an edge
      S
from j<i C j .
   LEMMA 5.4. If Property 5.3 holds for H, then there exists an optimal MSF deci-
sion tree for H that makes no comparisons of the form e < f where e ∈ Ci , f ∈ C j
and i 6= j.
   PROOF. Consider a subset P of the permutations of all edge weights where for
e ∈ Ci , f ∈ C j and i < j, it holds that weight(e) < weight( f ). Permutations
in P have two useful attributes that can be readily verified. First, any number of
intercomponent comparisons shed no light on the relative weights of edges in the
same component. Second, any spanning forest of a component is the MSF of that
component for some permutation in P.
   Now consider any optimal decision tree T for H . Let T 0 be the subtree of T that
contains only leaves that can be reached by some permutation in P. Each intercom-
ponent comparison node in T 0 must have only one child, and by the first attribute,
the MSF at each leaf was deduced using only intracomponent comparisons. By the
second attribute, T 0 must determine the MSF of each component correctly, and thus
by Property 5.3 it must determine the MSF of the graph H correctly. Hence, we
can contract T 0 into a correct decision tree T 00 by replacing each one-child node
with its only child.
                                                               P
   LEMMA 5.5. If Property 5.3 holds for H, then T ∗ (H ) = i T ∗ (Ci ).
26                                                S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


   PROOF. Given optimal decision trees Ti for the Ci we can construct a decision
tree for G by replacing each leaf of T1 by T2 , and in general replacing each leaf
of Ti by Ti+1 and by labeling each leaf of the last tree by the union of the labels
of the original trees along this path. Clearly, P the height of this tree is the sum of
the heights of the Ti , and hence T ∗ (G) ≤            ∗
                                                    i T (C i ). So we need only prove
that no optimal decision tree for G has height less than the sum of the heights of
the Ti .
   Let T be an optimal decision tree for G that has no intercomponent compar-
isons (as guaranteed by Lemma 5.4). We show that T can be transformed into
a “canonical” decision tree T 0 for G of the same height as T, such that in T 0,
all comparisons for Ci precede all comparisons for Ci+1 , for each i, and further,
the subtrees of T 0 containing intra-Ci comparisons are all identical. That is, they
have the same shape and the same comparisons are associated with correspond-
ing nodes. This establishes the desired result since T 0 must contain a path that
is the concatenation of the longest path in an optimal decision tree for each of
the Ci .
   We first prove this result for the case when there are only two components, C1
and C2 . Assume inductively that the subtrees rooted at all vertices at a certain depth
d in T have been transformed to the desired structure of having the C1 comparisons
occur before he C2 comparisons, and with all subtrees for C2 within each of the
subtrees rooted at depth d being identical. (This is trivially the case when d is equal
to the height of T .)
   Consider any node v at depth d − 1. If the comparison at that node is a C1
comparison, then all C2 subtrees at descendent nodes must compute the same set of
leaves for C2 . Hence, the subtree rooted at v can be converted to the desired format
simply by replacing all C2 subtrees by one having minimum depth (note that there
are at most two different C2 subtrees: all those descending from v’s left child (right
child) are identical). If the comparison at v is a C2 comparison, we know that the
C1 subtrees rooted at its left child x and its right child y must both compute the
same set of leaves for C1 . Hence, we pick the C1 subtree of smaller height (without
loss of generality, let its root be x) and replace v by x, together with the C1 subtree
rooted at x. We then copy the comparison at node v to each leaf position of this
C1 subtree. For each such copy, we place one of the isomorphic copies of the C2
subtree that is a descendant of x as its left subtree, and the C2 subtree that is a
descendant of y as its right subtree. The subtree rooted at x, which is now at depth
d − 1, is now in the desired form; it computes the same result as in T, and there
was no increase in the height of the tree. Hence, by induction, T can be converted
into canonical decision tree of no greater height.
   Assume inductively that the result hold for up to k − 1 ≥ 2 components. The
result easily extends to k components by noting that we can group the first k − 1
components as C10 and let Ck be C20 . By the above method, we can transform T to a
canonical tree in which the Ck comparisons appear as leaf subtrees. We now strip
the Ck subtrees from this canonical tree and then, by the inductive assumption, we
can perform the transformation for remaining k − 1 components.
  COROLLARY 5.6. Let the S  Ci be the components formed by the Partition routine
P ∗ to graph∗ G, let H ∗= i Ci and let G have m edges and n vertices. Then,
applied
  i T (C i ) = T (H ) ≤ T (m, n).
     COROLLARY 5.7. For any m and n, 2 · T ∗ (m, n) ≤ T ∗ (2m, 2n).
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                           27

   We can now solve the recurrence relation for the running time of OptimalMSF
given in the previous section.
             X                    ³m n ´
 T (m, n) ≤      c1 T ∗ (Ci ) + T     ,    + c2 · m
               i
                                    2 4
                                ³m n ´
          ≤ c1 T ∗ (m, n) + T       ,     + c2 · m (Corollary 5.6)
                                  2 ³4
                                      m n´
          ≤ c1 T ∗ (m, n) + c · T ∗     ,     + c2 · m (assume inductively)
                        ³             2´ 4
                                c
          ≤ T ∗ (m, n) c1 + + 2c2 (Corollary 5.7 and Propositions 5.1, 5.2)
                                2
          ≤ c · T ∗ (m, n) ( for c = 2c1 + 4c2 ; this completes the induction).
  This gives us the desired theorem.
  THEOREM 5.8. Let T ∗ (m, n) be the decision-tree complexity of the MSF prob-
lem on graphs with m edges and n nodes. Algorithm OptimalMSF computes the
MSF of a graph with m edges and n vertices deterministically in O(T ∗ (m, n)) time.

6. Avoiding Pointer Arithmetic
We have not precisely specified what is required of the underlying machine
model. Upon examination, the algorithm does not seem to require the full power
of a random access machine (RAM). No bit manipulation is used and arith-
metic can be limited to just the increment operation. However, if procedure
DecisionTree is implemented in the obvious manner, it will require using a ta-
ble lookup, and thus random access to memory. In this section, we outline the
pointer machine [Tarjan 1979a] a model that does not allow random access to
memory, and describe some techniques we use for implementing the Decision-
Tree procedure on a pointer machine. Our method is similar to that described in
Buchsbaum et al. [1998], but we ensure that the time overhead in performing the ta-
ble look-ups during a call to DecisionTree is linear in the size of the current input to
DecisionTree.
   A pointer machine distinguishes pointers from all other data types. The only
operations allowed on pointers are assignment, comparison for equality and deref-
erencing. Memory is organized into records, each of which holds some constant
number of pointers and normal data words (integers, floats, etc.). Given a pointer
to a particular record, we can refer to any pointer or data word in that record in
constant time. On nonpointer data, the usual array of logical, arithmetic, and binary
comparison operations are allowed.
   Every MSF decision tree solves the MSF problem on a particular graph topology:
we call this the generic graph. In order to solve the MSF problem on an actual graph,
we bind corresponding edges of the actual and generic graphs, such that given one
edge the other can be found in constant time. Comparisons in the MSF decision
tree refer to edges in the generic graph; hence, they too can be translated into
comparisons in the actual graph in constant time.
   We match up identical actual graphs and generic graphs using the method
given in Buchsbaum et al. [1998]. If all graphs have fewer than r vertices we
represent the graphs as a string of numbers between 1 and r , then perform
a lexicographic sort [Aho et al. 1974] on all the graphs (both actual and generic).
28                                                S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


A generic graph will appear adjacent to all identical actual graphs. All that remains
to be done is bind the actual graphs to the appropriate generic graph and run the
associated MSF decision tree. If the
                                   2
                                       total size of all actual subgraphs is s (s ≤ m),
the sorting step takes O(s + r 2 2r ) time, which is O(m + n) for r = log(3) n. The
lexicographic sort guarantees that in the recursive calls it suffices to scan an initial
prefix of the sorted list whose size is linear in the size of the current graph.

7. Performance on Random Graphs
Even if we assume that MST has some super-linear complexity, we show below that
our algorithm runs in linear time for nearly all graphs, for arbitrarily chosen edge
weights. This improves upon the expected linear-time result of Karp and Tarjan
[1980], which depended on the edge weights being chosen randomly. Our result
may also be compared with the randomized algorithm of Karger et al. [1995],
which is shown to run in O(m) time with high probability. However, for any given
graph the Karger et al. [1995] algorithm can be made to run in Ä(m log n) time
by an adversary that controls the edge weights. In contrast, we show below that
our algorithm runs in linear time for the vast majority of graphs, for every possible
assignment of edge weights.
   None of the earlier published MST algorithms appear to have this property of
running in linear time with high probability on random graphs for all edge-weights.
Using the analysis of this section and suitably souped-up versions of earlier algo-
rithms [Fredman and Tarjan 1987; Gabow et al. 1986; Chazelle 2000b], we may
obtain similar high probability results.
   Our analysis hinges on the observation that for sparse random graphs, with high
probability any subgraph constructed by the Partition routine has only a miniscule
number in edges in excess of the number of spanning forest edges in that subgraph.
The MST of such graphs can be computed in linear time, and hence the computation
on optimal decision trees takes linear time on these graphs.
   Throughout this section, α will denote α(m, n).
                                                                             n
   The random graph model G n,m [Erdös and Rényi 1961] assigns all ((m2 )) graphs
with m edges equal probability. In G n, p any graph on m edges is assigned probability
            n
p m (1 − p)(2 )−m . In other words, each possible edge is included independently with
probability p.
   THEOREM 7.1. The MST of a graph can be found in linear time with probability
(1) 1 − exp(−Ä(m/α 2 )), for a graph drawn from Gn,m
(2) 1 − exp(−Ä( pn 2/α 2 )), for a graph drawn from Gn, p .
   Both (1) and (2) hold regardless of the permutation of edge weights.
   In the next section, we describe the edge-addition martingale for the G n,m model.
In Section 7.2, we use this martingale and Azuma’s inequality to prove part (1) of
Theorem 7.1. Part (2) is shown to follow from part (1).
  7.1. THE EDGE-ADDITION MARTINGALE. It was observed Erdös and Rényi
[1961] that a random graph from the Gn,m model can be generated in an incre-
mental fashion as follows: We begin with n labeled vertices, adding one random
edge at a time that was not previously selected. Let X i be a random edge such that
Xi 6= X j for j < i, and G i = {X 1 , . . . , X i } be the graph made up of the first i
edges, with G 0 being the graph on n vertices having no edges.
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                                       29

  A martingale is a sequence of random variables Y0 , . . . , Ym such that
E[Yi | Yi−1 ] = Yi−1 for 0 < i ≤ m. We now prove that if g is any graph-theoretic
function and g E (G i ) = E[g(G m )|G i ], then g E (G i ), for 0 ≤ i ≤ m is a martingale.
   LEMMA 7.2. The sequence g E (Gi ) = E[g(G m ) | G i ], for 0 ≤ i ≤ m, is a
martingale, where g is any graph theoretic function, G 0 is the edge-free graph on
n vertices, and G i is derived from G i−1 by adding a random edge not in Gi−1
to Gi−1 .
                    j
   PROOF. Let X i = {X i , . . . , X j }. Given that G i−1 has been fixed,
                     X
     E[g E (G i )] =   Pr[X i = xi | G i−1 ]
                        X i =xi
                              X             £ m           ¯                 ¤ ¡              ¢
                                                      m ¯
                        ·                 Pr X i+1 = xi+1   G i−1 , X i = xi · g G i−1 ∪ xim
                              m
                            X i+1 =xi+1
                                    m
                            X         £           ¯     ¤ ¡              ¢
                  =                 Pr X im = xim ¯G i−1 · g G i−1 ∪ xim
                        X im =xim
                  = E[g(G m ) | G i−1 ] = g E (G i−1 ).
  We call the sequence proved to be a martingale in Lemma 7.2 the edge-addition
martingale in contrast to the edge-exposure martingale for G n, p .
  We now recall the well-known Azuma’s inequality (see, e.g., Alon and
Spencer [1992]).
   THEOREM 7.3 (AZUMA’S INEQUALITY ). Let Y0 , . . . , Ym be a martingale with
  i − Yi−1 | ≤ 1 for 0 < i ≤ m. Let λ > 0 be arbitrary. Then Pr[|Ym − Y0 | >
|Y√
λ m] < exp(−λ2 /2).
  To facilitate the application of Azuma’s inequality to our edge-addition martin-
gale, we establish the following lemma:
  LEMMA 7.4. Consider the sequence proved to be a martingale in Lemma 7.2.
Let g be any graph-theoretic function such that |g(G) − g(G 0 )| ≤ 1 for any pair of
graphs G and G 0 of the form G = H ∪ {e} and G 0 = H ∪ {e0 }, for some graph H .
Then |g E (G i ) − g E (G i−1 )| ≤ 1, for 0 < i ≤ m.
   PROOF. g E (G i ) and g E (G i−1 ) are the average of g(G i ∪ X i+1
                                                                   m
                                                                       ) and g(G i−1 ∪
  m           m         m
X i ) where X i+1 and X i range over their possible outcomes, given G i and G i−1 ,
                                                  m
respectively. We identify each outcome of X i+1      with equal-size disjoint sets of
                m                                 m
outcomes of X i that cover all outcomes of X i . Then g E (G i−1 ) may be regarded
as an average of set averages. If, for each set corresponding to an outcome P of
  m
X i+1 , we establish that the set average differs from g(G i ∪ P) by no more than 1,
the Lemma follows.
   The correspondence is as follows: Let G i = G i−1 ∪ {a} (i.e., X i = a). For each
            m                                                              j
outcome xi+1   , the corresponding set consists of outcomes of the form xi+1 a x mj+1
for i < j ≤ m (i.e., the same graph but a appears at different times), and of the
           m                                                                 m
form xi xi+1   where xi ranges over all edges not appearing in G i−1 and xi+1   . For
each outcome P = xi+1 of X i+1 and all Q in P’s associated set, |g(G i ∪ P) −
                        m         m

g(G i−1 ∪ Q)| ≤ 1 since the graphs differ in at most one edge. Clearly, |g(G i ∪ P)
− AVG Q {g(G i−1 ∪ Q)}| ≤ 1 holds as well, where the average is over outcomes Q
in P’s associated set.
30                                                     S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


   7.2. ANALYSIS. We define the excess of a subgraph H to be |E(H )| − |F(H )|,
where F(H ) is any spanning forest of H. Let f (G) be the maximum excess of the
graph made up of intracomponent edges, where the sets of components range over
all possible sets returned by the Partition procedure. (Recall that the size of any
component is no more than k = maxsize = log(3) n.)
   Define f E (G i ) = E[ f (G m )|G i ].
   The key observation leading to our linear-time result is that each pass of our
optimal algorithm definitely runs in linear time if f (G) ≤ m/α(m, n). To see
this, note that if this bound on f (G) holds, we can reduce the total number of
intracomponent edges to ≤2m/α in linear time using log α Borůvka steps, and
then, clearly, the MST of the resulting graph can be determined in O(m) time. We
show below that if a graph is randomly chosen from Gn,m , f (G) ≤ m/α(m, n) with
high probability.
   We now show that Lemma 7.4 applies to the graph-theoretic function f , and then
apply Azuma’s inequality to obtain our desired result.

  LEMMA 7.5. Let G = H ∪ {e} and G 0 = H ∪ {e0 } be two graphs on a set of
labeled vertices that differ by no more than one edge. Then | f (G) − f (G 0 )| ≤ 1.

   PROOF. Suppose without loss of generality that f (G) − f (G 0 ) > 1, then we
could apply the optimal set of components of G to G 0. Every intracomponent edge
of G remains an intracomponent edge, except possibly e. This can reduce the
excess by no more than one, a contradiction. The possibility that e0 may become an
intracomponent edge can only help the argument.

  LEMMA 7.6.          f E (G 0 ) = o(m/α).

   PROOF. Notice that if m/n ≥ αk, it is simply impossible to have m/α intra-
component edges, so we assume m/n < αk.
   An upper bound on f E (G 0 ) is the expected number of indices i such that edge X i
completed a cycle of length ≤k in G i−1 , since all edges which caused f to increase
must have satisfied this criterion. Let pi be the probability that X i completed a
cycle of length ≤k. By bounding the number of such cycles, and the probability
they exist in the graph, we have
                                              Ã j−1              !
                               X
                               k               Y       i −`
                         pi <     n     j−2
                                                 ¡n ¢
                              j=3           `=1 2 − (` − 1)
                                     Ã        ! j−1
                              1X  k
                                        nm
                            <            ¡n ¢        (recall that i ≤ m)
                              n j=3       2
                                µ k−1 ¶
                                     m
                            =O k k                   if m = Ä(n)
                                       n
                                µ 2¶
                                    m
                         or = O                      if m = o(n)
                                    n3
                                    P
     In either case, f E (G 0 ) ≤   i pi = o(m/α).
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                             31

  LEMMA 7.7. Let G be chosen from G n,m . Then Pr[ f (G) > m/α]                        <
exp(−Ä(m/α 2 )).

  √PROOF. By applying Azuma’s inequality,
                                       √                  √ Pr[| f E (G m )− f E (G 0 )| >
                                                 we have that
λ m] < exp(−λ2/2). Setting λ = m/α − f E (G 0 )/ m gives the lemma. Note
that, by Lemma 7.6, f E (G 0 ) is quite insignificant.
  We are now ready to prove Theorem 7.1.
    PROOF. We examine only the first log k passes of our optimal algorithm, since
all remaining passes certainly take o(m) time. Lemma 7.7 assures us that the first
pass runs in linear time with high probability. However, the topology of the graph
examined in later passes does depend on the edge weights. Assuming the Borůvka
steps contract all parts of the graph at a constant rate, which can easily be enforced,
a partition of the graph in one pass of the algorithm corresponds to a partition of
the original graph into components of size less than k c, for some fixed c. Using k c
in place of k does not affect Lemma 7.6, which gives the Theorem for G n,m , that
is, part (1). For G n, p , note that the probability that there are not 2( pn 2 ) edges is
exponential in −Ä( pn 2 ); hence, the probability that the algorithm fails to run in
linear time is dominated by the bound in part (1).
   For the sparse case where m < n/α, Theorem 7.1 part (1) holds with proba-
bility 1, and for p < 1/nα, by a Chernoff bound, part (2) holds with probability
1 − exp(−Ä(n/α)).

8. Discussion
An intriguing aspect of our algorithm is that we do not know its precise deter-
ministic running time although we can prove that it is within a constant factor of
optimal. Results of this nature have been obtained in the past for sensitivity anal-
ysis of minimum spanning trees [Dixon et al. 1992] and convex matrix searching
[Larmore 1990]. Also, for the problem of triangulating a convex polygon, it was
observed in Dixon et al. [1992] that an alternate linear-time algorithm could be
obtained using optimal decision trees on small subproblems. However, these ear-
lier algorithms make use of decision trees in more straightforward ways than the
algorithm presented here.
   As noted in Section 4.1, the construction of optimal decision trees takes sublin-
ear time. Thus, it is important to observe that our use of decision trees does not
result in a large constant factor in the running time. Further, this construction of
optimal decision trees is performed by a straightforward brute-force search; hence,
the resulting algorithm is uniform (i.e., it is a fixed algorithm that works for all
problem sizes).
   It was mentioned in the introduction that an optimal algorithm can be con-
structed for any problem, given an optimal verification algorithm for that problem.
We briefly sketch this construction [Jones 1997]. Consider a problem that has an
optimal verification algorithm that runs in time Ver(n). The above-mentioned con-
struction produces an algorithm that enumerates programs P1 , P2 , . . . for some
machine model and executes them incrementally as follows: for each i ≥ 1, for
every two operations executed by program Pi , program Pi+1 executes one operation.
Whenever any of the programs halts the verifier checks its output for correctness.
The algorithm terminates once the verifier determines that a correct output has been
32                                               S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


produced by one of the programs. If PC is the optimal program for the problem with
running time Opt(n), then this construction gives an algorithm that takes no more
than 2C+1 (Opt(n) + Ver(n)) steps. Since C is a constant and Ver(n) = O(Opt(n)),
this gives an algorithm that is within a constant factor of Opt(n).
   Using a linear-time MST verification algorithm such as Dixon et al. [1992],
King [1997], and Buchsbaum et al. [1998], the above construction yields an
optimal MST algorithm; however, it is unsatisfactory for several reasons. It is
truly impractical since it asks for an enumeration of all possible algorithms
and its constant factor is exponential in the position of the actual optimal algo-
rithm in this enumeration. Further, it sheds no light on the relation between the
algorithmic and decision-tree complexity of the problem. Our result, in con-
trast, has a very reasonable constant factor in the running time, and it is ro-
bust in that it ties the algorithmic complexity of MST to its decision-tree com-
plexity, a limiting factor in any machine model. It is not always the case that
algorithmic complexity and decision-tree complexity are asymptotically equiva-
lent: for instance, two sorting-type problems whose decision-tree complexity and
algorithmic complexity provably diverge are described in Goddard et al. [1993]
and [Pettie and Ramachandran [2002a, Sect. 8]. In fact, one can easily con-
coct simple problems that are NP-hard but nevertheless have polynomial-depth
decision-trees.

9. Conclusion
We have presented a deterministic MSF algorithm that is provably optimal. The
algorithm runs on a pointer machine, and on graphs with n vertices and m edges,
its running time is O(T ∗ (m, n)), where T ∗ (m, n) is the decision-tree complex-
ity of the MSF problem on n-node, m-edge graphs. Also, on random graphs our
algorithm runs in linear time with high probability for all possible edge-weights. In
fact, a hybrid of our algorithm and the randomized algorithm of Karger et al.
[1995] runs in expected linear time using only log∗ n random bits [Pettie and
Ramachandran 2000b]. Although the exact running time of our algorithm is not
known, we have shown that the time bound depends only on the number of
edge-weight comparisons needed to determine the MSF, and not on any data
structural issues.
   Determining the worst-case complexity of our algorithm is the main open ques-
tion remaining in the MSF problem; however, there is a subtler open question.
We have given an optimal uniform algorithm for the MSF problem that uses pre-
computed decision trees. Is there an optimal uniform algorithm that does not use
precomputed decision trees (or some similar technique)? More generally, are there
problems where precomputation is necessary? One may wish to study this issue in
a simpler setting, say the MSF verification problem on a pointer machine. Here,
there is still an α(m, n) factor separating the best pointer machine algorithm that
uses precomputed decision trees [Buchsbaum et al. 1998] and the one which does
not [Tarjan 1979b].
   One may also ask for the parallel complexity of the MSF problem. Here, re-
solved recently were the deterministic time complexity [Chong et al. 2001] and the
randomized work-time complexity [Pettie and Ramachandran 1999] of the MSF
problem on the EREW PRAM. An open question that remains here is to obtain a
deterministic work-time optimal parallel MSF algorithm. Parallelizing our optimal
An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm                                                           33

algorithm is not at all straightforward. Although handling decision trees does not
present any problems in the parallel context, we still need a method for identifying
contractible components in parallel and a base case algorithm that performs linear
work for graph-densities of log(3) n. Existing sequential algorithms that are suit-
able for the base case, such as the one in Fredman and Tarjan [1987] are also not
easily parallelizable.

REFERENCES
AHO, A. V., HOPCROFT, J. E., AND ULLMAN, J. D. 1974. The Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms.
  Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.
ALON, N., AND SPENCER, J. 1992. The Probabilistic Method. Wiley, New York.
    o
BORUVKA, O. 1926. O jistém problému minimaálním. Moravské Pr̆írodovĕdecké Spolec̆nosti 3, 37–58.
  (In Czech.)
BUCHSBAUM, A. L., KAPLAN, H., ROGERS, A., AND WESTBROOK, J. R. 1998. Linear-time pointer-
  machine algorithms for least common ancestors, MST verification, and dominators. In Proceedings of
  the ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing. ACM, New York, 279–288.
CHAZELLE, B. 1997. A faster deterministic algorithm for minimum spanning trees. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computing Science. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos,
  Calif., 22–31.
CHAZELLE, B. 2000a. The soft heap: An approximate priority queue with optimal error rate. J. ACM 47,
  6, 1012–1027.
CHAZELLE, B. 2000b. A minimum spanning tree algorithm with inverse-Ackermann type complexity.
  J. ACM 47, 6, 1028–1047.
CHONG, K. W., HAN, Y., AND LAM, T. W. 2001. Concurrent threads and optimal parallel minimum
  spanning trees algorithm. J. ACM 48, 2, 297–323.
DIJKSTRA, E. W. 1959. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs. Numer. Math. 1, 269–271.
DIXON, B., RAUCH, M., AND TARJAN, R. E. 1992. Verification and sensitivity analysis of minimum
  spanning trees in linear time. SIAM J. Comput. 21, 1184–1192.
ERDÖS, P., AND RÉNYI, A. 1961. On the evolution of random graphs. Bull. Inst. Internat. Statist. 38,
  343–347.
FREDMAN, M. L., AND TARJAN, R. E. 1987. Fibonacci heaps and their uses in improved network opti-
  mization algorithms. J. ACM 34, 596–615.
FREDMAN, M., AND WILLARD, D. E. 1994. Trans-dichotomous algorithms for minimum spanning trees
  and shortest paths. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 48, 3, 533–551.
GABOW, H. N., GALIL, Z., SPENCER, T., AND TARJAN, R. E. 1986. Efficient algorithms for finding
  minimum spanning trees in undirected and directed graphs. Combinatorica 6, 109–122.
GRAHAM, R. L., AND HELL, P. 1985. On the history of the minimum spanning tree problem. Ann. Hist.
  Comput. 7, 43–57.
GODDARD, W., KENYON, C., KING, V., AND SCHULMAN, L. 1993. Optimal randomized algorithms for
  local sorting and set-maxima. SIAM J. Comput. 22, 2, 272–283.
JARNÍK, V. 1930. O jistém problému minimaálním. Moravské Pr̆írodovĕdecké Spolec̆nosti 6, 57–63.
  (In Czech.)
JONES, N. 1997. Computability and Complexity: From a Programming Perspective. MIT Press,
  Cambridge, Mass.
KARGER, D. R., KLEIN, P. N., AND TARJAN, R. E. 1995. A randomized linear-time algorithm to find
  minimum spanning trees. J. ACM 42, 321–328.
KARP, R. M., AND TARJAN, R. E. 1980. Linear expected-time algorithms for connectivity problems.
  J. Algorithms 1, 4, 374–393.
KING, V. 1997. A simpler minimum spanning tree verification algorithm. Algorithmica 18, 2, 263–270.
LARMORE, L. L. 1990. An optimal algorithm with unknown time complexity for convex matrix searching.
  Infor. Process. Lett. 36, 147–151.
PETTIE, S. 1999. Finding minimum spanning trees in O(mα(m, n)) time. Tech. Rep. TR99-23. Univ. of
  Texas at Austin, Austin, Tex.
PETTIE, S., AND RAMACHANDRAN, V. 1999. A randomized time-work optimal parallel algorithm for
  finding a minimum spanning forest. In Proceedings of RANDOM ’99. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
  vol. 1671. Springer-Verlag, New York, 233–244.
34                                                         S. PETTIE AND V. RAMACHANDRAN


PETTIE, S., AND RAMACHANDRAN, V. 2002a. Computing shortest paths with comparisons and additions.
  In Proceedings of the 13th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms. ACM, New York, 267–276.
PETTIE, S., AND RAMACHANDRAN, V. 2002b. Minimizing randomness in minimum spanning tree, parallel
  connectivity, and set maxima algorithms. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
  Algorithms. ACM, New York, 713–722.
PRIM, R. C. 1957. Shortest connection networks and some generalizations. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 36, 1389–
  1401.
TARJAN, R. E. 1979a. A class of algorithms which require nonlinear time to maintain disjoint sets.
  J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 18, 2, 110–127.
TARJAN, R. E. 1979b. Applications of path compression on balanced trees. J. ACM 26, 4, 690–715.

RECEIVED AUGUST 2000; REVISED OCTOBER 2001; ACCEPTED NOVEMBER 2001




Journal of the ACM, Vol. 49, No. 1, January 2002.
