                                         Non-Trivial Zero-Knowledge Implies One-Way Functions

                                             Suvradip Chakraborty*             James Hulett†            Dakshita Khurana‡
                                                                              Kabir Tomer§
arXiv:2602.17651v1 [cs.CR] 19 Feb 2026




                                                                                  Abstract
                                                 A recent breakthrough [Hirahara and Nanashima, STOC’2024] established that if
                                             NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, the existence of zero-knowledge (ZK) with negligible errors for NP
                                             implies the existence of one-way functions (OWFs). This work obtains a characteriza-
                                             tion of one-way functions from the worst-case complexity of zero-knowledge in the
                                             high-error regime.
                                                 Assuming NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, we show that any non-trivial, constant-round public-
                                             coin ZK argument for NP implies the existence of OWFs, and therefore also (stan-
                                             dard) four-message zero-knowledge arguments for NP. Here, we call a ZK argument
                                             non-trivial if the sum of its completeness, soundness and zero-knowledge errors is
                                             bounded away from 1.
                                                 As a special case, we also prove that non-trivial non-interactive ZK (NIZK) argu-
                                             ments for NP imply the existence of OWFs. Using known amplification techniques,
                                             this also provides an unconditional transformation from weak to standard NIZK proofs
                                             for all meaningful error parameters. Prior work [Chakraborty, Hulett and Khurana,
                                             CRYPTO’2025] was limited to NIZKs with constant zero-knowledge error εzk and
                                                                                 √
                                             soundness error εs satisfying εzk + εs < 1 .




                                         * Visa Research. suvchakr@visa.com
                                         †
                                           UIUC. jhulett2@illinois.edu
                                         ‡
                                           UIUC and NTT Research. dakshita@illinois.edu
                                         §
                                           UIUC. ktomer2@illinois.edu
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                  1

2   Technical Overview                                                                       3
    2.1 Previous Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
    2.2 Barriers to Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
    2.3 Repetition to the Rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
    2.4 Generalizing to Interactive Zero Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
        2.4.1 Working with Computational Zero-Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
        2.4.2 Working with Private Coins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

3   Preliminaries                                                                                11
    3.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
    3.2 Uniform and Non-Uniform Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             12
    3.3 One-Way Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12
    3.4 Universal Extrapolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      13
    3.5 Zero-Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
    3.6 Complexity Classes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
    3.7 Chernoff Bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
    3.8 Lemmas From [LMP24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16

4   OWF From Non-Trivial NIZK                                                                    17

5   OWF From Non-Trivial Public-Coin ZK                                                          19
    5.1 Prover P
               e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
    5.2 Distinguisher D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    23
    5.3 Algorithm A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
    5.4 Putting It All Together . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    28

6   Applications to Amplification                                                          29
    6.1 Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
    6.2 Interactive Zero-Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

References                                                                                       30

A Private to Public Coin in the Absence of ai-OWFs                                               32

B Proof of Lemma 2                                                                               34
1       Introduction
Zero-knowledge proofs are a cornerstone of modern cryptography, allowing a prover to
convince a verifier about the validity of an NP statement without leaking any informa-
tion about the witness. A major research agenda, initiated by Ostrovsky and Wigder-
son [Ost91, OW93], asks: what are the minimal cryptographic assumptions needed for
zero-knowledge (ZK) proof systems? Their celebrated results established that, assuming
NP is hard on average, the existence of ZK proofs for NP implies the existence of one-way
functions (OWFs), a fundamental cryptographic primitive.
    More recently, Hirahara and Nanashima [HN24] made a notable advance by proving
that even the worst-case hardness of NP (specifically, NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly) suffices to construct
one-way functions from zero-knowledge proofs for NP. In fact, they only require the ex-
istence of zero-knowledge proofs for a specific type of language outside ioP/poly, thereby
opening up a new route for constructing one-way functions based solely on worst-case
hardness.

Non-trivial ZK and One-way Functions. What happens if we allow ZK proof systems
with non-negligible and possibly large security errors? Unfortunately, techniques of [Ost91,
OW93, HN24] that link zero-knowledge to one-way functions are critically dependent on
the assumption of small errors. As we will show, this is not merely an artifact of their anal-
ysis, but a fundamental limitation of their reductions. This state of affairs leaves open a
basic gap in our understanding of the complexity of ZK.
   Note that ZK proof systems with εc + εs + εzk ≥ 1 can be realized trivially1 , without any
assumptions. Here εc , εs and εzk denote the correctness, soundness and zero-knowledge
errors of the proof system respectively. In this work, we will focus on non-trivial ZK proof
systems with εc + εs + εzk < 1 − 1/p(|x|) for some polynomial p(·) in the input length |x|.
   We ask:

                   Do non-trivial ZK proof systems imply the existence of OWFs?

   Non-trivial ZK proof systems may be a lot easier to construct than standard ZK: relax-
ing the negligible soundness or zero-knowledge error requirement can significantly lower
the barriers to designing these protocols, potentially making them feasible even in set-
tings where negligible-error notions are hard to build. But if we did manage to construct
them, we would not know how to leverage them to build OWFs—leaving unresolved
questions about whether such protocols could function as a stepping stone towards one-
way functions, or if they are fundamentally weaker and cannot be used to construct basic
cryptographic primitives.

This Work. Our main result is a complete characterization of the worst-case complexity
of non-trivial constant round ZK.
    1
     Observe that when εc + εs + εzk = 1, one can have the CRS sample one of three protocols: have the
verifier always reject, have the verifier always accept, or have the prover send the full witness in the clear
and the verifier check it. If the CRS chooses the first with probability εc , the second with probability εs , and
the third with probability εzk , this trivial protocol will satisfy our requirements.


                                                        1
Theorem 1 (Informal). If NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly and non-trivial public-coin, constant round (compu-
tational) ZK arguments for NP exist, then one-way functions exist.

   The above result requires the assumption that the underlying ZK argument is public-
coin. We also obtain a result for private-coin protocols by showing that unless auxiliary-
input one-way functions exist, we can convert any constant-round private-coin protocol
into a public-coin one. Thus, non-trivial constant round ZK protocols yield auxiliary-
input OWFs.

Theorem 2 (Informal). If NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly and non-trivial constant round (computational) ZK
arguments for NP exist, then auxiliary-input one-way functions exist.

    We also consider the special case of non-interactive zero-knowledge (NIZK) arguments
for NP, where the prover sends a single proof string and both parties share a common ref-
erence string (CRS). We show that nontrivial NIZKs for NP, together with the assumption
that NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, imply the existence of one-way functions.

Theorem 3 (Informal). If NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly and non-trivial (computational) NIZK arguments for
NP exist, then one-way functions exist.

    This improves recent work [CHK25] which obtained one-way functions from any
                                                                                   √
NIZK with zero-knowledge error εzk and soundness error εs satisfying εzk + εc + 2 εs <
       1                                                √
1 − p(|x|) for some polynomial p(·), or satisfying εzk + εs < 1 in the case where εzk and
                                                                                 √
εs are constants and εc = o(1). However, the regime where εzk + εs < 1 but εzk + εs ≥ 1
remained open until this work.

Application: Amplifying ZK. Arguably one of the most natural questions about non-
trivial ZK proofs is whether they can be amplified to drive down their errors to negligible,
and obtain “standard” ZK. For NIZKs, this question has been studied extensively recently,
and such amplification has been shown to be possible under additional assumptions such
as the existence of public-key encryption [GJS19], and even just one-way functions [BG24,
AK25].
    Our theorem above can be viewed as eliminating the need to make any cryptographic
assumptions when amplifying NIZK. In more detail, if NP is easy in the worst case then
NIZKs for NP exist unconditionally, whereas if NP is hard in the worst case, then Infor-
mal Theorem 3 builds one-way functions from non-trivial NIZKs for NP. The resulting
one-way functions can be used, together with weak NIZKs, to obtain standard NIZKs by
relying on known amplification theorems in [BG24, AK25].
    For technical reasons we will still need to make the extremely mild complexity-theoretic
assumption (Assumption 1) that NP ̸⊆ (ioP/poly) \ BPP. In other words, if NP languages
are efficiently decidable infinitely often with advice, then they are efficiently decidable
on all input lengths. This is an extremely mild complexity assumption (it is implied by
NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, which is already a mild worst case assumption).

Corollary 1 (Informal). Under Assumption 1, non-trivial (computational) NIZK proofs imply
standard NIZK proofs.


                                            2
   Note that the corollary above applies only to NIZK proofs (with statistical soundness),
since we currently do not have approaches to amplify arbitrary non-trivial NIZK argu-
ments from assumptions weaker than public-key encryption.
   A natural next question is whether similar amplification is possible for interactive
ZK. Here, we note that one-way functions imply the existence of four-round ZK argu-
ments [BJY97], yielding the following informal Corollary.

Corollary 2 (Informal). Under Assumption 1, non-trivial public-coin constant-round interac-
tive (computational) ZK arguments imply four-round ZK arguments.


2     Technical Overview
For simplicity throughout this overview, we will highlight our techniques assuming that
the completeness error εc = 0. Formally we work with the general case where εc ̸= 0, but
this is a straightforward extension of the analysis described in this overview.
    In the following two subsections, we recall techniques used in prior works [OW93,
CHK25] to show that zero-knowledge requires one-way functions, as well as barriers that
prevent these techniques from working when εs + εzk ≈ 1. These will build intuition
towards our eventual approach. Readers that are already familiar with these works may
skip ahead to our techniques described in Section 2.3.
    We discuss prior ideas in the context of non-interactive zero-knowledge (NIZK), and
then describe methods to close the gap in parameters in the non-interactive setting. How-
ever, we note that the more general interactive case requires the most significant new
insights, discussed in Section 2.4.


2.1    Previous Techniques
[OW93] Techniques. The key tool used in [OW93] is Universal Extrapolation (UE): in-
formally, UE lets us “reverse sample” the randomness that would generate a particular
output of an efficient process. In more detail, given a polynomial-time sampler Samp and
an output y from its distribution, UE refers to the ability to efficiently and uniformly sam-
ple (up to small error) from the set of all inputs that Samp maps to y. UE is possible if and
only if one-way functions do not exist [IL90].
   Towards a contradiction, [OW93] assume the non-existence of one-way functions.
Then using UE, they convert a NIZK (Gen, P, V) and simulator Sim for a language L into
an algorithm A that decides L. In particular, A samples a real CRS from Gen, then uses
UE to find a random string r that would lead the simulator to output that same CRS. A
then accepts if and only if V would accept the proof output by Sim(x; r).
   To argue that A works, one has to show that it will accept x ∈ L with higher probability
than it accepts x ̸∈ L. Consider each of these cases:

    • If x ̸∈ L, A can only accept if it finds a proof relative to a real CRS that causes V to
      accept x. Soundness of the underlying NIZK will immediately tell us that this can
      happen with probability at most εs .


                                              3
   • If x ∈ L, note that by completeness V will accept a real CRS and proof with prob-
     ability 1 and so by zero-knowledge will accept a simulated CRS and proof with
     probability at least 1 − εzk .
      Now consider an algorithm B that is almost identical to A, except that it starts by
      sampling a CRS from Sim instead of from Gen. We note first that this is (up to the
      small statistical error of the UE) identically distributed to simply running V on a
      simulated CRS and proof, so by the above B accepts x ∈ L with probability at least
      1 − εzk . But note that since the only difference between A and B is in the original
      sampling of the CRS, and so by zero-knowledge their outputs must be εzk -close.
      Thus, A accepts x ∈ L with probability at least 1 − 2εzk .

   Thus, A is a correct algorithm for L as long as 1 − 2εzk is noticeably larger than εs ,
which is equivalent to requiring that εs + 2εzk is noticeably smaller than 1. Since one can
implement A as long as one-way functions don’t exist, this means that a NIZK for a hard
language with εs + 2εzk < 1 requires the existence of a one-way function.
   Note that in the analysis above, we first uses the zero-knowledge property to bound
the difference between real and simulated proofs (costing one εzk ) and then again bound
the difference between real and simulated crs (costing another εzk ). It is natural to won-
der whether there may be a better way to analyze the same algorithm and show that A
decides L whenever we have arbitrary non-trivial NIZKs, but in the following subsection
(Section 2.2) we provide an explicit counterexample.

[CHK25] Techniques. The improvement in [CHK25] stems from the observation that
one of the εzk errors occurs specifically when the analysis transitions the crs (and not
the proof itself) from real to simulated. They then add a “CRS check” to the deciding
algorithm A described above, which roughly predicts whether a CRS was sampled from
the real or simulated distribution. This requires the use of Universal Approximation (UA),
which intuitively allows one to approximate the probability of a given output coming
from a given randomized process. Similar to the case of UE, [Imp92] showed that UA is
possible exactly when one-way functions don’t exist.2
    In particular, [CHK25] modifies the algorithm A above by adding a step that estimates
the probability that the CRS it samples came from Gen or from Sim, and immediately
rejects if the latter is at least √1εs times larger than the former. As in [OW93], one now has
to show that the modified A accepts x ∈ L more often than x ̸∈ L.

   • If x ̸∈ L, the above modification can only make A less likely to accept, so the accep-
     tance probability is still upper-bounded by εs .

   • If x ∈ L, all the hybrids considered above have to be modified to also include the
     CRS checking step. It is possible to show that a real CRS fails the check with prob-
                     √
     ability at most εs (ignoring a small error term from the UA), and thus a real CRS
                                                                                     √
     and proof will be accepted and pass the CRS check with probability at least 1 − εs .
  2
   [CHK25] technically uses a stronger notion of UA than the one considered in [Imp92], but for our
purposes we will ignore this subtlety.



                                                4
       Thus, by zero-knowledge a simulated CRS and proof must pass both checks with
                               √
       probability at least 1 − εs − εzk .
      The key step in the [CHK25] analysis comes when considering B, which as before is
      equivalent to A except that it starts with a simulated CRS. As in the prior analysis,
      this is identically distributed (up to the small statistical error of the UE) to sampling
      the CRS and proof from Sim directly, and so will accept x ∈ L with probability at
                √
      least 1− εs −εzk . However, instead of paying an additive εzk loss in acceptance prob-
                                                                                            √
      ability between B and A, [CHK25] notes that one can instead pay a multiplicative εs
      loss. Indeed, any CRS that is at most √1εs times more likely to come from Sim as from
      Gen can “contribute” at most √1εs times more the the acceptance probability of B as it
      does to A; all other CRS are rejected by the checking step, and so “contribute” noth-
                                                                                      √
      ing in either algorithm. Thus, A accepts x ∈ L with probability at least εs times
                                                                         √        √        
      the acceptance probability of B, which gives a final bound of εs 1 − εs − εzk .
                                                                  √         √        
   This means that A is a correct algorithm for L as long as εs 1 − εs − εzk is notice-
                                                                      √
ably smaller than εs ; rearranging terms, this requires that εzk + 2 εs is noticeably smaller
                                                                                 √
than 1. As before, this says that a NIZK for a hard language with εzk + 2 εs < 1 must
imply the existence of a one-way function.

2.2    Barriers to Improvement
We would ideally like a result that works for any non-trivial NIZK, meaning it should only
need to assume that εs + εzk < 1. One might hope that a tighter analysis of the hybrids in
[OW93] or [CHK25] could achieve such a result, but this turns out to be impossible: there
exists a (contrived) protocol with εs + εzk < 1 for which neither algorithm A described
above give advantage in distinguishing x ∈ L from x ̸∈ L!
     In particular, consider some language L ∈ P3 and define a NIZK for L with errors
(εs , εzk ) as follows:
   • Gen : Output                               (
                                                 0      w.p. 1 − εzk ,
                                          crs =
                                                 1      w.p. εzk .

   • P(crs) outputs as proof a bit π = crs.
   • V decides x on its own and if x ∈ L, V outputs
                                               (
                                                1 if π = crs,
                                V(crs, π, x) =
                                                0 if π ̸= crs.

       If x ̸∈ L, V outputs                          (
                                                      1      w.p. εs ,
                                      V(crs, π, x) =
                                                      0      w.p. 1 − εs .
   3
    Note that while this language is by definition easy, that doesn’t matter for the purposes of our coun-
terexample; we are simply trying to show that the particular algorithm A doesn’t decide L.


                                                    5
   • Sim(x) outputs                                (
                                                    00      w.p. 1 − εzk ,
                                        (crs, π) =
                                                    01      w.p. εzk .

    One can easily verify that the soundness error is exactly εs and the zero-knowledge
error is exactly εzk by construction.
    But now consider the behavior of the algorithm A from [OW93] if instantiated with
this NIZK (assuming, for simplicity, that the UE has no errors):

   • If x ̸∈ L, V will accept with probability εs regardless of what CRS and proof it is
     given, so A will accept with the same probability.

   • If x ∈ L, note that A can never sample the proof to be 1 if the CRS is 1, since Sim
     never outputs 11.4 Thus, the only way for A to accept is if it samples the CRS as 0
     (which happens with probability 1−εzk from Gen) and the proof as 0 (which happens
     with probability (1 − εzk ) from Sim conditioned on the CRS being 0). Thus, A will
     only accept x ∈ L with probability (1 − εzk )2 .

Thus, at a minimum, we need to assume that (1 − εzk )2 is noticeably larger than εs in order
for the [OW93] algorithm to have any chance of working. This rules out the possibility of
a better analysis of the same algorithm giving us the optimal result.5
    Additionally, the same counterexample also rules out the possibility of getting a tight
result from the modified decision algorithm A in [CHK25]. Indeed, if the parameters are
set such that the CRS check rejects when the CRS is 0, A will never accept x ∈ L. If
instead the CRS check accepts when the CRS is 0, then it accepts every CRS6 , and thus
(for this particular NIZK) the algorithm from [CHK25] is functionally equivalent to that
from [OW93]!


2.3    Repetition to the Rescue
In order to improve on prior techniques, it will help to first understand why the above
counterexample is bad for them. We note that the counterexample hinges on the fact that
on crs = 0 the simulator always has the ability to output a Good proof (i.e. 0), but still
chooses to output a Bad proof (i.e. 1) some of the time. Here by Good we mean a proof
that is statistically close to a real proof, and by Bad we mean a proof that is far from a
real proof. This causes the distribution used by A to have 2εzk error (once due to the
distance between the real and simulated CRS and once due to the distance between the
   4
      Technically, Sim can never output a CRS of 1, and so the behavior of A if it samples 1 from Gen is
undefined. Informally, we can say that if the distribution of Sim is undefined, A simply fails. Alternatively,
we can fix this formally by having Sim output 10 with some tiny probability δ, where we set δ to be small
enough to not affect our analysis meaningfully.
    5
      As an explicit example, the parameter setting of εzk = 0.5 and εs = 0.25 is non-trivial, but the [OW93]
algorithm would accept x with probability 0.25 regardless of if x ∈ L or not.
    6
      Note that Sim outputs the CRS as 1 with probability smaller than Gen does, so the CRS check can never
reject this.




                                                      6
real and simulated proofs conditioned on a particular CRS), while still keeping the real and
simulated (CRS, proof) distributions εzk -close overall.
    It turns out that this type of simulator behavior is the only reason prior techniques
don’t work with protocols where εs + εzk ≈ 1. In particular, for every fixing of x ∈ L, if
every CRS was either Good (i.e., the simulator conditioned on this CRS always outputs
an accepting proof for x) or Bad (i.e., the simulator conditioned on this CRS never outputs
an accepting proof for x), then the algorithm A from [OW93] will work only assuming that
εs + εzk < 1! This is because on any Bad CRS output by Gen, the real prover is guaranteed
to output an accepting proof whereas the simulator never does. This allows us to infer
that Gen must output a Good CRS with probability at least 1 − εzk , and thus A will accept
x ∈ L with the same probability.
    Of course, we cannot in general assume that the simulator is guaranteed to always
output Good proofs on certain CRSes and always output Bad proofs on others. But, we
can hope to mimic a similar effect by sampling many simulated proofs for the same CRS
and checking whether they all reject. Our updated definition of a Good CRS is one where
(with overwhelming probability) at least one of the simulated proofs that is sampled is
accepted.7
    In particular, we fix an appropriate polynomial p(·) and consider a modified algorithm
A′ that repeats the [OW93] algorithm p(|x|) times (all with respect to the same CRS, but
reverse sampling fresh randomness each time) and accepts if any of the repetitions give
an accepting proof.
   • For x ̸∈ L, A′ still needs to find an accepting proof relative to a real CRS in order to
     accept. Since repeatedly running the [OW93] algorithm is a valid strategy to break
     soundness of the NIZK, we have that the probability that even one of the proofs
     accept is at most εs .

   • For x ∈ L, we call a CRS Good if Sim conditioned on outputting CRS gives an
                                                  1
     accepting proof for x with probability ≥ p(|x|) and Bad otherwise. Very roughly, as
     long as p(|x|) is large enough, we can as above argue that Gen can only output a Bad
     CRS with probability (approximately) εzk , since doing so contributes directly to the
     zero-knowledge error of the NIZK8 . And if Gen outputs a Good CRS, A′ will find an
     accepting proof for x with overwhelming probability. Thus, up to small errors, A′
     will accept x ∈ L with probability at least 1 − εzk .
    As in prior analysis, we just need the probability that A′ accepts x ∈ L to be noticeably
larger than the probability it accepts x ̸∈ L. Rearranging terms, this only requires that
   7
      We note that [Ps05] use a similar idea, where they categorize the crs according to whether there exists an
accepting proof relative to it. However, their analysis is limited to the negligible-error setting and doesn’t
seem to naturally generalize to the interactive setting.
    8
      In more detail note that Sim will almost never output a Bad CRS with an accepting proof, since by
                                                                                                     1
definition the probability Sim’s proof is accepting conditioned on the CRS being bad is at most p(|x|)   . Since
we are assuming perfect completeness however, P will always output an accepting proof, even when the
CRS from Gen is Bad. Thus, if Gen outputs a Bad CRS with probability much higher than εzk , we can break
zero-knowledge with a distinguisher that checks if the CRS is Bad but the proof is still accepting. Here,
note that we can (probably approximately) estimate whether a CRS is Good or Bad efficiently by using UE
to sample many possible simulated proofs relative to it, and checking what fraction of them are accepting.


                                                       7
εs + εzk be noticeably smaller than 1—meaning we can work with any non-trivial NIZK!
    We have swept some technical details under the rug, but the above ideas coarsely suf-
fice to obtain OWFs from non-trivial NIZKs. In the following section, we discuss barriers
and methods to extend these ideas to the interactive setting.


2.4   Generalizing to Interactive Zero Knowledge
As discussed in the introduction, our primary goal is to obtain an implication from non-
trivial honest-verifier ZK to OWFs, since this gives us the strongest possible theorem state-
ment. First, we note that techniques from [OW93] naturally extend to the interactive case,
but get further from the desired result as the number of rounds increases: to get a one-way
function from a k round protocol, they require εs + kεzk < 1. Similarly, simple extensions
of the [CHK25] techniques require (εs )1/k + εzk < 1.
    A natural goal is therefore to see if we can extend the techniques that gave us a tight
result for NIZKs to the interactive setting, and more specifically, eliminate the dependence
on k in the above constraints.
    In order to generalize our techniques to the interactive setting, it will help to take a
slightly different view of our proof in the non-interactive case. We can treat our algo-
rithm A as defining a malicious prover P,    e then simulating a run of P  e and V to decide
whether to accept x. In the analysis above, we treated P     e as using UE to sample many
possible simulated proof strings, and outputting an accepting one if found. But note that
we equally well could phrase P  e as choosing whichever sampled proof string has the max-
imum probability of being accepted. Phrased this way, we can now begin to extend this
idea to the interactive case.

An Inefficient Prover. We would like to define a malicious prover P    e such that our algo-
rithm A to decide L can simply simulate an interaction between P   e and V on x and output
the result. Unlike the non-interactive case, P  e can’t immediately check if the message it
is considering would lead to V accepting or rejecting, since this decision may depend on
randomness sampled at a later point in the protocol. Thus, all we can hope for is to have
e choose the “best” message available to it, which means choosing the message that max-
P
imizes the probability that V accepts if we continue to apply the prover strategy Pe in future
rounds. For now, we will assume that Pe can (inefficiently) find such messages, and we
will later see how to make Pe efficient.
    More formally, suppose for simplicity that we are starting from a protocol that satis-
fies statistical soundness and zero-knowledge. We can (recursively) define P    e that, given
x and a partial transcript τ , considers all possible next messages m in the support of Sim
and outputs whichever one maximizes the probability of V accepting x if it interacts with
e starting from transcript τ ∥m. Here, defining this success probability based only on the
P
transcript and not on V’s internal state limits us to only working with public-coin proto-
cols.
    Let A(x) be the algorithm that runs P  e and V on input x and outputs V’s decision bit;
we can now argue that A correctly decides L.

                                              8
   • If x ̸∈ L, statistical soundness tells us that no prover can convince V with probability
     greater than εs , and so in particular Pe cannot. Thus, A(x) will accept with probability
     at most εs .

   • If x ∈ L, we can argue that P     e performs “almost as well as” the honest prover P.
     In particular, we note that since P  e always chooses the best possible message in the
     support of Sim, the only way for P to choose a better message is if it sends a message
     that Sim never would. But from statistical zero-knowledge, we know that this can
     happen with probability at most εzk !9 Thus, the probability that P   e convinces V is at
     least (1 − εzk ), which tells us that A accepts with probability at least (1 − εzk ).

   As in the NIZK case, this immediately gives us an algorithm for L as long as εs + εzk is
noticeably smaller than 1.

Making P  e Efficient. So far, we required P e to find the best possible next prover message
in the support of Sim, which may not be efficient to compute. This inefficiency meant that
our eventual decision algorithm A is inefficient, which is a problem. To fix these issues,
we need to modify how we define P    e so that it has a polynomial run time, but still works
well enough to argue that A(x) will accept with good probability when x ∈ L.
    Taking inspiration from the NIZK case, we can have P    e use UE to sample many possi-
ble next messages from Sim, and simply choose the best message among those it sampled.
While this won’t guarantee that we get the best possible next message, it does guarantee
that (with overwhelming probability) we get a message that is “one of the best”. In par-
ticular, suppose we order all the messages in the support of Sim by the probability that P  e
will convince V if it chooses that message next. For any δ, if we have P    e sample n many
                                                                                      δ
possible next messages, it will sample at least one in the top δ fraction of this order with
overwhelming probability.
    There is however one catch to this strategy that only arises in the interactive case: in
order to choose the best message among those sampled, P      e has to be able to compute the
probability that each message will lead to it convincing V. Note though that as long as
V is public coin (and so stateless), P
                                     e can get a very good estimate of this probability, as
e can simulate an interaction between itself and V “in its own head”. A Chernoff bound
P
says that Pe only needs to run poly(n, 1 ) such simulations in order to (with overwhelming
                                       δ
probability) estimate its success probability to within an additive δ factor for any δ. Note,
however, that since P e has to simulate itself a polynomial number of times on a transcript
that is only one message longer, its run time will grow by a multiplicative factor of poly(n)
for each round. This will give us a final run time of poly(n)k , which constrains us to only
work with protocols where k is a constant.
    Putting this all together, we get an efficient P e that with overwhelming probability
chooses a next message that has success probability at most 2δ smaller than some message
in the top δ fraction of messages in the support of Sim. We claim that as long as δ is set to
   9
   Importantly, we are applying zero-knowledge globally to the entire transcript instead of on a message-
by-message basis. This is the key reason why we avoid the O(k)εzk term in the analysis from [OW93].


                                                   9
a sufficiently small inverse polynomial, our prior analysis is robust enough to work with
these weaker guarantees on P.   e
    In more detail, note that all we have to change in the above analysis is the argument
that P can’t pick a “better” message than P   e too commonly. Since our weaker guarantee
on Pe is that it picks a message (approximately) in the top δ fraction of possible messages
from the support of Sim, we just have to bound the probability that P picks a message that
is better than a (1 − δ) fraction of the support of Sim.
    By a union bound over each round, the probability that Sim ever outputs such a mes-
sage is at most δk, so by (statistical) zero-knowledge, the probability that a real transcript
contains such a message is at most εzk + δk. By our guarantees on P,e we know that it loses
at most 2δ success probability in each round compared to P conditioned on not picking
such a “too good” message. Thus, since P will always convince V to accept x ∈ L, we
have that P e convinces V with probability at least 1 − εzk − 3δk.
    Finally, in order for A to be correct, we will need εs to be noticeably smaller than
1 − εzk − 3δk. As long as εs + εzk is noticeably smaller than 1, we can pick an appropriate
inverse-polynomial δ that makes this happen.

2.4.1   Working with Computational Zero-Knowledge
Up until this point, we’ve been applying zero-knowledge with respect to a distinguisher
D that perfectly answers questions about the support of Sim—in particular, one that checks
if a given prover message better than the bottom (1 − δ) fraction of the support of Sim.
Here recall that a message a is better than b if the probability that Pe convinces V is higher
if Pe chooses a in its next round, compared with b.
     If we want to work with protocols that only have computational zero-knowledge, we
need to come up with an efficient distinguisher that still works well enough for our proof.
     Our efficient distinguisher will try to approximate the fraction of messages from Sim
that a given message is better than. To do this, it will sample a large number of possible
next messages from the support of Sim and compare them to the given message. Formally,
it will sample poly(n, 1δ ) such messages, and check if at most a 2δ fraction of them are
better than the given prover message. By a Chernoff bound, we have that if the given
prover message is in fact better than a (1 − δ) fraction of all possible messages in the
support of Sim, this check will pass with overwhelming probability.
     As in the previous section, we note that while we may not be able to compute the
exact success probability efficiently, the same estimation procedure can with overwhelm-
ing probability get us within an additive factor of δ for any inverse-polynomial δ. Thus,
except with negligible probability, we know that our distinguisher will say “real” if any
prover message in its input transcript is at least 2δ better than the bottom (1 − δ) fraction
of messages in the support of Sim.
     By a careful analysis, we can show that that this efficient distinguisher still works for
the analysis in the previous section. Indeed, there are only two points where we had
to use properties of the distinguisher: first to argue that it rarely outputs “real” on a
simulated transcript, and second to argue that P   e does “almost as well” as P conditioned
on the distinguisher saying “simulated”.

                                             10
    • For the former case, we claim that the efficient distinguisher says “real” on a tran-
      script from Sim with probability at most 2δk. For any given round, we know that the
      prover message in the transcript was generated by Sim, and hence comes from the
      same distribution as the messages the distinguisher samples. Thus, the probability
      that the message in the transcript is in the top 2δ fraction of the sampled messages
      is just 2δ, regardless of what procedure we use to compare them.

    • For the latter case, we note that the only change between this section and the last
      is that the efficient distinguisher may allow P to have messages that have up to 2δ
      higher success probability than the bottom (1−δ) fraction of messages in the support
      of Sim. Since in the last section we already allowed P e to output messages that have
      up to 2δ lower probability than the top δ fraction of messages, we essentially are just
      doubling the error from there.

In both cases, we see that setting δ to be half as large as the setting of δ in the previous
section suffices to make the same analysis go through.

2.4.2    Working with Private Coins
The above proof critically relies on the zero-knowledge protocol we start with being
public-coin so that we can efficiently simulate V starting from an arbitrary transcript and
thus estimate the probability of it accepting. However, we note that at least intuitively, we
shouldn’t have to make this assumption: if V is able to computationally hide information
about its randomness in a private-coin protocol, intuitively the map from V’s randomness
to its messages is a one-way function.
    We formalize this intuition in Appendix A, showing that either infinitely-often auxiliary-
input uniform-secure one-way functions exist or every constant-round private-coin pro-
tocol can be converted into an equivalent public-coin protocol.
    We note that, unlike in the case of public-coin protocols, we obtain auxiliary-input one-
way functions. This is because in our transformation, in order to achieve soundness the
verifier has to resample its randomness such that it is consistent with the full transcript.
Since the verifier does not have access to the malicious prover’s code, there does not im-
mediately seem to be a way to construct an efficient sampler such that UE on that sampler
will allow us to do this. We get past this by allowing the sampler to take the transcript
as auxiliary input, but this limits our result to achieving auxiliary-input one-way func-
tions. Since this auxiliary input comes from the prover messages and not from the worst-
case instance, switching to average-case hardness does not seem to improve the situation.
Nonetheless, our results are sufficient to rule out information-theoretic constructions of
(constant-round) non-trivial ZK even in the private-coin setting.


3       Preliminaries
3.1     Notation
We define the following notation:

                                             11
   • [n] represents the set {1, 2, . . . , n} and [n]0 represents the set {0, 1, . . . , n}.

   • We call a function µ negligible if it is smaller than any inverse polynomial, that is if
                                                                                         1
     for every polynomial p there exists an n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , µ(n) < p(n)   .
     We let negl denote an unspecified negligible function.

   • We call a function µ noticeable if it is asymptotically larger than some inverse poly-
     nomial, that is if there exists a polynomial p and n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 ,
              1
     µ(n) ≥ p(n) .

   • a <n b represents that a is noticeably less than b, that is that there exists a polynomial
                                                               1
     p and n0 ∈ N such that for all n ≥ n0 , a(n) < b(n) − p(n)   .


3.2   Uniform and Non-Uniform Machines
Throughout this paper, our protocols will have (honest) participants that can be described
as uniform Turing machines, whereas adversaries will (w.l.o.g.) be non-uniform Turing
Machines, or equivalently, families of polynomial-sized circuits.


3.3   One-Way Functions
Definition 1 (One-way Functions). Fix an alphabet Σ. We say that a family of functions
{fx }x∈Σ∗ with fx : {0, 1}mi (|x|) → {0, 1}mo (|x|) is one-way if

   • [Efficiency] There exists a Turing machine M and polynomial p such that for all x ∈ Σ∗
     and r ∈ {0, 1}mi (|x|) , M (x, r) outputs fx (r) in time at most p(|x|)

   • [One-Wayness] For all non-uniform PPT machines A, all polynomials p, and all suffi-
     ciently large n, there exists an x ∈ Σn with
                           h
                                                         $
                                                                         i       1
                         Pr fx (A(x, fx (r))) = fx (r)|r ← {0, 1}mi (|x|) ≤
                                                                                p(n)

Definition 2 (Weak One-way Functions). Fix an alphabet Σ. We say that a family of functions
{fx }x∈Σ∗ with fx : {0, 1}mi (|x|) → {0, 1}mo (|x|) is weakly one-way if

   • [Efficiency] There exists a Turing machine M and polynomial p such that for all x ∈ Σ∗
     and r ∈ {0, 1}mi (|x|) , M (x, r) outputs fx (r) in time at most p(|x|)

   • [Weak One-Wayness] For all non-uniform PPT machines A there exists a polynomial p
     such that for sufficiently large n there exists an x ∈ Σn with
                         h
                                                       $
                                                                       i       1
                       Pr fx (A(x, fx (r))) = fx (r)|r ← {0, 1}mi (|x|) ≤ 1 −
                                                                              p(n)

Remark 1. A few remarks about these definitions are in order:


                                                  12
   • The definition above can be used to define both (standard) one-way functions, and one-way
     functions with auxiliary input. If we take Σ = {0, 1}, these definitions correspond to (weak)
     one-way functions with auxiliary inputs; if we take Σ = {1}, these definitions correspond to
     (weak) one-way functions with no auxiliary input. In this paper, if we refer to an “auxiliary
     input (weak) one-way function”, we mean one with respect to Σ = {0, 1}; if we don’t
     otherwise specify Σ, we default to Σ = {1}. A similar remark applies to all our definitions
     that make reference to Σ.

   • Since we require that M is computable in time polynomial in |x| (as opposed to in the size of
     its full input), we can assume WLOG that mi and mo are polynomially-bounded functions.
    While weak one-way functions may at first seem much weaker than one-way func-
tions, the two notions are existentially equivalent.
Theorem 4 ([Yao82]). Fix an alphabet Σ. One-way functions exist with respect to Σ if and only
if weak one-way functions do.


3.4    Universal Extrapolation
Definition 3 (Sampler). Fix an alphabet Σ. We say that a probabilistic polynomial time machine
M is a sampler from mi input bits to mo output bits if for all x ∈ Σ∗ , M (x) uses at most mi (|x|)
bits of randomness and for all r ∈ {0, 1}mi (|x|) , M (x; r) ∈ {0, 1}mo (|x|) .
Remark 2. Note that mi and mo can WLOG be bounded by the run time of M ; since M runs in
time polynomial in |x|, we can freely assume that mi and mo are polynomially-bounded functions
of n.
Definition 4 (Infinitely-Often Universal Extrapolation). Fix an alphabet Σ. We say that
Infinitely-Often Universal Extrapolation (io-UE) is possible if for every sampler M from mi input
bits to mo output bits and all polynomials p, there exists a non-uniform PPT machine N such that
                                                             1
for infinitely many n, the following two distributions are p(n) -close in statistical distance for every
       n
x∈Σ :
                 $
   1. Sample r ← {0, 1}mi (n) and output r∥M (x; r)
                 $
   2. Sample r ← {0, 1}mi (n) and output N (x, M (x; r))∥M (x; r)
Theorem 5 ([IL90]). Fix an alphabet Σ. io-UE is possible with respect to Σ if and only if one-way
functions do not exist with respect to Σ.


3.5    Zero-Knowledge
Definition 5 ((εc , εs , εzk )-ZK). An (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument for an NP relation R is a pair of
uniform PPT interactive algorithms (P, V) such that
   • Syntax

         – P is given input (x, w) and V is given input x.

                                                  13
         – P and V interact over the course of k rounds, creating a transcript τ .
         – After the interaction, V outputs a single bit. We let ⟨P(w), V⟩(x) denote this output.

   • Completeness: For every (x, w) ∈ R,

                                    Pr [⟨P(w), V⟩(x) = 1] ≥ 1 − εc (|x|)

                                                  e we have that for x ̸∈ LR such that
   • Soundness: For any non-uniform PPT algorithm P,
     |x| is large enough,         h            i
                               Pr ⟨P,
                                    e V⟩(x) = 1 ≤ εs (|x|)

   • Zero-Knowledge: There exists a PPT simulator Sim such that for all non-uniform PPT
     distinguishers D and all (x, w) ∈ R with |x| large enough,
                                                "                                 #
                                                                   $        m
       Pr [D(r, τ ) = 1 | (r, τ ) ← Sim(x)] − Pr D(r, τ ) = 1    r ← {0, 1}         ≤ εzk (|x|)
                                                              τ ← ⟨P(w), V⟩(x; r)

      where we let m be the number of random bits used by V and ⟨P(w), V⟩(x; r) denote the
      transcript generated by P and V interacting, fixing V’s random tape to r.
Remark 3. We say a ZK argument for L is public-coin if the every message from V is simply a
fresh random string. In particular, note that this implies without loss of generality that V does not
maintain an internal state between rounds.
Definition 6 ((εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK). An (εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK for an NP relation R is a tuple of polynomial-
time algorithms (Gen, P, V) such that
   • Syntax

         – crs ← Gen(1n ): Gen is a randomized algorithm that on input an instance size (in
           unary) outputs a common reference string.
         – π ← P(crs, x, w): P is a randomized algorithm that on input a crs, instance, and
           witness for that instance outputs a proof.
         – b ← V(crs, x, π): V is a deterministic algorithm that on input a crs, instance, and
           proof for that instance outputs a bit denoting acceptance or rejection.

   • Completeness: For every (x, w) ∈ R,

                                         crs ← Gen(1|x| )
                                                         
                     Pr V(crs, x, π) = 1                    ≥ 1 − εc (|x|)
                                         π ← P(crs, x, w)

   • Soundness: For any non-uniform PPT algorithm P,    e we have that for x ̸∈ LR such that
     |x| is large enough,

                                               crs ← Gen(1|x| )
                                                               
                          Pr V(crs, x, π̃) = 1                    ≤ εs (|x|)
                                                e ← P(crs,
                                                π   e      x)

                                                   14
   • Zero-Knowledge: There exists a PPT simulator Sim such that for all non-uniform PPT
     distinguishers D and all (x, w) ∈ R with |x| large enough,

                                                                crs ← Gen(1|x| )
                                                                                
      Pr [D(crs, π) = 1 | (crs, π) ← Sim(x)] − Pr D(crs, π) = 1                    ≤ εzk (|x|)
                                                                π ← P(crs, x, w)

Remark 4. We will often refer to a (non-interactive) zero-knowledge argument as being for the
language defined by the relation R, rather than for the relation itself.

Remark 5. We have defined soundness for NIZKs as being computational and non-adaptive.
One can also consider statistical soundness, where our guarantee needs to hold even against inef-
ficient P.
        e Additionally, one can consider adaptive soundness, where the adversary is allowed to
choose the instance after seeing the CRS. Formally, our soundness requirement would be replaced
by
                              |x| = n ∧ x ̸∈ LR crs ← Gen(1n )
                                                                  
                         Pr                                          ≤ εs (n)
                              ∧ V(crs, x, π̃) = 1 (x, π̃) ← P̃(crs)
for sufficiently large n.


3.6    Complexity Classes
Definition 7 (Infinitely-Often BPP). Let ioBPP be the class of languages L such that there exists
a PPT algorithm A, functions a, b : N → [0, 1], and a polynomial p such that for infinitely many
n,

   • For all x ∈ L ∩ {0, 1}n , Pr[A(x) = 1] ≥ a(n)

   • For all x ∈ {0, 1}n − L, Pr[A(x) = 1] ≤ b(n)
                    1
   • a(n) − b(n) ≥ p(n)

We let ioBPP/poly be defined similarly, except that A is allowed to be non-uniform.

Definition 8 (Infinitely-Often P/poly). Let ioP/poly be the class of languages L such that there
exists a non-uniform polynomial-time algorithm A such that for infinitely many n,

   • For all x ∈ L ∩ {0, 1}n , A(x) = 1

   • For all x ∈ {0, 1}n − L, A(x) = 0

Remark 6. The textbook proof that BPP ⊆ P/poly also says that ioBPP/poly ⊆ ioP/poly, so in
particular ioBPP/poly = ioP/poly. Since ioP/poly is a more standard complexity class, we will
state our results in terms of it, even when the algorithms we give are in fact probabilistic.




                                               15
3.7       Chernoff Bounds
We will need a few different standard instantiations of Chernoff bounds for binomial
random variables, as listed below.

Theorem 6 (Chernoff Bounds). For every i ∈ [m], let XiP      be an independent Bernoulli random
variable that takes value 1 with probability p, and let X := i Xi . Then:
                                                        2 
   1. for any 0 < δ < 1, Pr[X ≥ (1 + δ)mp] ≤ exp − δ 3mp .
                                                                   2
                                                                           
   2. for any 0 < δ < 1, Pr[X ≤ (1 − δ)mp] ≤ exp                 − δ 2mp       .
                                              2
   3. for any 0 < ∆, Pr[|X − mp| ≥ ∆] ≤ 2 exp − ∆m .


3.8       Lemmas From [LMP24]
In order to bridge the gap from auxiliary-input one-way functions to standard one-way
functions, we recall the following definition and lemmas from [HN24] as presented in
[LMP24].

Definition 9 (Infinitely-Often Average-Case BPP, [LMP24] Definition 2.1). Let L be a lan-
guage and D = {Dn }n∈N be an efficiently sampleable distribution. We say (L, D) ∈ ioAvgBPP/poly
if there exists a non-uniform PPT A such that for infinitely many n ∈ N:

   • For all x ∈ Supp(Dn ), Pr[A(x) ∈ {⊥, L(x)}] ≥ 0.9
       h                    i
                      $
   • Pr A(x) =⊥| x ← Dn ≤ 0.25

Lemma 1 ([LMP24] Lemma 3.5). Suppose auxiliary-input one-way functions exist. Then there
is a language L ∈ NP and a polynomial m(·) such that (L, {Um(n) }n∈N ) ̸∈ ioAvgBPP/poly.

   In order to fit the next lemma from [LMP24] into our framework, it will help to intro-
duce some new notation.

Definition 10 (Decision-To-Inversion Reduction). Fix a language L. A decision-to-inversion
reduction for L is a PPT machine R(·) , a function family {fx }x∈{0,1}∗ , and a polynomial p(·)
such that for any non-uniform    APPT A and sufficiently  large10 x such that A(x, ·) inverts fx with
                       1                                 1
                                             
probability at least p(|x|) , Pr R (x) = L(x) ≥ 1 − p(|x|) .

Lemma 2 (Implicit in proof of [LMP24] Lemma 3.1). Let (L, D) ̸∈ ioAvgBPP/poly. If there
exists a decision-to-inversion reduction for L with p(n) = ω(1), then one-way functions exist.

    Since Lemma 2 is not stated in exactly this form in [LMP24], we include a formal
proof of it in Appendix B, noting that the proof essentially mirrors what already appears
in [LMP24].
  10
       Note here that we explicitly allow the notion of “sufficiently large” to depend on A.


                                                       16
4    OWF From Non-Trivial NIZK
We begin with the simpler case of NIZKs.

Theorem 7. Suppose there exists a language L ̸∈ ioP/poly such that L has an (εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK
with εc + εs + εzk <n 1. Then there exists an auxiliary-input one-way function.

Proof. Let (Gen, P, V) be the (εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK for L guaranteed by the theorem statement,
                                                                                          1 11
and p(n) be a polynomial such that for sufficiently large n, εc (n)+εs (n)+εzk (n) < 1− p(n) .
Suppose for the sake of contradiction that auxiliary-input one-way functions don’t exist.
Define:

    • M as an auxiliary-input sampler where M (x; r) computes (crs, π) ← Sim(x; r) and
      outputs crs.

    • N as the io-UE machine guaranteed by Theorem 5 with respect to sampler M and
      polynomial 20p(n).

    • Γ as the (infinite) set of n such that the guarantees of N hold.

We now claim that Algorithm 1 decides L infinitely often, contradicting that L ̸∈ ioP/poly.

 Algorithm 1: Algorithm A to decide L
   Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n
   Output: Decision bit b, with b = 1 representing x ∈ L
                              n
 1 Compute crs ← Gen(1 )
 2 for ← 1 to 20n · p(n) do
 3    Compute r′ ← N (x, crs)
 4    Compute (crs′ , π ′ ) ← Sim(x; r′ )
 5    if V(crs, x, π ′ ) = 1 then
 6        Output b = 1
 7    end
 8 end
 9 Output b = 0



    To analyze this algorithm, we first consider what it does when x ∈ {0, 1}n − L. In
this case, A can only accept if it finds an accepting proof for x relative to an honestly-
generated CRS. Since A is efficient, soundness tells us that this happens with probability
at most εs (n).
    Next, we consider what A does when x ∈ {0, 1}n ∩ L for some n ∈ Γ. Let pcrs be
the probability that a single iteration of the for loop in A accepts. We call crs “bad” if
         1                             1
pcrs ≤ 20p(n) , and “good” if pcrs ≥ 10p(n) . The core of our analysis comes from the following
claim:
Claim 1. Suppose x ∈ {0, 1}n ∩ L for some n ∈ Γ. Then Pr[crs is bad | crs ← Gen(1n )] ≤
                     1
εzk (n) + εc (n) + 4p(n) .


                                               17
 Algorithm 2: Distinguisher D
   Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n , (crs, π)
   Output: Decision bit b, with b = 0 representing that (crs, π) was generated by Sim
 1 for ← 1 to 20n · p(n) do
 2     Compute r′ ← N (x, crs)
 3     Compute (crs′ , π ′ ) ← Sim(x; r′ )
 4     Run V(crs, x, π ′ )
 5 end
 6 Let count be the number of iterations where V accepted
 7 if count ≤ 1.5n and V(x, crs, π) = 1 then
 8     Output b = 1
 9 else
10     Output b = 0
11 end




Proof. Consider the distinguisher D defined by Algorithm 2. We first claim that if D is
                                                                                   1
given (crs, π) drawn from Sim(x), it will output 1 with probability at most 5p(n)      . First note
                                                                                   ′
that if we change π to instead be the proof we get from using randomness r ← N (x, crs),
                                                                                 1
our guarantees on N tell us that this probability can change by at most 20p(n)       . Now there
are two cases to consider: either crs is good, or it is not good.
     In the case where crs is good, we note that each iteration of the for loop has V(crs, x, π ′ ) =
                                   1
1 with probability at least 10p(n)    . Thus, bound 2 in Theorem 6 (with respect to δ = 41 ) tells
us that the final value of count can be below 1.5n with probability at most exp(−n/16),
                        1
which is at most 20p(n)     for sufficiently large n.
     In the case where crs is not good, we know that the probability that we get an accept-
ing proof by computing r′ ← N (x, crs) and (crs′ , π ′ ) ← Sim(x; r′ ) is at most 10p(n)  1
                                                                                             . But
note that this is exactly how our given proof is computed! Since D can only output 1 if
V(x, crs, π) = 1, we have that when crs is not good this happens with probability at most
   1
10p(n)
       . Combining all of the above, we get that D outputs 1 on a simulated (crs, π) with
                          1
probability at most 5p(n)      as desired.
     Now we turn to what D does when given (crs, π) generated by Gen and P. We claim
here that it will output 1 with probability at least Pr[crs is bad | crs ← Gen(1n )] − εc (n) −
   1
20p(n)
       . Indeed, there are only two ways for D to output 0: either V(x, crs, π) rejects, or the
final value of count is at most 1.5n. The former can happen with probability at most εc (n)
by completeness. For the latter, if crs is bad, we know that each iteration of the for loop
has V(crs′ , x, π ′ ) = 1 with probability at most 20p(n)
                                                        1
                                                          . Pessimistically assuming that this
probability is exactly 20p(n) , bound 1 of Theorem 6 (with respect to δ = 21 ) tells us that the
                             1

final value of count can exceed 1.5n with probability at most exp(−n/12); for sufficiently
                                         1
large n, this can be bounded by 20p(n)      .
     Putting this all together, we have that D distinguishes a real (crs, π) from a simulated
  11
       In what follows, it will help to assume WLOG that p(n) = ω(n2 ).



                                                      18
                                                                         1
one with advantage at least Pr[crs is bad | crs ← Gen(1n )] − εc (n) − 4p(n) . But by zero-
knowledge, we know that this advantage can be at most εzk (n). Rearranging terms gives
the desired claim.
     We can now argue that A must accept x ∈ L with good probability. Suppose that crs
is not bad. Then each iteration of the for loop must have V(crs, x, π ′ ) = 1 with probability
            1
at least 20p(n) . Thus, the probability that no iteration of the for loop outputs 1 is at most
            20n·p(n)
         1                                                                            1
  1 − 20p(n)            ≤ exp(−n), which for sufficiently large n is at most 4p(n)        . Thus, the
                                       n
probability that A accepts x ∈ {0, 1} ∩ L for n ∈ Γ is at least the probability that crs is not
                1                                                                   1
bad minus 4p(n)    ; plugging in Claim 1, this is at least 1 − εzk (n) − εc (n) − 2p(n) .
     Finally, this all means that we can instantiate Definition 7 with respect to a(n) = 1 −
                       1
εzk (n) − εc (n) − 2p(n)   and b(n) = εs (n). The above shows that we satisfy the first two
points of the definition for all n ∈ Γ. For sufficiently large n, we know that εc (n) + εs (n) +
                  1                        1
εzk (n) < 1 − p(n)   , so a(n) − b(n) > 2p(n) , satisfying the third point. Thus, we have that
L ∈ ioBPP/poly, so by Remark 6, L ∈ ioP/poly.

Remark 7. Theorem 7 can also be phrased in the following way: if L has an (εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK
with εc +εs +εzk <n 1, then L has a decision-to-inversion reduction (Definition 10). Indeed, all we
need to prove the correctness of Algorithm 1 is for N to satisfy the io-UE guarantees on auxiliary
input x. Additionally, we note that the proof of Theorem 5 constructs a candidate auxiliary-input
one-way function {fx }x and reduces inverting fx to satisfying io-UE guarantees on auxiliary
input x. Putting these two together gives the desired reduction R.12

    Given the above remark, the techniques from [HN24, LMP24] immediately allow us
to improve Theorem 7 from an auxiliary-input one-way function to a standard one-way
function.

Corollary 3. Suppose that every L ∈ NP has an (εc , εs , εzk )-NIZK with εc + εs + εzk <n 1 and
NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly. Then OWFs exist.

Proof. Since NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, we know there is a language L ∈ NP (that thus has an appro-
priate NIZK) where L ̸∈ ioP/poly. Theorem 7 thus tells us that there exists an auxiliary-
input one-way function. We can then plug this into Lemma 1 to get a new language
L′ ∈ NP and a polynomial m(·) such that (L′ , {Um(n) }n∈N ) ̸∈ ioAvgBPP/poly. But since
L′ ∈ NP (and thus has an appropriate NIZK), Remark 7 tells us that there is a decision-to-
inversion reduction for L′ . Hence, Lemma 2 tells us that one-way functions exist.


5        OWF From Non-Trivial Public-Coin ZK
We now turn to the more general case of interactive zero-knowledge.
    12
    Technically, Algorithm 1 doesn’t quite give a decision-to-inversion reduction as written, since we are
only guaranteed a polynomial gap between the probability of accepting x ∈ L versus x ̸∈ L. However,
standard BPP amplification can convert this into a reduction that outputs the correct answer with high
probability.


                                                   19
Theorem 8. Suppose there exists a language L ̸∈ ioP/poly such that L has a constant-round,
public coin (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument with εc + εs + εzk <n 1. Then there exists an auxiliary-input
one-way function.
   Before proving this theorem, it will help to define some tools that will assist us in the
proof. In all of the sections below, let
   • (Gen, P, V) be the (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument for L guaranteed by the theorem state-
     ment with simulator Sim,

   • k be the (constant) number of rounds of interaction in this argument,
                                                                                          1
   • p(n) be a polynomial such that for sufficiently large n, εc (n)+εs (n)+εzk (n) < 1− p(n) ,

   • pEst (n) as the polynomial 256k 2 · n · p(n)2 ,

   • M as an auxiliary-input sampler where M (x; r) interprets r = r1 ∥r2 for r1 ∈ [k] and
     outputs the first r1 − 1 rounds of the transcript generated by Sim(x; r2 ),

   • N be the io-UE machine guaranteed (assuming auxiliary-input one-way functions
     don’t exist) by Theorem 5 with respect to sampler M and polynomial 8k 2 · p(n), and

   • Γ as the (infinite) set of n such that the guarantees of N hold.


5.1      Prover P
                e
We start by defining a malicious prover strategy P e for (Gen, P, V). Intuitively, P
                                                                                   e will, given
the current partial transcript of interaction with V, use N to sample “many” possible next
prover messages. In order to choose which to use, P   e will estimate the probability of each
leading to an accepting transcript if it continues to use this strategy in future rounds, and
pick the one with the largest success probability. We formally define the behavior of P        e
in Algorithm 3; we’ve separated out the definition of the success probability estimation
procedure Est as Algorithm 4, as this will see use elsewhere.

Remark 8. We note that while the definitions of P   e and Est refer to each other, Pe always calls Est
on a strictly longer transcript than it started with, so these definitions are not circular.

       We now prove some useful properties of P
                                              e and Est.

         e and Est run in polynomial time.
Lemma 3. P

Proof. Define TPe (i) as the run time of P e when it is given a transcript with i messages in
it. We note that this is a decreasing function, as P  e needs to do less work estimating its
success probability when the transcript is closer to completion.
    Our first claim is that there exists a polynomial q(·, ·) such that TPe (i) ≤ q(k, n)·TPe (i+2)
and TPe (k − 1) ≤ q(k, n). Indeed, ignoring various (additive) polynomial overheads, when
  13
     We note that this simulation is possible because V is public-coin, and thus has no internal state. In fact,
this is the only reason we need to limit our proof to public-coin protocols.


                                                      20
Algorithm 3: Malicious Prover P    e
  Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n , partial transcript τ with P sending the next message
  Output: m as the next message to send
1 Let i be the number of rounds already completed in τ
2 for ← 1 to 16k · n · p(n) do
3    Compute r′ ← N (x, τ )
4    Parse r′ = r1′ ∥r2′
5    Compute τ ′ as the first i + 1 messages of Sim(x; r2′ )
6    Compute Est(x, τ ′ )
7 end
        ∗                                                    ′
8 Let τ be the transcript with the highest value of Est(x, τ ) sampled above
             ∗                               ∗
9 Output m as the (i + 1)st message in τ




Algorithm 4: Success Probability Estimator Est
  Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n , (possibly partial) transcript τ
  Output: Estimate of the probability that V will accept when interacting with P    e
           starting on transcript τ
                         4
1 for ← 1 to 12pEst (n) do

2    Simulate13 interaction between V and P    e starting from partial transcript τ
3 end
4 Output fraction of iterations where V accepted




                                            21
e is given a transcript with i messages, it simply needs to run Est on transcripts with
P
i + 1 messages a total of 16k · n · p(n) times. Each call to Est needs to simulate 12pEst (n)4
interactions between P  e and V, each of which needs to run P   e at most k times, each time
starting with a transcript that has at least i+2 messages. Combining these two statements,
we get the first part of our claim. For the second part, we note that Est on a full transcript
simply needs to check if V accepts 12pEst (n)4 times, each of which takes polynomial time
independent of P. e Since Pe on input a transcript with k − 1 messages simply needs to run
Est on a full transcript 16k · n · p(n) times, we get the second half of the claim.
    Given this claim, we can say that TPe (0) ≤ q(k, n)O(k) . Since k is a constant14 and TPe
is a decreasing function, we have that P    e always runs in polynomial time. Furthermore
noting that Est only ever needs to run P   e a polynomial number of times (along with some
other polynomial additive overhead), we have that Est also always runs in polynomial
time.
Lemma 4. On any input τ , the output of Est is within an additive distance of pEst1(n) of the true
acceptance probability with probability at least 1 − pEst1(n) .

Proof. Let pτ
   be the true acceptance probability given that P     e and V start with the transcript τ . An
application of bound 3 in Theorem 6 (with respect to ∆ = 12pEst (n)3 ) tells us that

                                                            144pEst (n)6
                                                                      
                                          1
               Pr |Est(x, τ ) − pτ | ≥            ≤ 2 exp −
                                       pEst (n)              12pEst (n)4
                                                                              1
                                                  = 2 exp −12pEst (n)2 ≤
                                                                      
                                                                           pEst (n)


Before stating our next property, we need to introduce some notation.
Definition 11. Fix a partial transcript τ where the prover is going next, and let i be the number
of messages in τ . For any possible next prover message m, let pm be the probability that V would
accept if it interacted with P e starting on the transcript τ ∥m. We define qthreshold as the threshold
                                                 1
such that qthreshold ≥ pm′ for at least 1 − 16k·p(n)   fraction (by probability) of messages m′ sampled
using N . More formally, let qthreshold be the smallest value such that

                                         r′ = r1′ ∥r2′ ← N (x, τ )
                                                                        
                                                                                       1
             Pr qthreshold ≥ pm′            τ ′ ← Sim(x; r2′ )          >1−
                                                                                   16k · p(n)
                                    m′ = the (i + 1)st message in τ ′

We call m “okay” if pm ≥ qthreshold − pEst2(n) , “good” if pm ≥ qthreshold , and “very good” if pm ≥
qthreshold + pEst2(n) .

Lemma 5. Let τ be any partial transcript where the prover sends the next message. If we run
e τ ) to get a next prover message m, then m is “okay” with probability at least 1− 1 −e−n .
P(x,                                                                               16k·p(n)
  14
       We note that this is the only reason we need to limit our proof to constant round protocols.


                                                       22
                    e makes 16k · n · p(n) calls to Est. By Lemma 4 and a union bound, we
Proof. We note that P
know that the probability that any of these calls is more than pEst1(n) away from the true
success probability is at most 16k·n·p(n)
                                 pEst (n)
                                               1
                                          = 16k·p(n) .
   But we now note that since each iteration of the for loop in P  e samples from exactly the
distribution of messages used in Definition 11, each iteration chooses a “good” message
                               1
with probability at least 16k·p(n) . Thus, the probability that no iteration chooses a “good”
message is at most (1 − 16k·p(n) )16k·n·p(n) ≤ e−n .
                             1

   Now note that if neither of the above bad events happen, the message m∗ output by P      e
must be “okay”.15 Thus, we have that P       e outputs an “okay” message with probability at
             1        −n
least 1 − 16k·p(n) − e , as desired.


5.2    Distinguisher D
We next define a distinguisher D that we will use in our proof. Intuitively, D will check
each prover message to see if it is “much better” than “most” next messages that we
would get by using N . In our proof, we will use the fact that this distinguisher can only
have εzk (n) advantage in distinguishing a real from a simulated transcript in order to
argue that our algorithm cannot lose too much success probability. We formally define D
as Algorithm 5.

 Algorithm 5: Distinguisher D
   Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n , (full) transcript τ
   Output: Decision bit b, with b = 0 representing that τ was generated by Sim
 1 for each P round i do
 2     Let τi be the first i rounds of τ and τi−1 the first i − 1 rounds
 3     Compute Est(x, τi )
 4     for ← 1 to 8k · n · p(n) do
 5         Compute r′ ← N (x, τi−1 )
 6         Parse r′ = r1′ ∥r2′
 7         Compute τ ′ as τi−1 concatenated with the ith message of Sim(x; r2′ )
 8         Compute Est(x, τ ′ )
 9     end
10     Let count be the number of iterations where Est(x, τ ′ ) ≥ Est(x, τi )
11     if count < n then
12         Output b = 1
13     end
14 end
15 Output b = 0



   We now prove some useful properties of D.
  15
     In the worst case, we could underestimate the success probability of every “good” message we sampled
by pEst1(n) , and choose a different message due to overestimating its success probability by pEst1(n) .


                                                   23
                                                                                    1
Lemma 6. For large enough n ∈ Γ and x ∈ {0, 1}n , Pr[D(x, τ ) = 1 | τ ← Sim(x)] ≤ 4p(n) .

Proof. We first define a sequence of hybrids for how we generate τ . For i ∈ [k]0 , let
Hybi (x) be defined as in Algorithm 6. We note immediately that Hybk is identical to Sim.
Furthermore, the guarantees on N tell us that Hybi (x) has statistical distance at most
   1                                                                                    1
8k·p(n)
        from Hybi+1 (x).16 Thus, we have that Sim(x) has statistical distance at most 8p(n)
from Hyb0 (x).

 Algorithm 6: Hybrid Transcript Generation Hybi
   Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n
   Output: (Full) transcript τ
 1 Let τ be the first i rounds of Sim(x)
 2 for j ← i + 1 to k do
 3     Compute r′ ← N (x, τ )
 4     Parse r′ = r1′ ∥r2′
 5     Append the jth message in Sim(x; r2′ ) to τ
 6 end
 7 Output τ


                                                                                        1
    To complete the proof, we now claim that Pr[D(x, τ ) = 1 | τ ← Hyb0 (x)] ≤ 8p(n)      . In-
deed, consider the iteration of D corresponding to prover round i. We note that because τ
was sampled from Hyb0 , τi is drawn from the same distribution as each τ ′ that D samples
in this iteration. Thus, if we order τi and each sampled τ ′ by their respective values of Est
(breaking ties randomly), they will be in a random order. Since it is only possible for D to
output 1 in this iteration if τi is in the top n of this order, we have that the probability of
                                n          1
this happening is at most 8k·n·p(n)   = 8k·p(n) . Taking a union bound over all prover rounds,
we get our desired claim.
Lemma 7. Let τ be a (full) transcript and n = |x| sufficiently large. If any prover message in
τ is “very good” (as in Definition 11, with respect to the partial transcript up to that message),
D(x, τ ) will output b = 1 in the iteration corresponding to that round with probability at least
        1
1 − 16k·p(n) .

Proof. Let i be a prover round where the prover’s message mi is “very good”. We first
note that the corresponding iteration of D only makes 8k · n · p(n) + 1 calls to Est. Thus,
by Lemma 4 and a union bound, we have that all values returned by Est are within a
   1
pEst (n)
         additive distance of their corresponding correct values with probability at least 1 −
8k·n·p(n)          1
 pEst (n)
          = 1 − 32k·p(n) − pEst1(n) . For the remainder of the proof, we will assume this is the
case.
   Since every call to Est is within an additive pEst1(n) distance of the true acceptance prob-
ability, we have that for any τ ′ sampled in the iteration of D corresponding to round i, we
can only have Est(x, τ ′ ) ≥ Est(x, τi ) if pm′ ≥ pmi − pEst2(n) , where m′ is the ith message of τ ′ .
  16
    Note that this loses a factor of k compared to the overall guarantee on N since we are specifically asking
N to work on a partial transcript with i messages, where M outputs such a transcript with probability k1 .


                                                     24
                                                                                                1
But since mi is “very good”, we know that this happens with probability at most 16k·p(n)
over the sampling of τ ′ . Pessimistically assuming that this probability is exactly 16k·p(n)  1
                                                                                                  ,
                                                   1
bound 1 in Theorem 6 (with respect to δ = 2 ) will tell us that the final value of count can
only exceed 3n   4
                   with probability at most exp(−n/24); for sufficiently large n, this is at most
   1
pEst (n)
         . Since D will output 1 if count < n (and so in particular if count ≤ 3n
                                                                                4
                                                                                  ), this tells us
that as long as no call to Est fails, D will output 1 with probability at least 1 − pEst1(n) .
      Applying a union bound to the above two paragraphs, we get that overall D outputs
                                      1
1 with probability at least 1 − 32k·p(n)  − pEst2(n) ≥ 1 − 16k·p(n)
                                                              1
                                                                    as desired.


5.3       Algorithm A
We can now describe our algorithm for deciding L, as described in Algorithm 7.

 Algorithm 7: Algorithm A for L
   Input: x ∈ {0, 1}n
   Output: Decision bit b
 1 Simulate an interaction between P
                                   e and V on input x
 2 if V accepts then
 3     Output b = 1
 4 else
 5     Output b = 0
 6 end




Lemma 8. For all x ∈ {0, 1}n − L, Pr[A(x) = 1] ≤ εs (n).

Proof. By Lemma 3, we know that P   e is an efficient prover strategy. Thus, soundness tells
us that the probability that V accepts when interacting with P  e on x ̸∈ L is at most εs (|x|).


Lemma 9. For all sufficiently large n ∈ Γ and all x ∈ {0, 1}n ∩ L, Pr[A(x) = 1] ≥ 1 − εc (n) −
            1
εzk (n) − 2p(n) .

Proof. Fix n to be large enough that the guarantees of all the above lemmas hold, and x as
any element in {0, 1}n ∩ L. We define a sequence of hybrid experiments as follows. For
each i ∈ [k]0 , let Hyb1i (x):
   • Create a transcript τ by running the honest P and V on x for the first i rounds, and
     completing the remaining rounds by running P  e and V.17

   • Run D(x, τ ). For every j ∈ [k]0 , let Rj be the event that D outputs 1 in or before the
     iteration corresponding to round j.
Furthermore, or each i ∈ [k], let Hyb2i (x):
  17
       As in our definition of P,
                               e this is possible because V is stateless.


                                                         25
   • Create a transcript τ by running the honest P and V on x for the first i rounds, and
     completing the remaining rounds by running P  e and V.

   • Run D(x, τ ). For every j ∈ [k]0 , let Rj be the event that D outputs 1 in or before the
     iteration corresponding to round j.

   • Create a second transcript τ ′ by taking the first i − 1 rounds of τ and completing the
     remaining rounds by running P   e and V.

   Note that Hyb10 (ignoring D) is exactly the same as A, so our goal is to prove that V is
unlikely to reject in that hybrid. On the other hand, Hyb1k involves generating an honest
transcript, which we know can only be rejected with probability at most εc (n). Thus, it
suffices for us to show that as we move from Hyb1k to Hyb10 18 the probability that V rejects
cannot increase by much. Specifically, we aim to prove
Claim 2. Fix any i ∈ [k]. Then we have that

                                                                              1
            Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ] ≤ Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] +                + Pr [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]
          Hybi−1                          Hybi                            4k · p(n) Hyb2i

Indeed, by repeated application of the claim, we get that

                Pr[A(x) = 0] = Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0] = Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ R0 ]
                                  Hyb0                     Hyb0
                                                                    1     X
                               ≤ Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Rk ] +             +    Pr [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]
                                  Hybk                            4p(n)     Hyb2i
                                                                              i∈[k]
                                                             1       X
                               ≤ Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0] +            +           Pr [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]           (1)
                                  Hybk                     4p(n)             Hyb2i
                                                                     i∈[k]


    (For the second equality, we used the fact that R0 is always true.) The first term is
at most εc (n) as noted above. For the last term, we note that the events Ri and Ri−1 are
defined over the first i messages of τ , which are sampled using the honest P and V. Thus,
we have that PrHyb2i [Ri−1 ∧Ri ] = Prreal [Ri−1 ∧Ri ], where real is the probability space where
we sample the entire transcript τ from P and     PV, then run D(x, τ ). Since Ri−1 ⊆ Ri for all
i ∈ [k], the resulting sum telescopes; that is, i∈[k] Prreal [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ] = Prreal [R0 ∧ Rk ], which
by the definition of R0 and Rk is just Prreal [D(x, τ ) = 1]. Plugging this all back into (1), we
get

                                                                    1
               Pr[A(x) = 0] ≤ εc (n) + Pr[D(x, τ ) = 1] +
                                          real                    4p(n)
                                                                                                 1
                              ≤ εc (n) + εzk (n) + Pr[D(x, τ ) = 1 | τ ← Sim(x)] +
                                                                                               4p(n)
                                                        1
                              ≤ εc (n) + εzk (n) +
                                                      2p(n)
  18
       The hybrids count down for ease of notation.


                                                      26
where the first inequality comes from zero-knowledge and the second comes from Lemma
6. All that now remains is to prove the claim. We do so by proving the following two
claims.
Claim 3. Fix any i ∈ [k]. Then we have that
                 Pr [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ] ≤ Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] + Pr2 [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]
                Hyb1i−1                              Hybi                       Hybi

Claim 4. Fix any i ∈ [k]. Then we have that
                                                                                        1
                          Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] ≤ Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] +
                      Hybi                            Hybi                          4k · p(n)
Note that Claim 2 trivially follows from Claim 3 and Claim 4.
Proof of Claim 3. We first note that
                              Pr [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ] = Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ]
                            Hyb1i−1                              Hybi

Indeed, in both cases we are checking if V accepts a transcript sampled by taking the first
i − 1 messages from P and V with the remainder from P     e and V, as well as if D outputs 1
within the first i − 1 messages of that transcript. But now we can write
        Pr [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ] = Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] + Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]
        Hyb2i                                 Hybi                      Hybi

                                         ≤ Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] + Pr2 [Ri−1 ∧ Ri ]
                                              Hybi                      Hybi

which yields the desired claim.
Proof of Claim 4. First note that if i is a verifier round, we have that
                                Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] = Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ]
                               Hybi                              Hybi

Indeed, the only place where these two hybrids could differ is at round i. But note that Ri
is not affected by this difference, since D only looks at prover rounds. Additionally, τ and
τ ′ are identically distributed (both use V to sample the ith message), so the event that V
rejects is also unaffected. This means that the statement trivially holds when i is a verifier
round, so for the remainder of the proof we will assume that i is a prover round.
     Recalling the definitions of “okay” and “very good” from Definition 11, we have that
Pr [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] =            Pr [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is “very good”]
Hyb2i                                 Hyb2i

                                   + Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is not “very good” ∧ m′i is “okay”]
                                      Hybi

                                   + Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is not “very good” ∧ m′i is not “okay”]
                                      Hybi

                               ≤       Pr [Ri ∧ mi is “very good”]
                                      Hyb2i

                                   + Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is not “very good” ∧ m′i is “okay”]
                                      Hybi

                                   + Pr2 [m′i is not “okay”]
                                      Hybi


                                                            27
where mi is the ith message in τ and m′i is the ith message in τ ′ . We note that the first term
              1
is at most 16k·p(n)                                             1
                    by Lemma 7; the third term is at most 16k·p(n)   + e−n by Lemma 5. For the
second term, we note that since mi is not “very good” but m′i is “okay”, the probability
that V rejects τ ′ can be at most pEst4(n) higher than the probability that V rejects τ . Thus, the
second term can be bounded as

            Pr [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is not “very good” ∧ m′i is “okay”]
            Hyb2i
                                                                                        4
         ≤ Pr2 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ∧ mi is not “very good” ∧ m′i is “okay”] +
            Hybi                                                                     pEst (n)
                                           4                                    4
         ≤ Pr2 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] +           = Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] +
            Hybi                        pEst (n) Hybi                        pEst (n)

where the equality comes from the fact that τ is sampled from the same distribution in
the two hybrids. Plugging this all in, we get that
                                                                       4         1
          Pr2 [V(x, τ ′ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] ≤ Pr1 [V(x, τ ) = 0 ∧ Ri ] +           +          + e−n
         Hybi                        Hybi                           pEst (n) 8k · p(n)

Noting that pEst4(n) + 8k·p(n)
                          1
                               + e−n ≤ 4k·p(n)
                                          1
                                               for sufficiently large n, we get the desired claim.




5.4   Putting It All Together
Proof of Theorem 8. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that ai-OWFs don’t exist, and
hence Γ is infinite. We then have that Algorithm 7 satisfies the requirements of Definition
                                                    1
7 with respect to a(n) = 1 − εc (n) − εzk (n) − 2p(n) and b(n) = εs (n). Indeed, Lemma 9
immediately tells us that we satisfy the first two points for infinitely many n. For the
third point, we have that for sufficiently large n,
                                                                       1       1
                    a(n) − b(n) = 1 − εc (n) − εzk (n) − εs (n) −          ≥
                                                                     2p(n)   2p(n)
where the inequality comes from the definition of p(n). Thus, we have that L ∈ ioBPP/poly,
so by Remark 6, we have that L ∈ ioP/poly. This provides our contradiction.
Remark 9. Theorem 8 can also be phrased in the following way: if L has a constant-round, public-
coin (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument with εc +εs +εzk <n 1, then L has a decision-to-inversion reduction
(Definition 10). The reasoning for this is identical to that in Remark 7.
    Given the above remark, the techniques from [HN24, LMP24] immediately allow us
to improve Theorem 8 from an auxiliary-input one-way function to a standard one-way
function.
Corollary 4. Suppose that every L ∈ NP has a constant-round, public-coin (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argu-
ment with εc + εs + εzk <n 1 and NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly. Then OWFs exist.

                                                  28
Proof. Since NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly, we know there is a language L ∈ NP (that thus has an ap-
propriate argument) where L ̸∈ ioP/poly. Theorem 8 thus tells us that there exists an
auxiliary-input one-way function. We can then plug this into Lemma 1 to get a new lan-
guage L′ ∈ NP and a polynomial m(·) such that (L′ , {Um(n) }n∈N ) ̸∈ ioAvgBPP/poly. But
since L′ ∈ NP (and thus has an appropriate argument), Remark 9 tells us that there is a
decision-to-inversion reduction for L′ . Hence, Lemma 2 tells us that one-way functions
exist.


6     Applications to Amplification
Similar to [CHK25], we can plug the one-way function we get from a high-error zero-
knowledge protocol into prior work in order to get (almost) unconditional amplification
of these high-error protocols. Below, we separately consider the cases of non-interactive
zero-knowledge and interactive zero-knowledge.

6.1    Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge
In the non-interactive case, a recent line of works [GJS19, BKP+ 24, BG24, AK25] has ex-
plored what assumptions are needed in order to amplify (adaptively-sound) NIZKs with
high errors to have negligible errors, with [BG24, AK25] only requiring one-way functions
in certain cases. If we instantiate these results with the one-way function we get from
Corollary 3, we get that we can amplify such NIZKs (almost) unconditionally. Formally,
we recall the following theorem from [AK25], rephrased slightly to fit our terminology.
Theorem 9 ([AK25], Theorem 8.27). Suppose OWFs exist. Then if there exists an (εc , εs , εzk )-
NIZK proof with adaptive and statistical soundness for a language L with (1) εc negligible and
(2) εs + εzk <n 1, then there exists an (ε′c , ε′s , ε′zk )-NIZK with adaptive and statistical soundness
for L with ε′c , ε′s , and ε′zk all negligible.
    Combining this with Corollary 3 immediately gives us the following result.
Corollary 5. Suppose that NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly or NP ⊆ BPP. Suppose further that all of NP has
(εc , εs , εzk )-NIZKs with adaptive and statistical soundness where (1) εc is negligible and (2) εzk +
εs <n 1. Then all of NP has (ε′c , ε′s , ε′zk )-NIZKs with adaptive and statistical soundness where ε′c ,
ε′s , and ε′zk are all negligible.
Proof. First, suppose NP ⊆ BPP. In this case, every L in NP has a trivial NIZK (P sends
nothing and V checks the instance on their own), meaning the claim holds trivially.
   Otherwise, suppose NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly. By Corollary 3, we get that one-way functions
exist; we can then use Theorem 9 to amplify the NIZK guaranteed for any L ∈ NP to have
negligible errors.

6.2    Interactive Zero-Knowledge
In the interactive case, a classic result of [BJY97] shows that one-way functions alone suf-
fice to construct a 4-round interactive zero-knowledge protocol with negligible errors.

                                                   29
Similar to the non-interactive case, we can instantiate this result using the one-way func-
tion we get from Corollary 4 in order to (almost) unconditionally “amplify” (actually, just
build from scratch)
    interactive zero-knowledge. Formally, we recall the following theorem from [BJY97].

Theorem 10 ([BJY97], Theorem 1.1). Suppose OWFs exist. Then for any L ∈ NP, there exists
a four-round (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument for L with εc , εs , and εzk all negligible.

   Combining this with Corollary 4 immediately gives us the following result.

Corollary 6. Suppose that NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly or NP ⊆ BPP. Suppose further that all of NP has a
constant-round, public-coin (εc , εs , εzk )-ZK argument with εc + εzk + εs <n 1. Then all of NP has
a 4-round (ε′c , ε′s , ε′zk )-ZK argument with ε′c , ε′s , and ε′zk all negligible.

Proof. First, suppose NP ⊆ BPP. In this case, every L in NP has a trivial zero-knowledge
protocol (P sends nothing and V checks the instance on their own), meaning the claim
holds trivially.
   Otherwise, suppose NP ̸⊆ ioP/poly. By Corollary 4, we get that one-way functions
exist; we can then use Theorem 10 to construct the desired zero-knowledge argument for
NP.
Acknowledgments. JH, DK, and KT were supported in part by NSF CAREER CNS-
2238718, NSF CNS-2247727, a Google Research Scholar award and an award from Visa
Research. Part of this work was done while the authors were visiting the Simons Institute
for the Theory of Computing.


References
[AK25]     Benny Applebaum and Eliran Kachlon. NIZK amplification via leakage-
           resilient secure computation. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/995,
           2025.

[BG24]     Nir Bitansky and Nathan Geier. Amplification of non-interactive zero knowl-
           edge, revisited. In Leonid Reyzin and Douglas Stebila, editors, Advances in
           Cryptology - CRYPTO 2024 - 44th Annual International Cryptology Conference,
           Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2024, Proceedings, Part IX, volume 14928
           of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 361–390. Springer, 2024.

[BJY97]    Mihir Bellare, Markus Jakobsson, and Moti Yung. Round-optimal zero-
           knowledge arguments based on any one-way function. Cryptology ePrint
           Archive, Paper 1997/002, 1997.

[BKP+ 24] Nir Bitansky, Chethan Kamath, Omer Paneth, Ron D. Rothblum, and
          Prashant Nalini Vasudevan. Batch proofs are statistically hiding. In Bojan Mo-
          har, Igor Shinkar, and Ryan O’Donnell, editors, Proceedings of the 56th Annual
          ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
          June 24-28, 2024, pages 435–443. ACM, 2024.

                                                30
[CHK25] Suvradip Chakraborty, James Hulett, and Dakshita Khurana. On weak nizks,
        one-way functions and amplification. In Annual International Cryptology Con-
        ference, pages 580–610. Springer, 2025.

[GJS19]   Vipul Goyal, Aayush Jain, and Amit Sahai. Simultaneous amplification: The
          case of non-interactive zero-knowledge. In Alexandra Boldyreva and Daniele
          Micciancio, editors, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2019 - 39th Annual In-
          ternational Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2019,
          Proceedings, Part II, volume 11693 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
          608–637. Springer, 2019.

[HN24]    Shuichi Hirahara and Mikito Nanashima. One-way functions and zero knowl-
          edge. In Bojan Mohar, Igor Shinkar, and Ryan O’Donnell, editors, Proceedings of
          the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, Vancouver,
          BC, Canada, June 24-28, 2024, pages 1731–1738. ACM, 2024.

[IL90]    R. Impagliazzo and L.A Levin. No better ways to generate hard np instances
          than picking uniformly at random. In Proceedings [1990] 31st Annual Symposium
          on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 812–821 vol.2, 1990.

[Imp92]   Russell Impagliazzo. Pseudo-random generators for cryptography and for random-
          ized algorithms. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1992.

[LMP24] Yanyi Liu, Noam Mazor, and Rafael Pass. A note on zero-knowledge for NP
        and one-way functions. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2024/800, 2024.

[Ost91]   Rafail Ostrovsky. One-way functions, hard on average problems, and statistical
          zero-knowledge proofs. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Structure in Complex-
          ity Theory Conference, Chicago, Illinois, USA, June 30 - July 3, 1991, pages 133–138.
          IEEE Computer Society, 1991.

[OW93]    Rafail Ostrovsky and Avi Wigderson. One-way fuctions are essential for non-
          trivial zero-knowledge. In Second Israel Symposium on Theory of Computing Sys-
          tems, ISTCS 1993, Natanya, Israel, June 7-9, 1993, Proceedings, pages 3–17. IEEE
          Computer Society, 1993.

[Ps05]    Rafael Pass and abhi shelat. Unconditional characterizations of non-interactive
          zero-knowledge. In Victor Shoup, editor, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO
          2005. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005.

[Yao82]   Andrew C. Yao. Theory and application of trapdoor functions. In 23rd Annual
          Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1982), pages 80–91, 1982.


Supplementary material
Disclaimer


                                             31
Case studies, comparisons, statistics, research and recommendations are provided “AS
IS” and intended for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon for op-
erational, marketing, legal, technical, tax, financial or other advice. Visa Inc. neither
makes any warranty or representation as to the completeness or accuracy of the infor-
mation within this document, nor assumes any liability or responsibility that may result
from reliance on such information. The Information contained herein is not intended as
investment or legal advice, and readers are encouraged to seek the advice of a competent
professional where such advice is required.
    These materials and best practice recommendations are provided for informational
purposes only and should not be relied upon for marketing, legal, regulatory or other ad-
vice. Recommended marketing materials should be independently evaluated in light of
your specific business needs and any applicable laws and regulations. Visa is not respon-
sible for your use of the marketing materials, best practice recommendations, or other
information, including errors of any kind, contained in this document.


A      Private to Public Coin in the Absence of ai-OWFs
Theorem 11. If there exists an argument system that satisfies the following properties:
    • It satisfies correctness up to ϵc error.

    • It satisfies soundness up to ϵs error.

    • There exists a simulator such that the output of the simulator is at most ϵzk distinguishable
      from the transcript of an honest execution of the protocol. Note that this is weaker than
      honest-verifier zero-knowledge since the simulator does not simulate the entire view of the
      verifier, only the transcript.

    • For some constant t ∈ N the first t verifier messages are uniformly random strings.
Then either io-uniform-ai-OWFs exist, or for every polynomial q, there exists an argument system
that satisfies the following properties:
    • It satisfies correctness up to ϵc + 1/q(λ) error.

    • It satisfies soundness up to ϵs + 1/q(λ) error.

    • There exists a simulator such that the output of the simulator is at most ϵzk + 1/q(λ) distin-
      guishable from the transcript of an honest execution of the protocol.

    • The first t + 1 verifier messages are uniformly random strings.
Additionally, the new prover, verifier, and simulator run in time polynomial in the original prover,
verifier, and simulator runtimes.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we model the verifier V as sampling its first t messages
r1 , . . . , rt uniformly at random. Then, before sending the (t + 1)th message, V samples in-
ternal randomness r. For i ≥ t + 1, the ith verifier message is computed by a deterministic

                                                  32
polynomial-time machine Vi that takes as input the transcript τ and the randomness r.
Additionally suppose there exist polynomials p1 and p2 such that the size of the transcript
just before the (t + 1)th verifier message is p2 (λ) and |r| = p1 (λ).
    Define f (a, x) = Vt+1 (a, x). If f is a 1/2q(λ)-distributional (infinitely-often, uniform-
secure) auxiliary-input one-way function we are done, since by [Imp92] it may be ampli-
fied to construct an (infinitely-often, uniform-secure) auxiliary-input one-way function.
Suppose not, i.e., there exists a PPT machine A such that for all large enough λ, for any
a ∈ {0, 1}p1 (λ) , and for x ← {0, 1}p2 (λ) ,
                      {Vt+1 (a, x), A(a, Vt+1 (a, x))} ≈ 1 {Vt+1 (a, x), x}.
                                                        2q(λ)


where the approximation symbol represents statistical indistinguishability. In particular,
            {Vt+1 (a, x), x, A(a, Vt+1 (a, x))} ≈ 1 {Vt+1 (a, x), A(a, Vt+1 (a, x)), x}.    (2)
                                                 q(λ)


We proceed by a sequence of hybrids, where the final hybrid will represent a proof system
where the first t + 1 verifier messages are uniformly random.

Hybrid 0: Identical to the honest protocol.

Hybrid 1: The verifier behaves identically to the honest verifier except it appends A(τ, Vt+1 (τ, r))
to its (t + 1)th message, where τ is the transcript of the first t messages. This appended
value is ignored by all subsequent verifier and honest prover steps.

The protocol preserves correctness since the appended value is ignored by both par-
ties. It preserves soundness since the appended value can be sampled by the malicious
prover themselves and is ignored by the verifier. The simulator for (honest-verifier) zero-
knowledge can run the simulator from Hybrid 0 and then sample A(Vt+1 (τ, r)) and ap-
pend to the (t + 1)th verifier message in the simulated transcript. Since the honest tran-
script distribution in Hybrid 1 can be sampled by sampling an honest transcript in Hybrid
0 and running the same sample-and-append step, switching between Hybrid 0 and Hy-
brid 1 preserves simulator security.

Hybrid 2: Identical to Hybrid 1 except the (t + 1)th message is computed as Vt+1 (τ, r)∥r,
and all subsequent verifier steps use A(τ, Vt+1 (τ, r)) in place of r. In other words, after
computing Vt+1 (τ, r) the roles of r and A(τ, Vt+1 (τ, r)) are switched.

By (2), swapping A(a, Vt+1 (τ, r)) and r in the transcript after Vt+1 (τ, r) can be detected
                             1
with advantage at most q(λ)     , even by unbounded adversaries. Therefore, completeness,
soundness, and simulation security are all preserved upto 1/q(λ) error. For simulation
security we crucially use the fact that the simulator only simulates the transcript instead
of the full view of V , since (2) does not hold if given access to the randomness of A, which
is part of the view of V .

Hybrid 3: Identical to Hybrid 2 except the (t + 1)th message consists only of the random-
ness r. A(a, Vt+1 (τ, r)) is computed before the (t + 2)th verifier message instead of before

                                                33
the (t + 1)th message.

Since Vt+1 (τ, r) can be computed from the transcript, this change does not affect complete-
ness, soundness, or simulation security. The verifier now samples the first t + 1 messages
uniformly at random, so we are done.

Corollary 7. The existence of a constant-round (ϵc , ϵs , ϵzk ) (honest-verifier) zero-knowledge argu-
ment implies either io-uniform-ai-OWFs exist, or for every polynomial q, there exists a public-coin
constant-round (ϵc +1/q(λ), ϵs +1/q(λ), ϵzk +1/q(λ)) (honest-verifier) zero-knowledge argument.

Proof. Follows from repeated application of Theorem 11 along with the following obser-
vations:

    • While there is polynomial blowup in runtime each time the theorem is applied, since
      there are constant rounds the final runtimes are polynomial.

    • While errors grow by an inverse polynomial additive term, we can set the to be
      small enough to obtain our desired final bounds.

    • While the theorem only guarantees a weakening of honest zero-knowledge, for
      public-coin protocols, both notions are the same. Therefore we recover honest-
      verifier zero-knowledge for the final protocol.




B     Proof of Lemma 2
Here we provide an explicit proof of Lemma 2, noting that it is closely mirrors the proof
of Lemma 3.1 in [LMP24].
Proof of Lemma 2. Let (R(·) , {fx }x∈{0,1}∗ , p(·)) be the decision-to-inversion reduction for L
guaranteed by the statement of the lemma. We define the function g(r1 ∥r2 ) = D(r1 )∥fD(r1 ) (r2 ),
and claim that g is a weak one-way function.
    Indeed, suppose for the sake of contradiction that g is not a weak one-way function.
This means that there exists an algorithm A that inverts g with probability at least 0.75
on infinitely many input sizes. Using A, we define an algorithm B to decide (L, D) as
follows. On input x, B first samples a random r2 and runs A(x, fx (r2 )). If A fails to find a
preimage of fx (r2 ), B immediately halts and outputs ⊥. Otherwise, B outputs RA (x).
    We now claim that B puts (L, D) ∈ ioAvgBPP/poly, which is a contradiction. Fix any
n where A succeeds in inverting g and that is sufficiently large for our guarantees on R
to hold. To show that the first point of Definition 9 holds, we fix an x ∈ Supp(Dn ) and
                                                                                  1
consider two possible cases. If A(x, ·) inverts fx with probability at most p(n)    , we have that
                                                                                     1
the first step of B(x) will cause it to output ⊥ with probability at least 1 − p(n)     . If instead
                                                   1
A(x, ·) inverts fx with probability at least p(n)    , our guarantees on R tell us that (as long as
                                                                                                  1
the first step doesn’t output ⊥), B(x) will output L(x) with probability at least 1 − p(n)          .


                                                 34
                                                                                  1
Thus in either case, we have that B(x) ∈ {⊥, L(x)} with probability at least 1 − p(n) , which
for sufficiently large n is at least 0.9.
    For the second point of Definition 9, we note that B(x) can only output ⊥ if A(x, ·) fails
                                                                          $
to invert fx . Thus the probability of this happening over a random x ← Dn is exactly the
probability that A fails to invert a random output of g, which we know to be at most 0.25.
    Putting this all together, we have reached a contradiction, and so must have that g
is in fact a weak one-way function. By Theorem 4, this means that one-way functions
exist.




                                             35
