                                                  The theory of one-relator groups:
                                                    history and recent progress

                                                                    Marco Linton1
arXiv:2501.18306v1 [math.GR] 30 Jan 2025




                                                           Carl-Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda2




                                              1
                                              Instituto de Ciencias Matemáticas, Fuencarral-El Pardo, 28049,
                                           Madrid, Spain
                                             Email address: marco.linton@icmat.es
                                              2
                                               School of Mathematics, Korea Institute for Advanced Study (KIAS),
                                           Seoul 02455, Korea
                                              Email address: cfnb@kias.re.kr
                                Contents

Preface                                                                5
Chapter 1. History                                                    7
  1.1. Introduction                                                   7
  1.2. Dehn, free groups, and presentations (1880–1930)              10
  1.3. Magnus, the Freiheitssatz, and the word problem (1930-1932)   21
  1.4. The Lull Phase (1932–1960)                                    28
  1.5. The resurgence of one-relator groups (1960s)                  36
  1.6. One-relator groups with torsion (1960–1980)                   47
  1.7. Subgroups of one-relator groups                               54
  1.8. More on decision problems                                     66

Chapter 2. Recent progress                                            75
  2.1. Introduction                                                   75
  2.2. One-relator splittings and the hierarchy                       77
  2.3. Splittings of one-relator groups                               91
  2.4. Group algebra properties                                      102
  2.5. Subgroup properties                                           109
  2.6. Geometric properties                                          124
  2.7. Residual properties                                           132
  2.8. Algorithmic properties                                        136
Bibliography                                                         141




                                       3
                                     Preface

The theory of one-relator groups is now almost a century old. The authors therefore
feel that a comprehensive survey of this fascinating subject is in order, and this
document is an attempt at precisely such a survey. This article is divided into two
chapters, reflecting the two different phases in the story of one-relator groups. The
two chapters can be read independently of one another and have minimal overlap.
     The first chapter, written by the second author, covers the history of one-relator
groups. The initial development of the theory of one-relator groups was parallel
to that of combinatorial group theory, and the chapter begins with the intertwined
history. As the theory of one-relator groups eventually grew into a subject in its
own right, the chapter turns to treating problems particular to this subject. The
chapter covers the history until around the year 1987, a year which marked the
advent of modern geometric group theory.
     The second chapter, written by the first author, surveys recent progress on the
subject. In the last few decades, new ideas coming from geometry, topology and
homological algebra have decidedly changed how one-relator groups are studied,
resulting in several significant developments. This chapter surveys these new devel-
opments and the tools used to prove them. Some proofs are provided and several
new open problems are posed, suggesting further directions for future research.
     Reading the first chapter will show the reader how many of the deep original
ideas and research directions of the subject continue to influence the subject; read-
ing the second chapter will give the reader access to the rich and modern toolkit
used to study one-relator groups today. It is the hope of the authors that the com-
bination of these two points of view will convince the reader of the depth, relevance,
and perennial beauty of the theory of one-relator groups.

Acknowledgements. The first author would like to thank Sam Kim and Carl-
Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda for inviting him to write a survey article (Chapter 2) for
the KIAS Springer Series in Mathematics and for their warm hospitality during
his visit to Korea. He would also like to thank Carl-Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda for
enriching his knowledge of the history of one-relator groups and Sam Hughes for
helpful conversations on profinite invariants. The second author would like to thank
Marco Linton for providing him with many insights into the theory of one-relator
groups, and John Stillwell for helpful comments. The cover image is based on a
design by B. B. Newman for the cover of his kangaroo leather-bound PhD thesis.
     The first author acknowledges supports from the grant 202450E223 (Impulso
de lı́neas cientı́ficas estratégicas de ICMAT). The second author is supported by
the Mid-Career Researcher Program (RS-2023-00278510) through the National Re-
search Foundation funded by the government of Korea, and by the KIAS Individual
Grant MG094701 at Korea Institute for Advanced Study.

                                           5
                                   CHAPTER 1


                                    History

                                1.1. Introduction
What is the simplest non-trivial group? This is an ambiguous question, and in
attempting to specify it one is led immediately to group-theoretic measures of
complexity. What does it mean for a group to be complicated? Group theory is
riddled with measures for answering such questions. From the point of view of
finite group theory, one might base complexity either coarsely on the cardinality of
the group, or more finely on the number of distinct prime divisors of the order of
the group. Many early results in finite group theory – such as Burnside’s theorem
on groups of order pa q b for primes p, q – arise from such considerations. The
challenges and associated measures for finite groups are quite particular to that
field, however. Instead, one might choose a broader combinatorial perspective by
treating all groups as structures satisfying a minimal set of relations (associativity
and existence of inverses), together with some additional set of defining relations.
This perspective, of defining groups via presentations xA | Ry by generators and
relations, is certainly not always the most beneficial, and e.g. many questions about
presentations of finite groups remain far out of reach and of dubious significance.
However, we can also gain much from this combinatorial perspective.
     One of many benefits is that we have been led to free groups, being those groups
with no additional defining relations whatsoever, as a starting point for a measure
of complexity of a group. Here, finite groups and infinite groups are placed on an
equal footing, for the methods of combinatorial group theory deal with finite groups
in the same manner as infinite groups: namely, via their presentations. Since all
groups are obtainable from free groups simply by adding some set of relations, one
immediately finds a natural target for describing the complexity of a group: how
complicated are its defining relations? Adding relations of a very particular form
naturally leads to subjects like small cancellation theory, whereas adding very few
relations leads to the subject matter of the present survey: one-relator groups. For
what could be more natural to ask than what happens if we add only a single
relation to a free group?
     The study of one-relator groups is now almost a century old, and has in recent
years seen a resurgence of activity. A number of old conjectures have been spectac-
ularly resolved, and techniques from many different areas have come to dominate
the area and ensure its relevance for many years to come. A survey of these de-
velopments, covering approximately the years 1990 to today (and especially the
last 15 years since 2010), constitutes the second chapter of this present document.
Doubtlessly, this present period will be cemented as an important part of the his-
tory of one-relator groups. The goal of this present survey is to cover the older half
of the history of one-relator groups, covering approximately the years 1930–1987.

                                          7
8                                     1. HISTORY


These years are neither arbitrarily chosen nor perfectly delimiting. Firstly, they
are chosen with care: 1930 was the year of the publication of Magnus’ proof of the
Freiheitssatz, which remains one of the core results of the theory. On the other
hand, 1987 was the year Gromov published his famous monograph on hyperbolic
groups [Gro87], the influence of which fundamentally changed much of combina-
torial group theory (in particular overseeing its shift of focus towards geometric
group theory). Secondly, however, we do not mean to say that no articles from
before 1930 are cited, nor none from after 1987. For the former, the entire first
section of this survey deals with the pre-history of one-relator groups, and that
thin slice of combinatorial group theory includes articles from around 1880–1920.
Furthermore, there are also more recent articles which “belong” to the older half of
the history of one-relator groups. For example, a 2000 article by McCool [McC00]
considers a very classical problem on normal roots (see §1.3.2), and deals with it in
a very classical manner; thus, it naturally falls into the scope of this present survey.
Some other recent developments on classical problems are similarly also referenced
in passing, albeit by necessity with essentially no details of the methods of proof.
     There already exist surveys on the theory of one-relator groups, and while they
all feature some history, they rarely do so in a comprehensive manner, instead
focussing on the select strands of the history directly relevant to the topics pre-
sented in the survey (such as the recent survey by Baumslag, Fine & Rosenberger
[BFR19]), or else written from the point of view of containing the development
of one-relator group theory inside the much broader development of combinatorial
group theory (such as in the spectacular book by Chandler & Magnus [CM82,
Chapter II.5]). The author of this survey has also included a brief history of one-
relator group theory in a related article [NB21a], but the history presented therein
is done so in a manner much too brief and lacunary to serve as a standard refer-
ence. It is the hope of the author that this present survey will fill this gap in the
literature. Throughout, in line with the maxim of Edwards [Edw81] and Stillwell
[Sti23] to read the masters, we have attempted to make precise references to the
original works alongside pointers to further literature. In particular, it is the sincere
hope of the author to leave the reader who already knows about one-relator groups
with some new tidbits about their history; and to leave the reader unfamiliar with
this fascinating topic with a desire to learn more.

We give a brief outline of the survey:

       ‚ In §1.2 (covering approx. 1880–1930) we give an overview of the pre-history
         of one-relator group theory, beginning with the advent of group presen-
         tations and leading into the work of M. Dehn. We emphasize his three
         fundamental decision problems, his work on surface groups, and the work
         by his students on certain one-relator knot groups. We conclude with a
         section on the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem and amalgamated free products.
       ‚ In §1.3, we present three fundamental articles by W. Magnus, from 1930,
         1931, and 1932, respectively. This includes a proof of the central Frei-
         heitssatz via the Magnus hierarchy and several of its applications, includ-
         ing the Conjugacy Theorem and normal roots. We conclude with Magnus’
         proof of the decidability of the word problem in all one-relator groups.
       ‚ In §1.4, we outline the “Lull Phase” of one-relator groups, being approx-
         imately the years 1932–1960 in which a paucity of results in the subject
                                1.1. INTRODUCTION                                   9


        appeared. Nevertheless, we discuss Lyndon’s Identity Theorem, an impor-
        tant result from this period, and the parallel study of residual properties
        of groups, central to later sections. Finally, we discuss some plausible
        reasons for why this phase experienced a dearth of results.
      ‚ In §1.5, beginning in 1960, we cover a period of resurgence of interest in
        one-relator groups, in which many new results were proved, and many cen-
        tral figures – most centrally G. Baumslag – would enter the playing field.
        We cover the Torsion Theorem of Karrass, Magnus & Solitar and how
        it was prompted by the Poincaré Conjecture. Next, we discuss hopfian
        groups, and the remarkable non-hopfian groups constructed by Baumslag
        & Solitar. Finally, we discuss the emergence of two new centres for one-
        relator group theory outside Germany: one in New York, and one in the
        USSR. The latter center gave rise to remarkable work by D. I. Moldavan-
        skii, and we discuss his interpretation of the Magnus hierarchy. Finally,
        we briefly discuss (finitely-generated free)-by-cyclic one-relator groups.
      ‚ In §1.6, we discuss one-relator groups with torsion, and the realization of
        the 1960s that the presence of torsion is a significantly simplifying factor.
        In this line, we begin by discussing the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem
        and its many remarkable consequences, all proved in the thesis of B. B.
        Newman, followed by some residual and virtual properties of one-relator
        groups. We conclude the section with a discussion of the work by S. J.
        Pride following in the footsteps of B. B. Newman, including his resolution
        of the isomorphism problem for two-generated one-relator groups with
        torsion.
The two last sections are more nebulous in their chronology, caused by the large
number of distinct branches of the subject, and cover roughly the years 1960–1990.
      ‚ In §1.7, we broadly discuss subgroups of one-relator groups, beginning
        with a discussion of Magnus subgroups and their malnormality. We turn to
        the remarkable theory of the center of one-relator groups, as completed by
        A. Pietrowski, and continue by discussing abelian and solvable subgroups
        of one-relator groups. We discuss coherence and subgroup separability,
        and some further results on quotients and residual properties of one-relator
        groups. Finally, we end with a discussion on the lower central series and
        factors of one-relator groups, including parafree groups.
      ‚ Finally, in §1.8 we go further in-depth on some decision problems for one-
        relator groups, including the conjugacy problem, the isomorphism problem
        (both of which remain open in general), and the complexity of the word
        problem. We end with a brief discussion on the obstacles to extending
        one-relator group theory to two-relator group theory.
10                                        1. HISTORY


           1.2. Dehn, free groups, and presentations (1880–1930)
In this section, we present some of the history of the central ideas that began the
development of one-relator group theory. Specifically, we will describe the ground-
work laid by M. Dehn and students in the 1910s and 1920s, particularly focussing
on the three prototypical classes of examples of one-relator groups: surface groups,
torus knot groups, and the figure-eight knot (Listing’s knot) group. Finally, we will
also discuss the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem, stating that all subgroups of free groups
are free. The methods developed by Nielsen and Schreier as part of their investi-
gations of free groups – Nielsen transformations and amalgamated free products,
respectively – will echo throughout this survey. We will therefore end the section
with a brief overview of the theory of amalgamated free products. This section
is not intended to serve as a complete, or even partial, history of combinatorial
group theory. For such treatments, we instead refer the reader to the monographs
by Chandler & Magnus [CM82] or Stillwell [Sti93].

     1.2.1. Presentations and Dehn’s fundamental problems.
             Dehn’s work and the influence of his ideas created a synthesis of topological
             and group theoretical problems which may be characterized as follows:
                   (1) The theory of non-abelian groups provides effective tools for the
                       solution of topological problems.
                   (2) The group theoretical results needed for the purposes of topology
                       have characteristics which did not appear in the previously
                       existing group theoretical literature. The new results were of an
                       algorithmic nature [...]

                                                        —W. Magnus, 1978 [Mag78, p. 135]
The theory of group presentations has an intricate, deep, and long history, so we
shall content ourselves with beginning the story at definite year: 1882. Group
presentations had appeared at sporadic points before this. One such point, pointed
out to the author by J. Stillwell, is a presentation of the alternating group A5
appearing in an 1856 article by W. R. Hamilton [Ham56] on icosian calculus.
Another such sporadic point is the 1880 publication by A. V. Vasiliev [Vas80],
who in his master’s dissertation (see [Hal97]) gives the same presentation for A5
as Hamilton. No systematic theory of presentations is developed in either of these
two articles, however. The year 1882, on the other hand, saw the publication
of W. Dyck’s Habilitationsschrift [Dyc82b, Dyc82a]1. Therein, Dyck places the
theory of group presentations on a solid footing, and gives presentations for a
number of groups. However, more importantly for our story, his investigations
opened up the possibility of investigating groups purely defined by means of their
presentations. For example, Dyck calls a group xA | ∅y with no defining relations
the “most general” (Ger. allgemeinste, [Dyc82a, p. 5]) group. Today such a group
is, of course, called a free group 2. Dyck also describes an algorithm – a very early
usage of this word! – for computing all subgroups of a given finite group using
    1Dyck had been supervised for his doctorate by F. Klein, who had in turn been influenced by
Cayley’s work. Thus, Dyck’s article [Dyc82a], which is otherwise written in German, curiously
begins with an English quote from Cayley’s 1878 article [Cay78a, p. 51]: “A group is defined by
means of the laws of combination of its symbols”.
    2The name free group only appeared later; it is attributed to E. Artin by Schreier [Sch27, p.
163].
               1.2. DEHN, FREE GROUPS, AND PRESENTATIONS (1880–1930)                         11


presentations, and applies it to the symmetric group S4 as an example ([Dyc82a,
§4.1]). Furthermore, one result ([Dyc82a, p. 12–13] that is central to his arguments
is the following: suppose G is a group given by the presentation
(1)                            G “ xA | r1 “ 1, . . . , rk “ 1y.
Then the set of all elements in the free group FA on A which represent the identity
element in G forms a normal subgroup R of FA , and furthermore any word w P R
can be written as
                    m
                    ź
(2)          W “       Ti rt˘1
                            i
                               Ti´1 where Ti P FA , and ti “ 1, 2, . . . , n.
                     i“1
In modern terminology, this amounts to little more than that G is equal to the
quotient of FA by the normal closure of the words r1 , . . . , rk . While seemingly
simple, this “normal form” result would lead to many later developments, appearing
both in the Reidemeister–Schreier process and Magnus’ proof of the Freiheitssatz
(§1.3.1). Dyck also made further use of this result, and others, and published a
sequel to his first article the very next year [Dyc83]. While this heavily features
presentations, the article is primarily concerned with finite permutation groups
rather than infinite groups, creating a unified and abstract approach to the former
subject.3 This second article can thus be seen as one of the very early articles in
the subject of computational finite group theory. The reader further interested in
the role Dyck’s work played in the development of the abstract notion of a group
is referred to Wussing’s discussion of the subject [Wus84, p. 240–243].
     The subject of presentations of groups would lay dormant for some time, until
it was picked up by M. Dehn (1878–1952) in the early 1900s. In 1911 [Deh11], he
posed the following three fundamental algorithmic problems:
      (1) The word problem; i.e. the problem of deciding when a given word over
          the generators of a group is equal to 1 in the group;
      (2) The conjugacy problem; i.e. the problem of deciding if two given words
          are conjugate or not; and
      (3) The isomorphism problem; i.e. the problem of deciding whether two pre-
          sentations define isomorphic groups or not.
Today, we know that all these problems are, for general finitely presented groups,
algorithmically undecidable (see §1.4.4). As pointed out by Stillwell [Sti12, §5] (see
also [Sti14, Footnote 17]) there were some remarkable early suspicions of this, even
before the formalization of undecidability appeared in the mid-1930s. For example,
already in 1908, Tietze [Tie08, §14, p. 80] noted that “the question of whether two
groups are isomorphic is not solvable in general”. In 1932, Reidemeister [Rei32,
§2.10] notes that “it is in general not possible to decide whether two groups pre-
sented by generators and relations are isomorphic to each other. One also cannot
decide whether such a group is free group...” [Sti14, pp. 40–41].4 These remark-
able and (at the time) unsubstantiated claims would not be proved – or indeed
formulated! – formally until many decades later in the 1950s (see §1.4.4).

    3This is also emphasized by the fact that Dyck cites, in a footnote, both Hamilton’s and
Vasiliev’s articles mentioned above [Dyc83, p. 82].
    4However, as Stillwell notes (loc. cit.), Reidemeister may have had “some intimation of the
coming wave of unsolvability”, having organized the 1930 conference where Gödel first announced
his (closely related) incompleteness theorems.
12                                          1. HISTORY


     Around 1914, however, the spectre of undecidability had not yet come to haunt
combinatorial group theory, and Dehn had produced the solution to the word prob-
lem in several classes of one-relator groups. The most central examples are the
surface groups and the trefoil knot group xa, b | a2 b3 “ 1y, the word problem for
which he solves using the Gruppenbild (or Cayley graph [Cay78b]). We shall ex-
pand on these topics in §1.2.2 below. For now, we suffice to mention a few pieces of
foreshadowing for the subsequent developments of one-relator group theory. First,
in 1911 Dehn [Deh11, §3, p. 144] also considered the word problem in the one-
relator group xa, b | a3 b3 “ 1y, but only provided a sketch of a solution. Dehn would
also assign several of his students to work on topics adjacent to one-relator group
theory around this time, two of which were H. Gieseking (1887–1915) and Fritz
Klein (about whom almost nothing is known). We will expand on Gieseking’s work
below in §1.2.2. Certainly Gieseking, and probably also Klein, died in the First
World War. For the remainder of the 1910s there was little progress on one-relator
group theory.
     After the war, however, the subject would again begin to stir. In 1922, in
an unpublished lecture given in Leipzig5, Dehn made a remarkable conjecture on
the structure of certain subgroups of one-relator groups. The conjecture reads as
follows: given a one-relator group G “ xA | r “ 1y in which all letters appear
in r, and such that r is not obviously conjugate to some shorter word, then the
subgroup of G generated by any proper subset of A is free. In other words: if one
cannot spell the word r, then one cannot get any non-trivial relation whatsoever.
This statement would become known as the Freiheitssatz (“Freeness theorem”).
The German-speaking reader will note that it is not called the Freiheitsvermutung
(“Freeness conjecture”). This is because, as we shall see in §1.3, Dehn’s student
Magnus would end up writing down the first (combinatorial) proof of the result
in 1930. This proof would mark one of the first milestones in one-relator group
theory. Dehn himself likely had a very solid idea of a (geometric) proof of the result
already in 19226, but never published it. This was perhaps auspicious, as the timing
of Magnus’ eventual combinatorial proof in 1930, coinciding with the development
by Reidemeister of combinatorial group theory and Schreier on amalgamated free
products, could not have been better.
     For a broad introduction to Dehn’s life, we refer the reader to Stillwell’s article
[Sti99] and [MM54]. For some of Dehn’s later articles, including on the famous
Dehn–Nielsen Theorem, we highly recommend the reader to consult Stillwell’s ex-
cellent translation and commentary [Deh87]. Two biographies have also recently
appeared: one by Peifer [Pei15] concerning Dehn’s topological and group-theoretic
work, and another by Rowe [Row23] concerning his work on the history of math-
ematics. Indispensible for the broader context of Dehn’s topological work is also
Stillwell’s [Sti12] history of the development of 3-manifolds.
     Dehn did not ever return to one-relator group theory after his initial work on
the Freiheitssatz mentioned above, being instead drawn to other problems. We
recall some of the fascinating moments in Dehn’s later life as presented by Stillwell

    5According to Reidemeister [Rei32], the lecture was an address to the Naturforscherversamm-
lung. He also confirms Magnus’ remarks in [Mag30, p. 141], cf. also [Mag84, p. xi], that the
notes from this lecture were, unfortunately, never published.
    6C. L. Siegel, for example, said that Dehn “did discover a proof [of the Freiheitssatz ], however,
and would on occasion tell his friends how it went” [Sie78, p. 223].
             1.2. DEHN, FREE GROUPS, AND PRESENTATIONS (1880–1930)                                13


[Sti99]. Dehn’s life would once again be affected by war: in 1938, Dehn was ar-
rested as part of the anti-Jewish programs organized by the Nazis. He was shortly
thereafter released “because there was no more room in Frankfurt to keep prisoners
under lock and key”. Eventually, with the help of W. Magnus, E. Hellinger, and
C. Haas, was able to escape to America. Deeming the Atlantic too dangerous, the
62-year old Dehn escaped via Stockholm, Moscow, Siberia, then Japan, arriving fi-
nally in America in 1941. He eventually settled in Black Mountain College in North
Carolina, a small liberal arts college. During his years in America, he was occupied
with mostly non-mathematical work, writing e.g. a charming series of articles sum-
marizing the early history of mathematics [Deh43a, Deh43b, Deh44b, Deh44a].
Dehn passed away in 1952, the same year that P. S. Novikov [Nov52] announced
the general unsolvability of the first of Dehn’s fundamental problems, i.e. the word
problem in finitely presented groups. Within a few years, undecidability would per-
meate combinatorial group theory, heralding a new era for the subject: we discuss
this period, and the large impact it likely had on one-relator group theory, in more
detail in §1.4.4.
Remark 1.2.1. When writing about the word problem, it is important to remark
that at the same time as Dehn, this problem was also considered by A. Thue (1863–
1922) in Norway. He studied the properties of the word problem in monoids, i.e.
structures with an associative binary operation for which an identity element exists,
and solved it in some particular cases. For example, he gives some examples of
one-relation monoids in which the word problem is decidable, including the monoid
with three generators a, b, c and the single defining relation abbcab “ 1, see [Thu14,
§VII]. This and several others monoids considered by Thue turn out to be (one-
relator) groups; in the specified example, it can be shown that it is isomorphic
to the free group of rank 2. It is unlikely that Thue was in any way influenced
by Dehn, since, as pointed out by Magnus [Mag78, p. 141], there was only a
fleeting acquaintance between Dehn and Thue. However, in the same place, Magnus
remarks that “[...] the emphasis in Thue’s papers is on infinite sequences with
certain properties. It is at least not obvious how his results could be applied to any
word problem.” As the above example and others like it show, Magnus’ remarks
seem misguided, and are not an accurate representation of Thue’s 1914 work on
the word problem. Indeed, Magnus’ remarks seem to be more applicable either to
Thue’s 1906 article containing the famous infinite Thue–Morse sequence [Thu06],
or perhaps his 1910 article discussing a precursor to term rewriting systems [Thu10]
(see [ST00] for a modern reading of this article). In any case, what is true is that
Thue’s work on the word problem would not have any significant impact on the
word problem for groups until the resurgence of methods of string rewriting systems,
or (semi-)Thue systems, for groups in the 1970s and 1980s; see §1.8.3.
    1.2.2. Surface groups and knot groups. Some of the most fundamental
examples of one-relator groups were also the first to be studied. These groups are
the fundamental groups π1 pΣg q of 2-surfaces, and much of the history of one-relator
group theory can be summarized as attempts to generalize techniques and results
that hold for π1 pΣg q. Given a compact orientable 2-surface Σg of genus g ě 1,
reading the boundary of its fundamental polygon shows that its fundamental group
has a presentation given by
(3)         π1 pΣg q “ xa1 , b1 , . . . , ag , bg | ra1 , b1 sra2 , b2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rag , bg s “ 1y.
14                                           1. HISTORY


Similarly, given a compact non-orientable surface Kg of genus g, a presentation of
its fundamental group is given by
(4)                       π1 pKg q “ xa1 , . . . , ag | a21 a22 ¨ ¨ ¨ a2g “ 1y.
The particular case of g “ 2 is the famous Klein bottle 7 K2 . In this section, we will
present some of Dehn’s work on these groups. It bears emphasizing that the surface
groups π1 pΣg q remain today among the flagship examples of one-relator groups.
    The use of hyperbolic geometry to study topological questions appeared already
in works of Poincaré in 1904 [Poi04], but Dehn’s remarkable contribution was to
merge these two topics together with combinatorial group theory. Dehn made two
separate studies of the groups π1 pΣg q. In 1911 [Deh11], he solves the word and
conjugacy problem in all such groups (and their non-orientable counterparts) by
constructing the universal covering space of Σg and a hefty dose of hyperbolic
geometry. He also gives a brief solution to the isomorphism problem for this class,
by proving that π1 pΣg1 q – π1 pΣg2 q if and only if g1 “ g2 via an appeal to the
abelianization, appealing to Tietze’s work [Tie08]. While this latter feat seems
modest today, it is important to remember that at this point we are still in the early
days of combinatorial group theory, and such arguments still had to be performed
with care.
    In 1912, the very next year, Dehn [Deh12] returned to provide a simpler com-
binatorial argument for the decidability of the word and conjugacy problems in
surface groups. His argument was based on the following key result:
    Theorem 1.2.2 (Dehn’s Spelling Theorem, [Deh12]). Let G “ π1 pΣg q be as in
(3). Let w be a non-trivial reduced word, in the generators of G, which represents
the identity element of G. Then there exists a subword u of w such that u is a
subword of some cyclic conjugate of the defining relator of G or its inverse, and
such that the length of u is strictly more than half the length of the defining relator.
     This “spelling” theorem, its name being due to it providing information on
the spelling of words equal to 1 in the underlying group, gives rise to an obvious
algorithm for solving the word problem: given a non-empty word w, to decide if
it is equal to 1 in π1 pΣg q, scan it for occurrences of all subwords u of all cyclic
conjugates of the defining relator and its inverse, such that u has length at least
half that of the defining relator. If such a word cannot be found, then w ‰ 1 in
G. Otherwise, replace u by the shorter word representing u´1 , and repeat. Then
w “ 1 in G if and only if the empty word is reached. This algorithm, known as
Dehn’s algorithm, can be interpreted as a form of partially confluent string rewriting
system, in which words are rewritten to shorter words by replacing certain subwords
by shorter words, and which is guaranteed to be confluent to a normal form (i.e.
converge in a finite number of steps, see §1.8.3) when applied to words representing
1, see [BO93, p. 70–71]. In this way, Dehn’s algorithm continues to influence
theoretical computer science, by leading to the notion of string rewriting systems
which are confluent only on certain equivalence classes, which has seen some study
[Ott87, OZ91].
     7The Klein “bottle” is likely a curious case of mistranslation. The original German is “Klein-
sche Fläche”, simply meaning “Klein surface”, and refers to the familiar surface constructed by
Klein in 1882 [Kle82]. However, these words were likely misread as “Kleinsche Flasche”, i.e.
“Klein bottle”, and thus this strange piece of terminology made its way into the mathematical
literature. The illustration of the surface as a self-intersecting bottle is likely a back-formation.
               1.2. DEHN, FREE GROUPS, AND PRESENTATIONS (1880–1930)                       15


     One particularly pleasant property of working with surface groups is that their
subgroups are all themselves either surface groups or free. Specifically, we have the
following result:
     Theorem 1.2.3. Let G be a surface group of genus g. Then any subgroup of
finite index is again a surface group (of genus ě g) and any subgroup of infinite
index is free.
     The above theorem (Theorem 1.2.3) is difficult to attribute explicitly, partic-
ularly because today it is not difficult to prove topologically. Its first published
algebraic proof, using the Reidemeister–Schreier method, only appeared in 1971 by
Hoare, Karrass & Solitar [HKS71, HKS72], cf. also [Mag69, p. 306] and [BS83].
However, we emphasize that the theorem was certainly known to Dehn, and likely
known also to Poincaré. One can get explicit bounds on the genera of the surface
subgroups of finite index [HKS71, Theorem 1]: in the orientable case, any sub-
group of index n in π1 pΣg q is isomorphic to π1 pΣnpg´1q`1 q. In the non-orientable
case, any subgroup of index n in π1 pKg q is either isomorphic to π1 pKnpg´2q`2 q or
to π1 pΣ n2 pg´2q`1 q. In particular, since π1 pΣg q surjects every finite cyclic group, it
follows that π1 pΣ2 q contains π1 pΣg q as a subgroup of finite index g ´ 1 for every
g ě 2. In the direction of understanding finite index subgroups of finitely gener-
ated discrete groups of motions of the hyperbolic plane, we briefly mention that it
was open for quite some time whether all such groups were virtually torsion-free, a
problem known as Fenchel’s conjecture. The problem admitted partial progress by
Bundgaard & Nielsen [BN51] followed by a full positive solution by Fox [Fox52]
(corrected in [Cha83]; in this direction see also [Men67, Men68, Leh70]) only
in the early 1950s.
     The next early fundamental examples of one-relator groups come from knot
groups, particularly the trefoil knot group and the figure-eight knot group (Listing’s
knot group). The history of knot theory and the associated knot groups is long,
and can be traced back to the very beginning of topology.8 Early knot theorists also
leave their mark on later generations of combinatorial group theorists. To name
just one example, W. Wirtinger, one of the first knot theorists, would have much
influence on K. Reidemeister, who would in turn have a great deal of influence on
his student O. Schreier. We will encounter the latter two frequently throughout
this part of the survey (particularly in §1.2.3). Because the history of knot theory
developed alongside the theory of one-relator groups, and did so in many intricate
and independent ways, the remainder of this section will by necessity be somewhat
anachronistic: we will detail those developments of knot theory pertaining to one-
relator group theory taking place between c. 1910–1930. At the end of it, however,
in preparation for our discussion of the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem in the next section
(§1.2.3), we will return in time to the early 1920s. The reader wishing to skip the
remainder of this section should thus have no difficulty knowing what year they
will land in.
     As mentioned above, we will discuss only two knot groups: the trefoil knot
group and the figure eight knot group. The former group would become important
to the theory of cyclically pinched one-relator groups; and the latter group would

   8Indeed, the very word topology was introduced by Listing already in 1848 [Lis48], in which
he among many other subjects considers the figure-eight knot, which we will encounter below.
This knot is also known (primarily in German sources) as Listing’s knot for this reason.
16                                   1. HISTORY


become one of the first concrete one-relator groups studied by Magnus. We will
restrict our attention to the groups as abstract groups given by generators and
relations, leaving the topological considerations aside (as did many of the authors
whose work will be cited in this section).
     First, on the trefoil knot group xa, b | a2 b3 “ 1y, as mentioned earlier, Dehn
[Deh10, Chapter II, §5] had solved the word problem in this group by constructing
its Cayley graph. In 1914, he was able to use the construction of the automorphism
group of the trefoil knot group to prove that the left-handed trefoil knot cannot
be deformed to the right-handed trefoil knot [Deh14]; this was the beginning of
the study of automorphism groups of one-relator groups, which we will encounter
throughout this survey. Pursuant to this, and not long after the war, O. Schreier
[Sch24] became interested in this problem following a seminar by Reidemeister in
Vienna [Sch24, p. 167, Footnote 1]], and in 1924 considered the groups Gm,n “
xa, b | am bn “ 1y for m, n ą 1. These groups cover all torus knot groups [ST50]:
if Tm,n is the pm, nq-torus knot, then π1 pR3 zTm,n q is isomorphic to Gm,n . In this
1924 article, among other things, Schreier proved that the pair tm, nu uniquely
determines Gm,n up to isomorphism. He also determines the centre ZpGm,n q to be
cyclic, generated by am “ bn , and when m ‰ n, he shows that the automorphism
group of Gm,n is generated by the automorphisms
                       ˘1
                      θW  : a ÞÑ W a˘1 W ´1 ,   b ÞÑ W b˘1 W ´1
where W is an arbitrary word, and in particular that OutpGm,n q – Z{2Z. If m “ n,
then OutpGm,n q – pZ{2Zq2 . He then gives a presentation for the full automorphism
group of Gm,n . For m ‰ n, he shows that
(5)   AutpGm,n q – xx, y, z | x2 “ y m “ z n “ pxyq2 “ pxzq2 “ 1y – Dm ˚C2 Dn .
In modern language, this is a virtually free group, being an amalgamated free
product of two finite dihedral groups. For m “ n, there is in addition to (5) the
generator q and relations q 2 “ rq, xs “ 1 and qyq ´1 “ z. Although he would
not have used precisely this language, Schreier’s result of fully determining the
automorphism group of torus knot groups – and other similar one-relator groups –
still stands as a gem of early combinatorial group theory (we refer the interested
reader to [KPS84a, KPS84b] for generalizations).
     Second, returning to the pre-war period and the figure-eight knot group, as
alluded to in §1.2.1, Dehn assigned one of his students, H. Gieseking [Gie12], the
task of studying this group and other related subjects. This is the one-relator group
with the presentation
(6)                       xx, y | x´1 yxy ´1 xy “ yx´1 yxy.
Much like Schreier above, Gieseking would first provide a solution to the word
and conjugacy problem in xa, b | aα bβ “ 1y, see [Gie12, Chapter 2, §2, p. 226],
and then investigate the one-relator group with the generators a, b and defining
relation a2 b2 a´1 b´1 “ 1 [Gie12, p. 158]. This latter group has an index 2 subgroup
isomorphic to the figure eight knot, generated by a2 , ba, and Gieseking succeeds in
solving the word problem for this group and the figure eight knot group. Gieseking’s
1912 thesis [Gie12] is typical for a student of Dehn’s: topological methods appear
first, and there is everywhere an abundance of geometric arguments and intutition.
His thesis is today more famous for producing the first example of a hyperbolic
3-manifold with finite volume, the Gieseking manifold.
             1.2. DEHN, FREE GROUPS, AND PRESENTATIONS (1880–1930)                      17


    The Cayley graph of the figure eight knot group was likely constructed, as
Magnus [Mag78] suggests, by a “Fritz Klein”, a student of Dehn’s who also likely
died in the First World War (see [Deh87, p. 201]). This provides yet another
solution to the word problem. Some time later, Magnus [Mag31] would prove in
1931 that a certain set of automorphisms given by Dehn generate the full outer
automorphism group of the figure eight knot group [Deh14, Part III]. Specifically,
Magnus proved, using his “Magnus hierarchy” for one-relator groups (see §1.3.1)
that the outer automorphism group is generated by the two automorphisms j0 , j1
given by:
                   j0 : u ÞÑ u´1 ,   v ÞÑ v ´1
                   j1 : u ÞÑ v ´1 u´1 vu,   v ÞÑ u´1 v ´1 u´2 v ´1 uv.
Computing the outer automorphism group of one-relator groups remains a difficult
problem in general; only in 1974, for example, did Grossman [Gro74] prove that
the outer automorphism group of π1 pΣg q is residually finite; this result extends
to all “cyclically pinched” one-relator groups by Allenby, Kim & Tang [AKT01].
The figure eight knot group, an archetypical one-relator group, continued to be
studied by students of Magnus, e.g. by A. Whittemore [Whi73], especially via
linear methods. Today we know that all knot groups have decidable word problem
[Wal68], although this algorithm is incredibly difficult to apply in practice. In
many cases, especially when the knot is alternating, more practical solutions are
known, see e.g. [Wei71, Dug82].
    Having jumped in time from the early 1910s, to the 1930s and beyond in pursuit
of one-relator knot groups, we now firmly return in chronological order to the 1920s.
During this time, one of the emerging themes in combinatorial group theory was
the theory of the properties of free groups, and particularly their subgroups.
    1.2.3. The Nielsen–Schreier Theorem, amalgamated free products.
                                                      Their great usefulness remained
                                                      long unrecognized, except by
                                                      Wilhelm Magnus.

                                                      —B. H. Neumann, on amalgamated
                                                          free products [Neu74, p. 517]
Before studying one-relator groups, one must first study zero-relator groups: that
is, free groups. Many theorems about one-relator groups – particularly the Frei-
heitssatz that we will encounter so frequently – were directly inspired by intuition
arising from free groups. One of the most fundamental questions about free groups
concern their subgroups, and whether any relations can arise in subgroups of free
groups. This question, of whether any subgroup of a free group is free, would
appear naturally in the investigations of several researchers in the early 1920s.
     One of the first to treat this question was J. Nielsen (1890–1959), who in many
ways can be considered “half a student of Dehn” [Mag78, p. 140]. Indeed, he
completed his PhD thesis under the supervision of Dehn, but had started out as a
PhD student of G. Landsberg, who passed away in 1912. We first present one of the
notable results by Nielsen, proved using topological means, and which occurred also
later in the theory of one-relator groups. This was a result on bases of free groups,
particularly in the rank 2 case. First, some terminology: a basis of a free group is
any generating set of minimal cardinality. For example, tab´1 , ba´1 bu is a basis of
18                                          1. HISTORY


F2 , the free group on ta, bu. An element w P Fn is said to be primitive if it is part
of some basis of Fn . This is equivalent to being in the same AutpFn q-orbit as one
of the generators ai of Fn . For example, ab´1 is primitive in F2 (as the above basis
shows), but neither a2 nor the commutator ra, bs “ aba´1 b´1 are primitive, since
any square resp. any commutator is necessarily mapped to another such element by
any automorphism. We remark that determining whether an element is primitive
or not is quite non-trivial, but decidable, as we shall see in §1.4.1. Nielsen, as part
of a broader investigation, gave a necessary and sufficient condition for a pair of
elements in F2 to be a basis, using commutators:
Proposition 1.2.4 (Dehn/Nielsen9, 1917 [Nie17]). Let w1 , w2 P F2 “ F pa, bq.
Then tw1 , w2 u is a basis of F2 if and only if we have rw1 , w2 s “ Xra, bs˘1 X ´1 .
     For example, tabab2 , abu is a basis of the free group on a, b, and we have
            rab, abab2 s “ ab ¨ abab2 ¨ pabq´1 ¨ pabab2 q´1 “ pabq2 ra, bspabq´2 .
Nielsen gave a proof of Proposition 1.2.4, but notes that the result was suggested
to him by Dehn, who had a “different proof”. The proof intended by Dehn would
only appear in print in 1930, in an article by Magnus [Mag30] using the theory
of one-relator groups and the Freiheitssatz ; see §1.3.2. We also note that Mal’cev
[Mal62] gave an independent proof of this result, seemingly unaware of either the
articles of Magnus or Nielsen (cf. also [Bez86]). Related to the above result, Nielsen
proved in 1918 that there is an algorithm whether a given set of words X Ă Fn of
words is a basis or not [Nie18]. These early results indicated that some very basic
problems about free groups require a substantial effort to prove, and that there is
a rich combinatorial theory underlying them. Indeed, related to Proposition 1.2.4,
we remark that the decision problem of deciding whether a given element in a free
group is a commutator is quite non-trivial, and was only solved in 1962 by Wicks
[Wic62].
     In 1921, and now a Danish citizen, Nielsen returned to the subject of free
groups. There, in his first article written in Danish, he proved a remarkable theo-
rem: every finitely generated subgroup of a free group is free. His proof can be stated
in modern terms as proving that given any finite set X Ă Fn of elements of a free
group, there exists a finite sequence of Nielsen transformations, being free group
automorphisms of a particularly simple form, which transform X into a free basis
of the subgroup it generates; thereby proving the theorem. Nielsen transformations
are thus the non-commutative analogue of the familiar row reduction process for
matrices. As part of his proof, Nielsen also proved that all bases of a free group
have the same cardinality, and thus that the rank of a free group is well-defined.
His treatment of free groups is not group-theoretical, but rather considers them
purely symbolically.10 We also remark that Nielsen discusses some aspects of the
word problem in the final part of his 1921 article [Nie21, p. 94]. In particular,

    9We remark the curious fact that Nielsen published this article while marking his affiliation as
“im Felde” (“in the field”, i.e. while serving in the military) and location as being in Constantinople
(today Istanbul). Nielsen was born in Schleswig in 1890, which today is part of Denmark but then
was part of the German Empire. He served in the German navy during the First World War, as
a military advisor to the Ottoman government in Constantinople. Proving results about bases of
free groups was, presumably, not part of his official duties in this capacity.
   10Somewhat surprisingly, it is only in §4 of his article, and notably after proving his theorem
for free groups, that Nielsen begins discussing groups at all.
               1.2. DEHN, FREE GROUPS, AND PRESENTATIONS (1880–1930)                          19


he notes that the word problem is a generalization of the membership problem in
free groups, which he himself solves for finitely generated subgroups, but perspica-
ciously notes that for the word problem “its general solution has until now offered
insurmountable difficulties”. Throughout this final part, he also acknowledges the
work of Dehn at almost every stage, showing the strong influence of the latter on
the early stages of the subject. Nielsen [Nie55] later revisited and simplified his
proof in 1955, and a good and classical account of Nielsen’s method is given in
[MKS66, Chapter 3].
     Around this time, O. Schreier (1901–1929), a young Austrian mathematician,
was beginning to work on knot theory, influenced by Reidemeister and particularly
Wirtinger. He was also influenced by Artin (also in Hamburg at the time) to work
on free groups, who had himself investigated the commutator subgroup of free
groups [Sch27, p. 161]. Schreier was aware of Nielsen’s result above, and was able
to extend it to all subgroups of free groups in 1927.11 Thus, we have the following
theorem today carrying both names:
    Theorem 1.2.5 (The Nielsen–Schreier Theorem12). Every subgroup of a free
group is itself free.
    In fact, Schreier was able to deduce more information in the case that the
subgroup has finite index [Sch27, p. 161]. Let Fn be a free group of rank n, and
let H ď Fn be a subgroup of finite index j in Fn . Then H is free of rank k, where
(7)                                  k “ 1 ` pn ´ 1q ¨ j.
This result is today called the Schreier index formula. Furthermore, Schreier proved
that every finitely generated normal subgroup of a free group has finite index
[Sch27, p. 162].
    As mentioned above, Nielsen’s proof for the finitely generated case of Theo-
rem 1.2.5 is entirely combinatorial. Schreier’s proof, on the other hand, makes use
of Dehn’s Gruppenbild, i.e. the Cayley graph. Schreier’s proof is still inherently com-
binatorial, and in particular contains no pictures. Nevertheless, his article attracted
a great deal of attention. For example, already in 1929 Rademacher [Rad29] would
make use of the method used by Schreier, today called the Reidemeister–Schreier
method, to determine presentations of the congruence subgroups of the modular
group PSL2 pZq. As we shall see, Magnus would also make great use of it in his
investigations on one-relator groups, see §1.3.1.
    Let us linger on this last point, and Schreier’s proof of the Nielsen–Schreier
Theorem. In particular, it contains a key new construction: the amalgamated free
product of two groups. Let G1 , G2 be two groups such that H embeds into both of
G1 and G2 . Concretely, this means that there exists some H ď G1 and an injective
homomorphism ϕ : H Ñ G2 . Then the free product of G1 and G2 amalgamated in
the subgroup H is the group with the presentation
(8)                    G1 ˚H G2 :“ xG1 Y G2 | h “ ϕphq @h P Hy.
   11As first observed in 1930 by Levi [Lev30, p. 315], Schreier’s proof uses the well-ordering
principle. Even today, all known proofs use the axiom of choice, but it remains an open problem
whether or not the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem is equivalent to the axiom of choice (in ZF). Howard
[How85] initiated this line of investigation, which has seen some recent progress [Kle15, Tac18].
   12In many ways, this theorem is one of the more remarkable properties of free groups. For
example, subsemigroups of free semigroups need not be free. Indeed, there exist non-finitely
presentable finitely generated subsemigroups of free semigroups.
20                                    1. HISTORY


In Schreier’s article, he begins by proving that the amalgamated free product has
some basic properties, such as the fact that G1 , G2 ď G1 ˚H G2 , that the groups
G1 , G2 generate the amalgam, and that G1 ˚H G2 is the “most general” group with
these properties; in fact, he takes such properties as definitional, and in his language
proves that amalgamated free products always exist. The idea likely dates back to
Schreier’s own work on the torus knot groups
(9)                       π1 pR3 zTm,n q “ xa, b | am bn “ 1y
discussed already in §1.2.2; these groups can clearly be written as an amalgamated
free product of two infinite cyclic groups. Schreier [Sch27, p. 163] attributes the
notion of free product to Artin, and that his aim was to generalize existence results
for free products also to this more generalized setting. Schreier’s article is not
concerned with the word problem, but he mentions in a remark without proof that
the word problem in amalgams of free groups is decidable [Sch27, p. 163]; this
result can be generalized to give the following standard result:
    Theorem 1.2.6 (Schreier, 1927). Let G1 , G2 be two groups, and let H be a
common subgroup. If the word problems for G1 and G2 are both decidable, and if
the membership problem for H in G1 and in G2 are both decidable; then the word
problem for G1 ˚H G2 is decidable.
     Here, the membership problem for H ď G simply means the problem of deciding
for arbitrary words w P G whether or not w P H (see §1.8.3). To the best of the
author’s knowledge, a proof of Theorem 1.2.6, which is essentially immediate from
standard normal form result for amalgamated free products, first appeared in a
1931 article by Magnus [Mag31, §4, p. 62], his second article on one-relator groups,
which we will revisit in greater detail in §1.3.3. There, he used the above result
to solve the word problem in some one-relator groups. After Magnus’ spectacular
application of amalgamated free products, they would come to occupy a central
role in combinatorial group theory, as indicated by the quotation at the start of
this section. A standard early reference is B. H. Neumann’s essay [Neu54], and
the modern reference is Serre’s 1977 book [Ser77], which places the amalgamated
free product in the larger context of the fundamental group of a graph of groups,
of which one particular case is the amalgamated free product, and another is the
HNN-extension, which we shall encounter in the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy
of one-relator groups in §1.5.4.
     Several simpler proofs of the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem would appear in the
literature shortly after Schreier’s publication appeared. First, in 1930 Levi [Lev30]
would give a short and compact proof of the theorem. Hurewicz [Hur30] gave
another proof in 1930, and Reidemeister [Rei32, §3.9 and §4.17] in his book gave
another, which is very close to the modern proof (see below). Locher [Loc34] in
1934 additionally gave a conceptually very simple and graphical proof. Finally,
very notably, in 1936 Baer & Levi [BL36] gave a topological proof of the result;
indeed, they gave a proof of the more general result, today called Kurosh’s Theorem
[Kur34] after the man who proved it in 1934, that any subgroup of a free product
of groups is again a free product (of a free group with conjugates of subgroups of
the factors), which implies the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem. Today, the theorem is
usually proved via actions on trees, as in Serre [Ser77]; Reidemeister’s treatment
of the theorem comes very close to precisely this modern proof already in 1932, as
noted already by Stillwell [Sti14, Footnote 13, p. 104].
       1.3. MAGNUS, THE FREIHEITSSATZ, AND THE WORD PROBLEM (1930-1932)                     21


    Schreier would not live to see any of these developments. Like his fellow group
theorists Abel and Galois before him, Schreier instead had his life cut short at the
very beginning of his career13: in 1929, just two years after publishing his proof of
the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem, he died of sepsis, merely 28 years old.

   1.3. Magnus, the Freiheitssatz, and the word problem (1930-1932)
One name towers above all others in the history of one-relator groups: Wilhelm
Magnus (1907–1990). Magnus was a PhD student of Dehn’s, and had the unusual
talent of being able to make significant contributions to a vast number of disparate
areas of mathematics; the reader interested in these contributions is referred to the
collected works [Mag84]. Indeed, it is not possible to summarize these collected
works here, nor even the full extent of Magnus’ influence on one-relator groups; we
hope that the many occurrences of Magnus’ name throughout the remainder of the
survey will serve as an indicator for this influence. In this section, we will focus
on his early contributions to the subject, with three articles from 1930, 1931, and
1932, respectively, as landmarks to guide us [Mag30, Mag31, Mag32].

    1.3.1. The Freiheitssatz .
                                                    Da sind Sie also blind gegangen!
                                                    [So you did it blind! ]

                                                     —M. Dehn in 1930, upon hearing that
                                                     Magnus’ proof of the Freiheitssatz was
                                                           not geometric [Mag78, p. 139]
The starting point for the entirety of Magnus’ work on one-relator groups comes
from the Freiheitssatz, already alluded to in §1.2.1. According to Magnus, Dehn
proved this 1922 conjecture regarding the freeness of certain subgroups of one-
relator groups before 1928, but “felt his proof was not in a form suitable for pub-
lication” [CM82, p. 114]. He therefore assigned the task of its proof to his PhD
student Magnus in July 1928, who proved it a couple of years later. The statement
of the theorem is as follows:
     Theorem 1.3.1 (Magnus’ Freiheitssatz, 1930 [Mag30, §1]). Let G “ xA | r “
1y be a one-relator group such that the word r is cyclically reduced, and such that r
involves every letter of A. Let A0 Ĺ A. Then the subgroup of G generated by A0 is
free, and furthermore is free with A0 as a basis.
     In the first condition, r being cyclically reduced means that it is equal in FA to
ar1 a´1 for some word r1 P FA , i.e. that r is not conjugate to a shorter word in FA .
This is harmless, for any relator of the form ara´1 “ 1 is, of course, equivalent to
r “ 1. The second condition is also of little consequence, since one can simply pull
out the unused letters of A into a free factor, and apply the Freiheitssatz to the
one-relator group factor which now satisfies the second condition. The subgroups
of a one-relator group generated by subsets of the generating set are called Magnus
subgroups. Thus, a restatement of the Freiheitssatz is simply: if all letters of A
appear in r, then all Magnus subgroups of xA | r “ 1y are free. Many more proper-
ties hold for Magnus subgroups, which we will expand on in §1.7.1. One immediate
   13By contrast, one of Schreier’s lecturers in Vienna was L. Vietoris (1891–2002), well-known
e.g. for the Mayer–Vietoris sequence, who remains the oldest verified Austrian man to have ever
lived.
22                                    1. HISTORY


consequence of the Freiheitssatz is the following result on the “spelling” of a word,
akin to Dehn’s Spelling Theorem for surface groups π1 pΣg q (i.e. Theorem 1.2.2).
Corollary 1.3.2 (Magnus, 1930). Let G “ xA | r “ 1y be a one-relator group with
r cyclically reduced, and such that r involves every letter of A. Let w P FA be a
non-trivial word such that w “G 1. Then w contains an occurrence of either a or
a´1 for every letter a P A.
     Thus, the Freiheitssatz relates the “spelling” of a word with some of its algebraic
properties: if one is missing some letter and its inverse and thus cannot spell the
defining relator, then one cannot spell any relator. The Freiheitssatz is hence the
second of several “spelling theorems” (a term due to B. B. Newman) that we will
encounter throughout the history of one-relator groups (cf. §1.6.1). We remark,
however, that the Freiheitssatz provides significantly less control over the word
problem than Dehn’s Spelling Theorem, and does not immediately yield a solution
to the word problem (although see §1.3.3).
     The proof of the Freiheitssatz can be sketched as follows. The overall idea is
to start with a one-relator group G1 “ xA1 | r1 “ 1y, perform a rewriting process
(via the Reidemeister–Schreier process) on r1 , and obtain a new one-relator group
G2 “ xA2 | r2 “ 1y. This new one-relator group will have two key properties: (1)
the word r2 is shorter than r1 , i.e. |r2 | ă |r1 |; and (2) if the Freiheitssatz holds
for G2 , then it holds for G1 . By induction on the relator length, we thus arrive
eventually at a free group Gn for some n, for which the statement of the Freiheitssatz
holds by the Nielsen–Schreier theorem, and we will be done by induction.
     The way the word r2 is obtained from r1 is by first assuming that some letter
a has exponent sum zero in r1 . Thus we obtain a surjection from G1 onto Z, and
the kernel of this map – consisting of all words in G1 with exponent sum zero
in a – turns out to be an amalgamated free product of one-relator groups G2,i ,
i P Z, with Magnus subgroups being the amalgamated subgroups. The relators of
the one-relator groups are all obtained by rewriting r1 , which lies in the kernel of
the map onto Z by assumption. Thus, since the kernel is generated by conjugates
of the form bi :“ ai ba´i for b P Aztau and i P Z, we can rewrite ai r1 a´i into a
(necessarily shorter) word r2,i over the bi , and the defining relation of G2,i will, by
the Reidemeister–Schreier process, be precisely r2,i “ 1. Analyzing the structure
of the amalgam of these groups now readily yields that any relation holding in a
Magnus subgroup of G1 would give a relation holding in a Magnus subgroup of
G2 ; and thus (2) follows. Finally, if no letter has exponent sum zero in r1 , then a
simple trick allows one to embed G1 into a very similar one-relator group for which
the exponent sum of some generator is zero, and performing the same procedure
as above can be shown to yield (1) in this case too, ensuring the induction carries
through. This completes the sketch of the proof.
     The breakdown procedure, of passing from G1 to G2 , from G2 to G3 , etc. gives
rise to the Magnus hierarchy for the given one-relator group. This hierarchy can
also be realized by means of HNN-extensions, as noticed by Moldavanskii, which we
expand on in §1.5.4. As an example of the procedure, suppose we have the group
(10)                    G1 “ xa, b, c | a2 bcab´1 caba2 b´1 “ 1y.
Then the defining relator of G1 has exponent sum zero in b, so we can rewrite this
word as a product of b-conjugates of a and c. Indeed, if we set ai “ bi ab´i and
ci “ bi ab´i , then to obtain the new relator one simply has to remove all b’s, and
       1.3. MAGNUS, THE FREIHEITSSATZ, AND THE WORD PROBLEM (1930-1932)             23


replace each instance of an a or a c by the same letter subscripted by j, where j is
the number of b-letters occurring in the relator before that instance. This results
in the new one-relator group

(11)                  G2 “ xa0 , a1 , c0 , c1 | a20 c1 a1 c0 a0 a21 “ 1y

Magnus’ method amounts to showing that G1 is an amalgamated free product of
infinitely many copies of G2,i , where G2,i is defined by the same presentation as
(11) but with the indices on all generators shifted by i P Z, and amalgamated over
Magnus subgroups of the G2,i . Note that G2 has a shorter defining relator than
G1 , and in fact is a free group, since c1 only occurs once in the defining relator.
Hence the breakdown procedure ends with G2 .
     There are many things that can be said about Magnus’ 1930 proof of the Frei-
heitssatz in [Mag30]. First, the sketch above uses the language of amalgamated
free products, which is very slightly anachronistic: Magnus’ 1930 proof does not use
this language, and reproves many of the fundamental results of such products by
hand. Indeed, reading this article, one sees just how primitive of an area combina-
torial group theory was at the time: no reader familiar with group theory will find
themselves outpaced by Magnus’ writing, nor indeed will they find any prerequisite
knowledge missing (the only potential difficulties for the modern reader arise from
the dated notation). But it is only slightly anachronistic: indeed, the article ends
with a footnote that many of the lemmas, particularly [Mag30, Lemmas 1–4] are
essentially reproving results by Schreier on amalgamated free products, and that
he will “expand on this in future work”. This expansion would be the subject of
his 1931 and 1932 articles, where the Freiheitssatz is used to great effect.
     Before elaborating further on these articles, we mention a famous anecdote
about Magnus’ proof of the Freiheitssatz. As mentioned, Dehn had assigned the
task of its proof to Magnus, and Dehn was a particularly geometrically-minded
mathematician; thus, when Magnus told his supervisor that he had completed an
entirely combinatorial and algebraic proof of the Freiheitssatz, Dehn exclaimed the
quotation presented at the start of this section. One should not take this quotation
to mean that Magnus was immune to geometric intuition and arguments. The
three aforementioned articles by Magnus [Mag30, Mag31, Mag32] are indeed
mostly combinatorial, but there is a relevant footnote in the second article, from
1931. There, a lemma ([Mag31, Lemma 1]) is proved, which states that if in
G “ xa, b | Rpa, bq “ 1y the word problem is decidable, and if moreover deciding
membership problem in xay is decidable, then the word problem is decidable in
G “ xt, b | Rptn , bq “ 1y for all n ě 1. This lemma, now vacuously true by
the general decidability of the word problem in all one-relator groups proved the
next year (see §1.3.3), is proved purely combinatorially, but is accompanied by a
footnote: “This can be proved in a more immediate and natural way by constructing
Dehn’s Gruppenbild [= Cayley graph] associated to G” [Mag31, Footnote 20, p.
63]. One cannot help but wonder why the proof was then not carried out using the
Gruppenbild ! It seems that Magnus placed high value in the algebraic techniques
in spite of their sometimes less immediate proofs.
     We now turn to early applications of the Freiheitssatz, including the 1931 and
1932 articles by Magnus himself. Beyond these, we remark that the theorem was
certainly also noticed by his contemporaries at an early stage. For example, a brief
sketch of the proof of the Freiheitssatz also appeared in 1932, in Reidemeister’s book
24                                     1. HISTORY


[Rei32, §3.13], and using the full power of Schreier’s amalgamated free products.14
This book (for an English translation by Stillwell, see [Sti14]) was the first book
written on the subject of combinatorial group theory, and Magnus’ early influence
can be seen already here: he is one of only four mathematicians to be acknowledged
in the introduction of the book [Rei32].
       1.3.2. Early applications of the Freiheitssatz.
                                                  Even though the Freiheitssatz seems
                                                  almost trivial, it is nevertheless an
                                                  extraordinarily powerful tool.

                                                    —W. Magnus, 1930 [Mag30, p. 157].
Thus begins the second part of Magnus [Mag30], the article whose purpose was
to prove this theorem. The first application of this tool, already appearing in his
1930 article, concerns the (normal) root problem, and a particular case of it leading
to his conjugacy theorem. Let us begin by stating that theorem.
     Theorem 1.3.3 (Magnus’ Conjugacy Theorem, [Mag30, §6]). Let r1 , r2 P FA
be two words such that the normal closures of r1 and r2 in FA coincide. Then r1
is conjugate to r2˘1 .
    In other words, if in G1 “ xA | r1 “ 1y we have that r2 “ 1, and vice versa,
then r1 is conjugate to r2˘1 . This is a solution to a particular case of the (normal)
root problem, which we first expand on. If G “ xA | r “ 1y is a one-relator group
and w P FA is a word such that w “ 1, then we say that r is a normal root 15 of
w. For example, a2 is a normal root of a6 , and the commutator ra, bs is a normal
root of every word in which the exponent sum of a and b are both zero. Fixing
an underlying free group, the normal root problem asks to determine all normal
roots of a given word w. This problem is mentioned by Magnus, together with the
word problem, as fundamental to one-relator groups. In general, the normal root
problem remains open even today, although Magnus’ solution to the word problem
(§1.3.3) shows that the roots of a given word is a recursive set. Nevertheless, one of
the first applications of the Freiheitssatz was to determine all normal roots of the
commutator ra, bs.
Proposition 1.3.4 (Magnus, [Mag30, §6.3]). The only (cyclically reduced) normal
roots of ra, bs are the primitive words together with ra, bs˘1 .
    As a consequence, up to renaming generators the only one-relator presentation
with a cyclically reduced defining relator of the group
(12)                           Z ˆ Z “ xa, b | ra, bs “ 1y
is precisely that one. This is a non-trivial result, and proving it requires some work.
One natural implication of this is the 1917 result by Nielsen discussed in §1.2.3 (see
Proposition 1.2.4), and a footnote by Magnus [Mag30, Footnote 20] indicates that
the proof he gives is the one Dehn originally intended, unlike Nielsen’s proof.
   14The 1932 Zentralblatt review of [Rei32] (Zbl:0004.36904) by Nielsen also mentions the
“Freiheitssatz of Dehn and Magnus” as a natural application of Schreier’s amalgamated free
products.
   15The original German is Wurzel; we have added normal to distinguish from other types of
roots.
       1.3. MAGNUS, THE FREIHEITSSATZ, AND THE WORD PROBLEM (1930-1932)                         25


     In the same 1930 article, Magnus continued to solved the normal root problem
for other words. He proceeds, by fairly elementary means, to determine the normal
                                              k
roots of the words a2 bp , a2 b2p , and ap bp for arbitrary k and primes p. There is
                      16
also a small section at the end of the first part of Magnus’ 1930 article [Mag30,
§7.5, p. 163], called “Simple, unsolved problems”. Here, Magnus mentions the
difficulties involved in finding the normal roots of all one-relator groups by giving
the example of the group with the single relator ab6 a´1 b6 . The reader familiar with
one-relator group theory will immediately recognise this group: it is the Baumslag–
Solitar group BSp6, 6q, whose siblings BSpm, nq we will encounter again on many
occasions, and particularly in §1.5.3.
     The normal root problem has not attracted particularly much attention in the
literature since (indeed it does not appear in any other articles by Magnus), and
we can summarize it here. A. Steinberg (a PhD student of Magnus’) revisited the
normal root problem in 1971 and 1986 [Ste71, Ste86]. In the former article, he
studied among other things normal roots of primitive elements, and in the latter he
found the normal roots of ak bl for all primes k, l. Steinberg directly uses and extends
Magnus’ method from [Mag30], and a side-by-side reading of the two articles shows
a great deal of similarity in the methods indeed. Finally, in 2000 McCool [McC00]
solved Magnus’ old problem of finding the normal roots of ab6 a´1 b6 , and, more
generally, the problem of finding the normal roots of ra, bk s for k P Z. He also found
all the normal roots of ak bl indirectly, by showing that this word has only finitely
many normal roots for all k, l P Z, and that these can be produced algorithmically.
A problem which remains open is whether there is some element in Fn but not in
rFn , Fn s (the commutator subgroup of Fn ) which has infinitely many normal roots.
By contrast, every element in rF2 , F2 s clearly has infinitely many normal roots.
     Let us now return to the Conjugacy Theorem (i.e. Theorem 1.3.3). An equiva-
lent formulation of it is: if two words r1 , r2 are normal roots of one another, then r1
is conjugate to r2˘1 . This is a very compelling result, and relates to the isomorphism
problem for one-relator groups in a natural way. Indeed, it is very natural to ask
whether two one-relator groups
                      G1 “ xA | r1 “ 1y,       and G2 “ xA | r2 “ 1y
can be isomorphic without r1 being a root of r2 and vice versa (i.e. without the
normal closures xxr1 yyFA and xxr2 yyFA coinciding). Magnus suspected that this would
not be the case, i.e. that this is the only way that isomorphisms of one-relator groups
arise. Note that an equivalent formulation of the Conjugacy Theorem is that if
G “ xA | r “ 1y, then any automorphism of FA which defines an automorphism
of G must also transform r into a word conjugate to r˘1 . Thus Magnus’ suspicion
above is equivalent to the following conjecture:
Conjecture 1.3.5 (W. Magnus17). Let G1 “ xA | r1 “ 1y and G2 “ xA | r2 “ 1y.
Then G1 – G2 if and only if r1 lies in the AutpFA q-orbit of r2 .
    Were this conjecture correct, it would follow that the isomorphism problem
for one-relator groups would be decidable, as Whitehead [Whi36] proved in 1936
that automorphic equivalence in free groups is decidable (cf. also [Rap58, HL74]).
However, many decades later, the conjecture would be disproved; we expand on this
  16The section is erroneously omitted from the table of contents of [Mag30].
    17Possibly the first place this conjecture appears explicitly, and attributed to Magnus, in the
literature is in 1959, in an article by Rapaport [Rap59, p. 231], see also [MKS66, p. 401].
26                                       1. HISTORY


in §1.8.2. Note also that here we easily stumble upon the question of the structure
of the automorphism group AutpGq of a given one-relator group G. We have seen
in §1.2.2 the importance and relative difficulty of computing such groups. Clearly,
given e.g. xa, b | an “ 1y with n ą 1, there are automorphisms not induced by free
group automorphisms; but even in the torsion-free case (i.e. when the relator is
not a proper power, see §1.5.1) there exist one-relator groups with automorphisms
not arising from automorphisms of the underlying free group [Rap59]. Indeed, the
knot group of the figure-eight knot has such automorphisms (see §1.2.2 for Magnus’
work on this group.
     We mention some brief notes on extensions of the Conjugacy Theorem (i.e.
Theorem 1.3.3). By an extension of this theorem we simply mean that the free group
FA in the statement of Theorem 1.3.3 is replaced by some other group (e.g. a surface
group). It was extended to all small cancellation C 1 p1{6q-groups by Greendlinger
[Gre61] (a PhD student of Magnus’), and was subsequently extended to some
related classes by Kashintsev [Kas69, Kas85] and Palasiński [Pal82]. We mention
also some more modern developments, as their proofs use entirely classical methods;
first, it is known that for all g ě 1, the surface groups π1 pΣg q and π1 pKg q (given by
(3) and (4)) have the Magnus property, proved in the orientable case by Bogopolski
[Bog05] (see also [BKZ04]), in the non-orientable case for g ě 4 by Bogopolski &
Sviridov [BS08], and the reticent case π1 pK3 q only completed recently by Feldkamp
[Fel19]. Finally, Edjvet [Edj89] extended the result to free products of locally
indicable groups.
     Finally, we remark that Magnus conjectured [Mag30, p. 24] in 1930 that a
similar theorem ought to hold for two-relator groups. Specifically, he conjectured
that if two pairs of relators tr1 , r2 u and tr11 , r21 u give rise to the same normal closures
in FA , then the two sets are connected by a set of “Nielsen moves”, i.e. the closure of
maps of the form ri ÞÑ ri rj˘1 (with i ‰ j), inversions, and conjugates. These moves
are thus the natural analogues of Nielsen transformations. The conjecture remains,
to the best of the authors’ knowledge, open. One particular case of is of course part
of the well-known Andrews–Curtis Conjecture, which states that any presentation
of the trivial group which is balanced (i.e. when the number of generators is the
same as the number of relators) is related to a trivial presentation by precisely a
sequence of such moves above. This conjecture, which is also open, was posed only
in 1965 [AC65], more than three decades after Magnus’ article. Thus Magnus’
1930 article [Mag30] contains hints not only of Baumslag–Solitar groups but also
of one of the central conjectures of combinatorial group theory; It is remarkable
how much can be traced back to this single article.
     As a final note on the Conjugacy Theorem, it is worth noting that although
many classical theorems on one-relator groups today have geometric proofs, this
is not (yet?) the case for the Conjugacy Theorem, as pointed out to me by H.
Wilton. The method of proof today remains, while streamlined, essentially the
same as Magnus’ original proof.



    1.3.3. The word problem for one-relator groups. Although Magnus does
discuss the word problem in his 1930 article [Mag30] at length, he does not give
a solution to it in that article. The problem was clearly on his mind at this point,
however, and in his 1931 article [Mag31, §4] he gives a solution to the word problem
       1.3. MAGNUS, THE FREIHEITSSATZ, AND THE WORD PROBLEM (1930-1932)                      27


in all one-relator groups of the form
(13)                             xa, b | aα1 bβ1 aα2 bβ2 “ 1y.
This class of one-relator groups is already rather non-trivial, and contains e.g. the
non-linear but residually finite Druţu–Sapir group xa, b | a2 b2 a´2 b´1 “ 1y studied in
[DS05]. The method Magnus used to solve the word problem in (13) is a primitive
version of a method he would revisit the very next year, when he would prove the
following remarkable theorem:
    Theorem 1.3.6 (Magnus, 1932 [Mag32]). Every one-relator group has decid-
able word problem.
    His method of proof uses the Freiheitssatz and the Magnus hierarchy (as in the
proof of the Freiheitssatz, see §1.3.1), but keeps track of some more information.
We now give a brief overview of how his proof works.
    The central problem of study is the generalized word problem 18 or the extended
identity problem 19. This problem is the following: given a one-relator group G “
xA | r “ 1y and a subset A0 Ď A, decide whether or not a given word w P FA is an
element of the subgroup xA0 y ď G. That is, the generalized word problem asks for
deciding membership in Magnus subgroups of one-relator groups. Of course, if a
one-relator group has decidable generalized word problem, then it also has decidable
word problem; for deciding membership in the Magnus subgroup generated by the
empty set is precisely the word problem.
    The basic observation for adopting the Magnus hierarchy, used in the proof
of the Freiheitssatz, to also solve the generalized word problem is Theorem 1.2.6,
which we here restate for simplicity: let G “ G1 ˚H G2 be an amalgamated free
product of two groups with H ď G1 , G2 . Then the word problem in G is decidable
if:
      (1) The word problem in G1 and G2 , respectively, is decidable; and
      (2) The membership problem for H in G1 and in G2 is decidable.
Magnus first proves this result in [Mag30, §4], giving the first published proof of
the result (although the result was known to Schreier, as we have seen in §1.2.3),
and then proceeds as follows. Since the Magnus hierarchy decomposes a one-relator
group into an iterated amalgamated free product of one-relator groups (with shorter
defining relation) with amalgamated subgroups being Magnus subgroups, this gives
a basis for an inductive step: one only has to show that the property of having
decidable generalized word problem is also preserved in this setting when performing
the Magnus breakdown. This is not difficult, since the generators of the initial one-
relator group essentially arise from generators of the one-relator group at the next
layer down in the Magnus hierarchy. The base case corresponds, essentially, to that
of a free group, and membership in Magnus subgroups of free groups is trivially
decidable.20 This solves the generalized word problem in all one-relator groups, and
hence solves the word problem in all one-relator groups.

  18This term has also been used for the subgroup membership problem, a much more difficult
problem which remains open for one-relator groups, see §1.8.3.
  19Another name for the problem is the Magnus problem, revisited by Boone [Boo55] along the
way of proving the word problem undecidable; see also Stillwell [Sti82, p. 45].
  20In fact, membership in any finitely generated subgroup of a free group is decidable by using
Nielsen’s method, see §1.2.3.
28                                       1. HISTORY


    We make a few remarks on this solution to the word problem. First, we note
that, as we shall see in §1.5.4, the Magnus hierarchy and the associated solution
to the word problem has a natural interpretation in terms of HNN-extensions.
Furthermore, the seeming simplicity of the solution to the word problem should not
be taken as a suggestion that the word problem in one-relator groups is necessarily
easy. Indeed, the time complexity of the word problem in general for one-relator
groups is unknown. Furthermore, the breakdown procedure depends, in an essential
way, on which generator with exponent sum zero one chooses (i.e. the generator
mapped to the generator of Z). For example, if one considers the group
(14)                               G “ xa, t | ra, at s “ 1y
then this has a defining relator with exponent sum zero in both a and t. If we break
down the group using a resp. t, we obtain the group Ga resp. Gt , defined by
       Ga “ xt0 , t1 , t2 | t1 t´1    ´1
                                2 t1 t0 “ 1y resp.   Gt “ xa0 , a1 | a0 a1 a´1 ´1
                                                                            0 a1 “ 1y.

Note that Ga is a free group, whereas Gt – Z2 . In the latter case, we must therefore
proceed with the Magnus breakdown once again before terminating in a free group.
                                                                              t
One can easily generalize the above example (14) with e.g. the relator ra, apa q s “ 1,
etc., in which choosing to break down using a immediately yields a free group, but
breaking down using t can take an arbitrary finite number of steps to reach a free
group. We also here mention in this connection a result of Weinbaum [Wei72] who
proved in 1972 that in a one-relator group xA | r “ 1y, with r cyclically reduced,
no proper non-empty subword of r is equal to 1. Thus even this result, which
seems straightforward, is not immediate to prove using Magnus’ solution to the
word problem. We will discuss the time complexity, and related questions, of the
word problem in one-relator groups in §1.8.3. Before this, however, we must first
cross the barren landscape of inactivity that followed Magnus’ results.


                          1.4. The Lull Phase (1932–1960)
    Following Magnus’ 1932 solution to the word problem in all one-relator groups,
progress on one-relator groups slowed down. Indeed, as for significant theorems
related directly to one-relator groups themselves, in the next three decades or so
only one would be proved: the Identity Theorem of Lyndon. We will discuss this
result in §1.4.2. However, these three decades, which we will refer to as the lull
phase, saw a number of very significant developments in combinatorial group theory
as a subject, many of which would eventually end up being directly relevant to one-
relator group theory. In this section, we will give an overview of this phase of the
development of one-relator group theory, ending it in §1.4.4 by discussing some
reasons for what caused progress to slow down, and subsequently resume.

     1.4.1. Some results on free groups. We begin with some developments on
the theory of free groups that occurred in the 1930s. As we shall see, they would
have rather an important impact on the development of one-relator group theory
in the 1960s, particularly the notion of residual nilpotence. We begin with Magnus’
main result during this time: the representation of free groups in (the group of
units of) a certain ring. This can be fairly easily explained. Let ξ1 , . . . , ξn be n
non-commuting variables, and let Zrrξ1 , . . . , ξn ss be the ring of formal power series
                             1.4. THE LULL PHASE (1932–1960)                              29


in the non-commuting variables. Let ai “ 1`ξi . Then each ai is, in fact, invertible,
with inverse given by
                                                        8
                                                        ÿ
(15)                a´1
                      i “ 1 ´ ξ i ` ξ 2
                                      i ´ ξ 3
                                            i ` ¨ ¨ ¨ “   p´1qj ξij .
                                                         j“0

Thus the ai generate a group; and Magnus proved that the group they generate is
a free group. This has a number of immediate consequences.
     Theorem 1.4.1 (Magnus, 1935 [Mag35]). The group generated by 1 ` ξi (1 ď
i ď n) is free of rank n, freely generated by these generators. As a consequence,
free groups are residually nilpotent.
     Here, a group G is said to be residually nilpotent if the intersection of all
terms in the lower central series of G is trivial; alternatively, we will see a more
general definition of residual properties in §1.4.3. The residual nilpotence of free
groups is a direct consequence in Theorem 1.4.1 as follows: let F be a free group.
Then any element of the kth term of the lower central series of F , considered as
an element of Zrrξ1 , . . . , ξn ss in the above representation, must have the degree
of a certain component be at least k (see [MKS66, p. 313]). This implies, of
course, that the terms of the lower central series intersect trivially. A standard
reference for this representation, now often called the Magnus representation, is
[MKS66, Chapter 5]. See also [Che54, Cha68] for some extensions to other
finitely generated groups; indeed, the representation was in the first place motivated
in part by a 1928 article by Shoda [Sho28] on the automorphism group of abelian
groups.
     The Magnus representation would end up inspiring much research on repre-
senting free groups. While we cannot write the full history here (it shall instead
appear elsewhere), one particularly famous case bears a brief mention. In the late
1930s, a group of three Soviet students working in St Petersburg, supervised by
V. A. Tartakovskii, picked up the subject: these were Kh. A. Doniyakhi, D. I.
Fuchs-Rabinovich, and I. N. Sanov. First, Fuchs-Rabinovich proved results about
“determinators” of free groups, and uses these to recover Magnus’ theorem above
on the residual nilpotence of free groups; this appeared in a 1940 article (written
in English!) [FR40b]21. Doniyakhi proved results about extending these results
to free products of abelian groups [Don40]. Fuchs-Rabinovich [FR40a], in an-
other article, also proved results about representing free groups in SL2 pCq, giving
another proof of Magnus’ result. At this time, Sanov [San40] instead worked on
a different problem, namely the Burnside problem for exponent 4, which he solved
affirmatively in 1940.
     The three students would have rather different fates. When war broke out
in 1941, Fuchs-Rabinovich was drafted into the USSR Baltic Fleet. He died of
dysentery in 1942, during the Siege of Leningrad, at the age of 29. Doniyakhi was
also drafted, and died in battle less than two months later in 1941, at the age of
24. Sanov survived the war.22 After the war, Sanov would carry on the research
his fellow students had initiated, and in 1947 published the famous article [San47].

  21Lyndon [Lyn53] later elaborated on this article and its connection with Magnus’ work, and
we primarily refer the interested reader to consult this latter source.
  22Indeed, Sanov served as Head of Mathematics for one year at the University of Pyongyang
(North Korea) in 1949.
30                                         1. HISTORY


This begins by acknowledging the articles by Fuchs-Rabinovich and Doniyakhi, then
presents his theorem: the (multiplicative) group generated by the two matrices
                            ˆ      ˙          ˆ     ˙
                              1 2               1 0
(16)                                    and
                              0 1               2 1
is a free group of rank 2. This can be used to give yet another proof of the residual
nilpotence of free groups, and would directly inspire many important results in
combinatorial group theory, including the Ping-Pong Lemma [Mac63].
     Sanov and his friends were of course not the only researchers to be affected by
the war; we have already seen in §1.2.2 how Dehn was affected. Magnus, who had
been appointed as an assistant at Königsberg in 1939, was forced to resign from
this position shortly thereafter because he refused to join the NSDAP (the Nazi
Party). Instead, he found employment at Telefunken, a radio company, during the
war.23 This abrupt break in his usual research environment could also explain the
lack of progress on one-relator group theory during this time, cf. §1.4.4.

    Let us now turn back to some further results on free groups pertaining to one-
relator groups. The first concerns the study of primitive elements in free groups, as
discussed in §1.2.3. Whitehead, using topological methods, proved two remarkable
theorems in this direction in a 1936 article [Whi36]. The first states simply that
there is an algorithm for deciding whether or not a given word is a primitive element
or not. That is, one can decide whether a given element w P FA can be part of
a basis or not (cf. Nielsen’s result Proposition 1.2.4, which gives an algorithm for
deciding if a pair of words is a basis for F2 ). Furthermore, Whitehead completely
characterized when a one-relator group is free.
    Theorem 1.4.2 (Whitehead, 1936 [Whi36, Theorem 4]). Let G “ xA | r “ 1y
with r non-trivial. Then G is free if and only if r is a primitive element of FA .
    As we shall see in §1.6, there is also a complete characterization of when a
one-relator group is virtually free (Theorem 1.6.8), but this would not be proved
until 1972.24 Next, a result which can be seen as a generalization of Whitehead’s
result was proved by Magnus in 1939.
    Theorem 1.4.3 (Magnus, 1939 [Mag39]). Let G be a group given by a pre-
sentation with n ` r generators and r defining relations, with n, r ě 0. Then:
     (1) If G can be generated by n elements, then G is free of rank n.
     (2) If Gab – Zn , then some set of n of the generators of G generate a free
         group.
     (3) If G has the same sequence of lower central factors as the free group on
         n ` r generators, then G is free.

    Thus Theorem 1.4.3(2) can also be seen as an extension of the Freiheitssatz to
the case of more than one defining relation. We delay the definition of lower central

   23During this time, he would gain an interest in special functions, which would eventually lead
to him joining a project with Erdélyi, Oberhettinger & Tricomi to publish their famous book
[EMOT53] on transcendental functions. This book remains, by a wide margin, Magnus’ most
cited work.
   24Indeed, the fact that a non-free virtually free one-relator group must have elements of finite
order is not at all obvious, but follows from Stallings’ theorem [Sta70].
                             1.4. THE LULL PHASE (1932–1960)                                31


factors for when we revisit Theorem 1.4.3(3) in the context of parafree groups in
§1.7.6.
     Finally, we remark on a set of results that relate to one-relator groups only by
association. In his 1931 article, his second on one-relator groups, referenced above,
Magnus [Mag31] also proved that the commutator subgroup of the modular group
G “ xa, b | a2 “ b3 “ 1y – C2 ˚ C3 is a free group of rank 2. His argument
is essentially a simplified version of the machinery developed to deal with one-
relator groups. Later, in 1948, Nielsen [Nie48] extended this result to arbitrary
free products of finite cyclic groups, proving using a geometric argument that that
the commutator subgroup of Cm1 ˚ Cm2 ˚ ¨ ¨ ¨ ˚ Cmr is free of rank
                                          ˜                   ¸
                                                  r
                                                 ÿ        1
                      1 ` m1 m2 ¨ ¨ ¨ m3 ¨ ´1 `      p1 ´    q .
                                                 i“1
                                                          mi
Many more results could be mentioned here, as we now are heading head-first into
the dawn of combinatorial group theory. We have said nothing, for example, of
the automorphism groups of free groups, a topic which interested Magnus, and
many others, around this time. However, these subjects increasingly stray from
one-relator groups, to which we now instead firmly return.
     1.4.2. Lyndon’s Identity Theorem. Recall Dyck’s fundamental result (see
§1.2.1) that in a group G with underlying free group F and given by defining
relations r1 , . . . , rn , an element W is equal to one in G if and only if it can be
written of the form
                           m
                           ź
(17)             W “          Ti rt˘1
                                   i
                                      Ti´1 where Ti P F, and ti “ 1, 2, . . . , n.
                      i“1
One might ask how unique such an expression (17). For example, in the group
xa, b | ra, bs “ 1y, isomorphic to Z2 , we obviously have ra2 , b2 s “ 1, since Z2 is
commutative. This equality is witnessed by the fact that:
                 #              `     ˘     `         ˘ `        ˘
                    ra2 , b2 s “ aRa´1 ¨ R ¨ baRpbaq´1 ¨ bRb´1
(18)                            `     ˘ `          ˘    `        ˘
                    ra2 , b2 s “ aRa´1 ¨ abRpabq´1 ¨ R ¨ bRb´1
where we have let R “ ra, bs “ aba´1 b´1 . How different are the two expressions in
(18)? Up to reordering the terms, we notice that they are identical, except for the
conjugates of R by ab resp. ba. However, ab “ ba in Z2 , and so the two expressions
in (18) are identical up to reordering the terms and equality in G. This is an instance
of Lyndon’s Identity Theorem, which states that this behaviour always occurs in a
torsion-free one-relator group; there are no “relations between the relations”.
     Formally, the problem of determining relations between relations asks: what
are the non-trivial relations holding between the relations r1 , . . . , rn of the form
               źm
(19)               Ti rt˘1
                        i
                           Ti´1 “ 1 where Ti P F, and ti “ 1, 2, . . . , n?
                i“1
There are some trivial relations always holding; for example, if r1 , r2 are two dif-
ferent relations, then pr2 r1 r2´1 q ¨ pr2 q ¨ pr1´1 q ¨ pr2´1 q “ 1, which is a product of the
form (19) but not a particularly interesting one. Such relations are called Peiffer
identities. According to Chandler & Magnus [CM82, p. 118], the idea of studying
identities between relations had been described by Dehn to Magnus in the early
1930s, but this was not pursued further at the time. Instead, this would not be
32                                        1. HISTORY


done until the late 1940s, when it was investigated by Peiffer (a student of Reide-
meister) in 1949 [Pei49b] and, in the same year, by Reidemeister [Rei49]. The
latter proved that the problem of finding all non-trivial relations (19) reduces to
understanding the case when all Ti are taken modulo r1 , . . . , rn , and disregarding
the order of the factors in the product. If we set G “ F {R, i.e. R is the normal
closure of r1 , . . . , rn , then this amounts to stating that we must understand the
group R{rR, Rs. This abelian group is naturally a ZG-module via the conjugation
action of G, and is called the relation module of G (with respect to r1 , . . . , rn , see
below). Furthermore, it can be shown that the action of G on R{rR, Rs is faithful,
i.e. only the identity element fixes all of R{rR, Rs, see [AL55].
     In 1948, Reidemeister visited the Institute for Advanced Study for a year, which
had a great influence on a young postdoc in Princeton at that time: R. Lyndon,
who had been a PhD student of S. Mac Lane’s [App84, p. 3]. Reidemeister,
who took an early interest in one-relator groups (see e.g. his 1932 proof of the
Freiheitssatz in §1.3.1), does not appear to have been the one to introduce Lyndon
to one-relator groups. Instead, Lyndon recalls that after presenting his projective
resolution (see below) in a seminar at the IAS, Reidemeister came up to him and
explained a natural topological interpretation of his resolution [Rat84b, p. 25],
cf. also [Lyn50, p. 651]. Thus in the late 1940s, combinatorial group theory was
certainly on Lyndon’s mind, and in a brief 1949 article [Lyn49] he proved a result
for the cohomology of groups defined by generators and relations, before finally
turning his attention to one-relator groups. He was able to prove the following
theorem, by using the Magnus breakdown (§1.3.1):
    Theorem 1.4.4 (Lyndon’s Identity Theorem, 1950 [Lyn50]). Let  ś G “ xA | r “
1y, with r “ wn where w is not a proper power and n ě 1. Then i Ti rεi Ti´1 “ 1
implies that the indices can be grouped into pairs pi, jq such that ei “ ´ej and
Ti ” Tj wci in G for some 1 ď ci ď n.
     In other words, there are no non-trivial relations holding among the relation
of a one-relator group. We now give a restatement of the theorem in more modern
terminology, using the language of homological algebra. Let us make clear that
at this point, group cohomology was a nascent area of research, and many of the
general statements that are today a standard part of the subject were not yet
formulated.25 We begin with a restatement of Theorem 1.4.4 in the case of n “ 1,
i.e. the torsion-free case (see §1.5.1):
Corollary 1.4.5 (Lyndon [Lyn50, p. 663]). Let G “ xA | r “ 1y be a torsion-free
one-relator group. Then the relation module of G with respect to this presentation
is a free ZG-module.
    The relation module and the second homology group of any group are, as
is well-known (and as we shall see below), closely related; this was observed by
Peiffer [Pei49a] and Miller [Mil52]. We can thus use the Identity Theorem to gain
information about the cohomological dimension of a one-relator group:

   25To highlight this, we remark that group cohomology had essentially only been computed for
finite abelian groups at the time of Lyndon’s 1947 PhD thesis [Lyn47]. The subject of this thesis,
later published as [Lyn48], was the cohomology of group extensions, leading to what is today
known as the Lyndon–Serre-Hochschild spectral sequence. For a lucid account of this early history
of group cohomology, we refer the reader to [ML84].
                            1.4. THE LULL PHASE (1932–1960)                            33


Corollary 1.4.6 (Lyndon [Lyn50, Corollary 11.2]). Let G be a torsion-free one-
relator group. Then G has cohomological dimension at most 2.
     Let us now give a restatement of the Identity Theorem in terms of an explicit
resolution. Let G “ xx1 , . . . , xm | rn “ 1y be a one-relator group with r not a
proper power and n ě 1. By attaching a 1-cell for each generator and a single 2-cell
for the defining relator, we can always find a sequence of free G-modules
                                     B
                                     2     1 B
                                 F2 ÝÑ F1 ÝÑ ZÑ0
where F2 is free of rank 1, and F1 is free of rank m. Lyndon’s Identity Theorem then
states that the kernel of B2 is generated by the element r´1. If n “ 1, then of course
r ´ 1 “ 0 in ZG, so it follows that B2 is injective, and hence any torsion-free one-
relator group G has cohomological dimension 2, and one can explicitly compute
the (co)homology groups. For example, for trivial coefficients it follows almost
immediately from Corollary 1.4.5 that H2 pG, Zq “ Z if and only if r P rF, F s, and
otherwise H2 pG, Zq “ 0. Hughes [Hug66] used the Identity Theorem to compute
the cohomology of G “ F {R with coefficients in the relation module R{R1 . Then,
when r “ wn with n ě 1 and w not a proper power, he proves that H k pG, R{R1 q
is trivial for odd k and cyclic of order n for even k ą 2. Furthermore, he shows
that H 2 pG, R{R1 q is an extension of an easily describable group DpGq by a cyclic
group of order n. For example, in the case of G “ π1 pKg q from (4), Hughes
is able to show that H 2 pπ1 pKg q, R{R1 q – Z. Finally, we remark that in 1984
Ratcliffe [Rat84a] gave an explicit description of the cup product ! : H 1 pG, M q ˆ
H 1 pG, M q Ñ H 1 pG, M q for an arbitrary ZG-module M .
     In 1963, Cohen & Lyndon [CL63] gave a new proof of the Identity Theorem,
and strengthened it by giving an explicit free basis of the relation module. Con-
cretely, if G “ xA | rn “ 1y, with r P FA not a proper power and n ě 1, then
Cohen & Lyndon construct a set X Ă FA of words such that tx´1 rn x | x P Xu
is a free basis of the normal closure xxrn yy in FA . Their results, proved via the
usual Magnus hierarchy but with a stronger inductive hypothesis, also included, as
a byproduct, a new proof of the Freiheitssatz. Two other simpler proofs are due to
Karrass & Solitar [KS72] and [Bur74], in 1972 and 1974 respectively.
     We end with a word of caution regarding the terminology “relation module of
a one-relator group”. Indeed, relation modules depend on the presentation chosen,
although if G – F {R – F {S, then it is known that there is a free ZG-module X
such that R{R1 ‘ X – S{S 1 ‘ X, see [Lyn62]. By combining the Identity Theorem
with the above statement, we find that the relation module of a one-relator group
G – F {S is always ZG-projective. However, if S is not the normal closure of a
single element – even though G is isomorphic to a one-relator group! – then the
relation module S{S 1 need not be ZG-free. Indeed, Dunwoody [Dun72] showed
that in the case of the trefoil knot group G “ xa, b | a2 “ b3 y (see §1.2.2), there is a
presentation G – F {S for which the relation module S{S 1 cannot be generated by
a single element, and indeed cannot contain ZG as a direct summand. Thus S{S 1
is not free, but it is projective.
     1.4.3. Residual properties of groups. The notion of residual properties
goes back rather far, and while we will not attempt to survey it in full here, we will
mention some generalities. Let P be a property of groups (e.g. being finite, free,
etc.). A group G is termed residually P if for every 1 ‰ g P G there exists a group
Hg with property P and a homomorphism φg : G Ñ Hg such that φpgq ‰ 1. The
34                                        1. HISTORY


terminology residually P is originally due to P. Hall [Hal54, p. 349] in 1954, but
the concept can be traced further back. For example, in 1940 Mal’cev [Mal40],
who called residually finite groups finitely approximable, proved that every finitely
generated linear group is residually finite. He also proved, in connection to the Hopf
problem (the connection of which to one-relator groups we shall explore thoroughly
in §1.5.2) that no finitely generated linear group is hopfian; his argument can be
easily extended to show that in fact every finitely generated residually finite group
is hopfian.
     Free groups are the prototypical examples of residually finite groups. Even
before Mal’cev’s result on linear groups – and free groups are linear, using e.g. the
representation by Fuchs-Rabinovich [FR40a], see §1.4.1 – it was well-known that
free groups are residually finite. For example, in 1933 Levi [Lev33, Theorem 1]
gave a proof of the residual finiteness of free groups. Indeed, he proved the stronger
statement that the intersection of any decreasing series of characteristic subgroups
in a free group is trivial, which shows that, in particular, free groups are residually
nilpotent (cf. Magnus’ 1934 proof in §1.4.1). For other early proofs of the residual
finiteness of free groups, see also [Iwa43, Neu61]. Free groups are also known
to satisfy the stronger property of being residually p-groups for any prime p, as
proved by Marshall Hall [Hal50] and Takahasi [Tak51]. Another natural class of
residually finite groups are the finitely generated nilpotent groups, as proved by
Hirsch in 1946 [Hir46]. Thus residually nilpotent groups are also residually finite,
and we will encounter many examples of residually nilpotent groups throughout this
survey. Residual nilpotence, in particular, has a strong connection with the Magnus
representation of free groups (§1.4.1) and many results on residual nilpotence of
particular quotients of free groups and related topics, e.g. a well-known result due
to Gruenberg [Gru62] or Neumann [Neu62], can often be proved by appealing to
the Magnus representation, see [BH66].
     One of the advantages of residual finiteness is that any finitely presented resid-
ually finite group has decidable word problem. The algorithm is simple: given such
a group G “ xA | Ry, to decide whether a given word w P FA is equal to 1 in G
or not we run two algorithms in parallel: (1) enumerate all words equal to 1 in G;
and (2) enumerate all homomorphisms from G onto finite groups. If w “ 1, then
the first algorithm detects this; if w ‰ 1, then by residual finiteness the second
algorithm will detect this. Thus G has decidable word problem.26 Since all one-
relator groups have decidable word problem (§1.3.2, Theorem 1.3.6), this raises the
following very natural question: is every one-relator group residually finite? The
answer is a resounding no, and we will encounter many such counterexamples in
the form of Baumslag–Solitar groups in §1.5.3, which are of central importance due
to giving rise to non-hopfian groups. Finally, we mention that Meskin [Mes74]
    26This algorithm is often attributed to McKinsey, particularly to his 1943 article [McK43,
Theorem 3], but this is not accurate, for several reasons. First, McKinsey works in a considerably
more general context of “finite reducibility” in algebras, and as McKinsey himself points out in a
footnote, “this principle has been known for a long time [...] It was employed by L. Löwenheim
[...] [McKinsey] also made use of it in his article [McK41]” [McK43, p. 69, footnote 6]. The
reference to Löwenheim refers to Hilbert & Ackermann [HA38, p. 95], which in turn refers to a
1915 article by Löwenheim [Löw15], wherein the principle is admittedly well-disguised. The first
to write the principle in its modern form, purely speaking of groups, was Mostowski [Mos66] in
1966 and, independently, V. Dyson [Dys64] (see also [Dys74]). The argument was also known
to G. Higman and A. Turing, but not published (as pointed out by Boone and Schupp in their
MR review of [Mos66]).
                              1.4. THE LULL PHASE (1932–1960)                                  35


proved in 1974 that there exist finitely generated residually finite groups with un-
decidable word problem. Hence, for the above algorithm, the assumption of finite
presentability is crucial.
     1.4.4. Why did progress halt? As we shall see in the next section (§1.5),
the area of one-relator group theory would see a resurgence of interest after the
lull phase ended just before 1960. As described by Chandler & Magnus, Baumslag
proposed the following idea to explain the lull phase: “the Freiheitssatz and the
subsequent solution of the word problem for one-relator groups by Magnus left the
impression that one-relator groups are something almost as easy to deal with as free
groups and that this delayed a more thorough investigation of one-relator groups
for quite a while.” [CM82, p. 119]. While somewhat compelling, we would like
to add two further suggestions to this, which have not appeared elsewhere in the
literature.
     First, given the large number of PhD students supervised by Magnus who
would end up active in the area of one-relator group theory, it also bears noticing
that Magnus only had two PhD students while in Berlin (F. Oberhettinger and
F. Shäfke) with neither working in group theory. As soon as he arrived in New
York in 1950, however, he started supervising a large number of doctoral students,
with the first graduating in 1954; one of the first was Abe Shenitzer27 [She54],
who gave a necessary and sufficient condition for a one-relator group to split as
a free product. This result can thus be seen as Magnus’ return to considering
one-relator groups, following the turbulence of the war. Magnus would end up
supervising 66 PhD students at New York University between 1950 and 1974, with
some ending up as the most important names in the theory of one-relator groups
and combinatorial group theory: to mention a few early names, we have D. Solitar
(1958), M. Greendlinger (1960), B. Chandler (1962), and J. Birman (1968). The
same idea can be proposed for B. H. Neumann, given his early contact with Magnus
while in Berlin. He moved to the University of Manchester in 1948, where he
supervised both J. Britton (1954) and G. Baumslag (1958), both of whom would
be of central importance to the subject (in this line, cf. also [CM82, pp. 197–198]).
     The second reason, and in our view more important, is the general undecidabil-
ity of the word problem. We first give a brief summary of these developments. The
word problem, having originated with Dehn and Thue as outlined in §1.2.1, gave
rise to the first undecidability result in “real” mathematics, following relatively ar-
tificial undecidable problems on Turing machines as given by Turing [Tur36]. This
first “real” undecidability result was the 1947 proof by Post [Pos47] and, indepen-
dently Markov [Mar47b, Mar47a], that there is a finitely presented semi group
with undecidable word problem. This would in short order lead to the undecid-
ability of the word problem for groups. Turing [Tur50] worked on the problem, in


   27Shenitzer and Magnus would develop a life-long friendship, summarized briefly in the touch-
ing tribute [She95]. In particular, Abe Shenitzer (1921–2022) had been imprisoned in several
concentration camps during the war. After the war, he arrived in New York, and studied under
Magnus. Early on in their friendship, Magnus, visibly moved, said “You’ve done more for me
than any person can do for another. [...] You are a Jew who was in German concentration camps,
and I am a German”, cf. also [Sti22]. Magnus choosing to return to his pre-war work on one-
relator groups at this point might thus have been in large part stimulated by his interaction with
Shenitzer.
36                                        1. HISTORY


1950 proving the undecidability of the word problem in cancellative semigroups28,
a class of semigroups in which either of xy “ xz or yx “ zx implies y “ z. This
article would be used29 by Novikov [Nov52, Nov55] to produce a proof of the un-
decidability of the word problem in groups; this was done independently by Boone
[Boo57, Boo59] and Britton [Bri58, Bri63] around the same time. Today, it is
known that there exists a 12-relator group with undecidable word problem [Bor69],
arising from an encoding of a 3-relation semigroup with undecidable word problem
due to Matiyasevich [Mat67].
     In connection with the undecidability of the word problem, in the mid-1950s
a number of further undecidability results for groups would appear, including the
famous Adian–Rabin Theorem, stating that deciding “most” reasonable properties
(e.g. finiteness, triviality, being abelian or free, etc.) about finitely presented groups
is undecidable [Adi55, Rab58, NB22]. Thus, around 1960 the area of combi-
natorial group theory had undergone something of a shock. Indeed, one might
reasonably speculate that a contemporary researcher reading Magnus’ 1932 article
[Mag32] would imagine that perhaps the same method could be extended, at great
combinatorial cost and with little gain, to all finitely presented groups, and that
therefore there was nothing particularly special about one-relator groups per se.
The undecidability results of the 1950s shattered this illusion. Now, research could
be directed to classes of groups where the word problem was decidable in order to
see what was special about them, because something had to be special if the word
problem were to be decidable. One-relator groups certainly turned out to be special
indeed.

              1.5. The resurgence of one-relator groups (1960s)
Topology gave rise to combinatorial group theory. As we have seen in §1.2, the early
articles on one-relator groups were all clearly motivated by topology, with surface
groups and knot groups being particular flagship examples. As the machinery of
one-relator groups and combinatorial group theory grew increasingly powerful, it
also became increasingly useful to reapply these tools back to answer topological
questions. In the late 1950s, an important connection between the Poincaré Con-
jecture and combinatorial group theory was made by C. Papakyriakopoulos. While
this connection would not result in a proof of the Poincaré Conjecture, it did re-
sult, directly and indirectly, in the development of one-relator group theory. Other
topological questions, related directly to the old hopfian problem, would also play
a key role during this time. In this section, we will outline how these topological
considerations led to a resurgence of one-relator group theory, and some of the
subsequent developments in the 1960s. We will also showcase Magnus’ continued
influence on the area by illustrating how one of his PhD students gave rise to a new
school of combinatorial group theory in the USSR.
  28We mention here another connection to B. H. Neumann: around 1950, when he and Turing
were both at the University of Manchester, the two of them had announced a resolution to the
word problem for groups. However, their resolutions were contradictory: Turing announced the
undecidability of the word problem in finitely presented groups, whereas Neumann announced the
general decidability of the same. Both later retracted their claims, but Turing’s work led to the
undecidability for cancellative semigroups in the work [Tur50] cited above [Col85, p. 169].
  29Turing’s article contains a number of gaps, somewhat amended by Boone [Boo58], and
Novikov & Adian [NA58] later produced their own proof of the same result to avoid this depen-
dency.
                1.5. THE RESURGENCE OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS (1960S)                               37


     1.5.1. The Poincaré Conjecture and torsion. Around this time, new stir-
rings of topological methods appeared in combinatorial group theory. An important
stirrer was C. D. Papakyriakopoulos, who rose to prominence by giving a proof of
Dehn’s Lemma in 1957 [Pap57a, Pap57b] (the original “proof” of this result,
given by Dehn [Deh10] in 1910, had a gap, as pointed out by Kneser [Kne29,
p. 260]). Soon thereafter, Papakyriakopoulos [Pap58] became interested in prov-
ing the Poincaré Conjecture30, and in 1963 [Pap63b, Pap63c] he considered the
following construction (with a slight correction provided by Maskit [Mas63]). Let
π1 pΣg q be the surface group of genus g ą 1, defined by (3), let w be any word in the
commutator subgroup of π1 pΣg q, and let Pg pwq be the quotient of π1 pΣg q by the
relation ra1 , b1 ws “ 1. Then Papakyriakopoulos was able to reduce the Poincaré
Conjecture to the following group-theoretic conjectures: (a) Pg pwq is torsion-free;
and (b) the cover of Σg corresponding to the kernel of π1 pΣg q Ñ Pg pwq is pla-
nar. In connection to the first of these two conjectures, Papakyriakopoulos wrote a
letter to Magnus, asking whether the then-known methods of combinatorial group
theory could be applied to solve (a). This letter would become the basis of a 1960
article by Karrass, Magnus & Solitar [KMS60] (D. Solitar was a student of Mag-
nus’, and A. Karrass had been a student of Solitar’s). The three authors did not
solve Papakyriakopolous’ question in full, but provided some partial results indi-
cating it had a positive answer. The groups Pg pwq are two-relator groups, and as
part of their investigations of the elements of finite order in this class, the authors
of [KMS60] were able to completely characterize the elements of finite order in
one-relator groups:
    Theorem 1.5.1 (Karrass, Magnus & Solitar, 1960 [KMS60, Theorem 1]). Let
G “ xA | r “ 1y be a one-relator group with r cyclically reduced. Then G has
elements of finite order if and only if r is a proper power in FA , i.e. r “ wn with
n ą 1 and 1 ‰ w P FA .
    The proof, of course, goes via the classical Magnus hierarchy, by induction on
the relator length (Gruenberg [Gru70] gave a cohomological proof of Theorem 1.5.1
in 1970). The theorem states, in other words, that a one-relator group has torsion
precisely when it obviously has torsion, and the authors of [KMS60] further char-
acterize the elements of finite order as the obvious ones, namely those which are
conjugate to a power of the relator. The authors of [KMS60] proceed to provide
some further insight into one-relator groups with torsion as follows:
    Theorem 1.5.2 (Karrass, Magnus & Solitar [KMS60, Theorem 3]). Consider
the two one-relator groups G1 “ xA | r1n “ 1y and G2 “ xA | r2n “ 1y where n ą 1.
If G1 – G2 , then also xA | r1 “ 1y – xA | r2 “ 1y.
    This shows that isomorphisms for one-relator groups with torsion is, in a sense,
at least as “rigid” as isomorphisms of torsion-free one-relator groups. Note that
the converse of Theorem 1.5.2 fails, but this would not be proved until more than a
decade later, see §1.6.3. Indeed, at this point in the story, one-relator groups with
torsion were still viewed with the same lens as their torsion-free counterparts; there
   30The Poincaré Conjecture, which other than its brief connection to one-relator groups ex-
pounded here lies wholly outside the scope of this survey, states: a closed 3-manifold with trivial
fundamental group is homeomorphic to a 3-sphere. The conjecture was proved by Perelman in
the early 2000s; for more historical details, see Stillwell’s translation and commentary in [Poi10,
pp. 1–12].
38                                   1. HISTORY


was even some indication that the presence of torsion was a complicating factor.
When we return to the topic of one-relator groups with torsion in §1.6, we shall see
that this indication was very far from the truth.
     As mentioned above, Karrass, Magnus & Solitar were not able to completely re-
solve Papakyriakopoulos’ conjecture (a), but provided some partial progress [KMS60,
Theorem 5]. Indeed, their work can be seen as a very early form of “relative one-
relator groups”, an area that would grow in the decades to follow [How81, How84,
How87]. In 1964, another PhD student of Magnus’, E. Rapaport, would provide
a full affirmative solution to conjecture (a). In a beautiful 1964 article, Rapaport
[Rap64b] adapted the Magnus hierarchy to the very particular two-relator setting
of conjecture (a), as suggested to her by G. Baumslag (a name we shall encounter
frequently from this point onwards), and was able to prove conjecture (a). For
further work in this direction, see [Pap63a]. Ultimately, the Poincaré Conjecture
would not be proved by means of Papakyriakopoulos’ reduction, as in 1981, Moran
[Mor81] and independently McCool [McC81] proved that conjecture (b) is false,
using a further reduction due to Swarup [Swa79].
     Nevertheless, topological methods were to remain in combinatorial group the-
ory. Indeed, soon after the new proof of Dehn’s Lemma, J. Stallings, motivated in
part by the old work of Kneser [Kne29] and encouraged by Papakyriakopoulos (see
[Sta65b, p. 1]), gave a new proof of Grushko’s theorem on generators of free prod-
ucts using purely topological methods. His proof also dropped the finite generation
hypothesis appearing in Grushko’s proof, reproving the more general result due
to Wagner [Wag57]. Topological methods in combinatorial group theory would
bloom in the coming decades. Stallings’ 1983 article [Sta83] introducing simple
graph-theoretic methods to the study of free groups marked one turning point in
the history of combinatorial group theory; and similarly the “tower method” of Pa-
pakyriakopoulos used to proved Dehn’s Lemma would become crucial in the study
of locally indicable groups and one-relator groups, as pioneered by Howie [How83]
in 1983. These methods, however, pass outside the scope of this present history.
     Instead, we now return to the state of one-relator group theory in 1960, where
many problems from topology motivated further problems and progress. One prob-
lem of particular importance regarded hopfian groups, and it is here that one-relator
groups would begin to reveal the full extent of their rich, versatile, and often myste-
rious nature. We first give a brief background on hopfian groups, and then expand
on how they led to a resurgence of one-relator group theory.


    1.5.2. Hopfian groups. A group is said to be hopfian if it is not isomorphic
to any proper quotient of itself. The terminology arises from the fact that H.
Hopf [Hop31] in 1931 studied the fundamental groups π1 pΣg q of genus g ą 1,
which we defined in (3) and he denoted by Sg . In particular, he proved by a
rather complicated topological argument that π1 pΣg q is hopfian. In this context,
one is naturally lead to ask: are there finitely generated non-hopfian groups? Hopf
asked this question, although not explicitly in any of his own articles; already by
1934, however, Magnus [Mag35, p. 276] noted that he had been informed by B.
H. Neumann of Hopf asking this question. Of ś     course, there are many non-finitely
generated examples of non-hopfian groups, e.g. iPZ Z, but the assumption of finite
generation makes the problem significantly more difficult, and it would take nearly
20 years to resolve (affirmatively).
                1.5. THE RESURGENCE OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS (1960S)                               39


     It was known already at this point that finitely generated free groups were
hopfian; indeed, it is not difficult to prove using Nielsen’s 1921 results (see §1.2.3).
Magnus [Mag35] explicitly gives a proof of the hopficity of free groups. Further-
more, Mal’cev [Mal40] proved in 1940 that any finitely generated linear group is
hopfian. Indeed, he proved that any such group is residually finite, a sufficient condi-
tion for hopficity as mentioned in §1.4.3, and Fuchs-Rabinovich [FR40b] moreover
proved that the any finite free product of finitely generated abelian groups is hop-
fian. One of the first to consider the hopfian problem explicitly was Baer [Bae44]
in 1944, who extended Fuchs-Rabinovich’s theorem to a more general setting. He
also claimed to have given a construction of a finitely generated non-hopfian group
[Bae44, p. 272]; however, this was later withdrawn due to an error [BW49, Appen-
dix, p. 741–743]. Thus, for some time, the problem of finding a finitely generated
non-hopfian group remained open.31
     The first example of a finitely generated non-hopfian group was finally given in
1950 by B. H. Neumann [Neu50]. This group is not finitely presented. The next
year, Higman [Hig51] constructed a two-relator non-hopfian group, given by the
simple presentation
(20)                            xa, b, c | a´1 ca “ b´1 cb “ c2 y.
A further finitely generated non-hopfian group was constructed in 1961 by Hall
[Hal61]. In 1962, Gilbert Baumslag constructed a new example of finitely pre-
sented non-hopfian groups [Bau62a]: take two integral Heisenberg groups, and
amalgamate them over a common free abelian subgroup of rank 2. Up to that
point, the above examples were essentially the only known non-hopfian groups.
But it would not be long before Baumslag would contribute a remarkable number
of results in this direction.
     Gilbert Baumslag (1933–2014) first heard of Wilhelm Magnus in 1956 while
attending lectures at the University of Manchester given by his PhD supervisor B.
H. Neumann [Bau94, p. 99]. The subject of the lectures was amalgamated free
products, which we have encountered before. Neumann pointed out that although
Nielsen introduced amalgamated free products, it was Magnus who recognised their
value in his work on one-relator groups. These amalgamated free products (or
Schreier products, as Baumslag calls them in e.g. [Bau63b]), would become a cen-
tral part of the toolbox he used to prove a remarkable set of theorems.
     Thus, at this point, in 1962, Baumslag would be part of two remarkable results
relating one-relator groups and hopfian groups. The first was a positive result.
He proved that the amalgamated free product of a free group with a free abelian
group, with amalgamated subgroup maximal cyclic in the free group, is residually
free [Bau62b, Theorem 1] (cf. also [Dye68]). This general result implies many
interesting corollaries. In particular, it implies that the amalgamated free product
F ˚u“u F of two isomorphic free groups, with isomorphism given by x ÞÑ x and u P F
being any word generating its own centralizer, i.e. not a proper power, is residually
free. Thus, many one-relator groups are residually free; and hence, by Magnus’ 1935

   31We remark here that being hopfian is not a Markov property of groups in the sense of
the Adian–Rabin Theorem [Adi55, Rab58], as every finitely presented group can be embedded
into a hopfian group [MS71]. However, Collins [Col69b] proved in 1969 that it is nevertheless
undecidable whether a given finitely presented group is hopfian. From these results, of course
proved only long after the results about to be presented, it follows that there exists an abundance
of finitely presented non-hopfian groups.
40                                         1. HISTORY


result (see §1.4.1) also residually nilpotent and residually finite. One example comes
surface groups, which we saw in §1.2.2. Baumslag [Bau62b, p. 425] states that
Magnus had asked in a seminar whether all surface groups π1 pΣg q are residually
nilpotent. This question can be answered by using Baumslag’s aforementioned
theorem, by taking a commutator u “ ra1 , a2 s, which makes
                π1 pΣ2 q – xa1 , a2 , a1 , a1 | ra1 , a2 s “ ra1 , a2 sy – F2 ˚Z F2
be residually free (and hence also all π1 pΣg q for g ą 1 by the discussion following
Theorem 1.2.3). Baumslag’s results show that π1 pΣg q is residually nilpotent and
hence also hopfian, thus answering Magnus’ question positively, giving many new
hopfian one-relator groups.32 He also proves that all 2-generator subgroups of
certain one-relator groups are free ([Bau62b, Theorem 2]), comparing this result
to the Freiheitssatz. Indeed, this would be one of the first results about subgroups
of one-relator groups since the Freiheitssatz, cf. §1.7. The second contribution
from 1962 would be of a negative nature, and was joint between Baumslag and
D. Solitar (a former PhD student of Magnus’): the construction of the famous
Baumslag–Solitar groups.
       1.5.3. Baumslag–Solitar groups.
                                            These facts destroy several conjectures long and
                                            strongly held by the reviewer and others, and
                                            some published and unpublished ‘theorems’.

                                                    —B. H. Neumann, MR review of [BS62].
The hopficity of one-relator groups was, for some time, an overlooked question.
In fact, in connection with the construction of his two-relator group (20), Higman
[Hig51, p. 61] states that it can be shown, using an argument due to B. H. Neumann
and H. Neumann, that all one-relator groups are hopfian. This is, as we shall now
see, very far from the truth. In 1962, Baumslag & Solitar [BS62] would consider
very simple examples of one-relator groups:
(21)                        BSpm, nq “ xx, y | x´1 y m x “ y n y,
Their main result, appearing in a bulletin article, would be to prove that many
of the groups BSpm, nq, now called Baumslag–Solitar groups, are not hopfian (see
below for a correction of their initially incorrect statement). One of the main
examples of non-hopfian groups would be the following remarkable statement:
    Theorem 1.5.3 (Baumslag & Solitar, 1962 [BS62]). The group BSp2, 3q is not
hopfian.
    We will not present the proof of this here, but recall that by Mal’cev’s theorem
(§1.4.3) all finitely generated residually finite groups are hopfian. Thus BSp2, 3q is
not residually finite. This, at least, is easy to observe directly. Indeed, let
(22)                      B :“ BSp2, 3q “ xx, y | x´1 y 2 x “ y 3 y,
and let φ : B Ñ F be any homomorphism onto a finite group F . Let α “ φpxq, β “
                                                    n         n
φpyq. A simple inductive argument shows that x´n y 2 xn “ y 3 for all n ě 0 in

   32Baumslag mentions in a footnote [Bau62b, p. 425] that Magnus’ question was also answered,
independently and by a very different method, by K. Frederick [Fre61, Fre63], a PhD student of
Magnus’. Furthermore, G. Higman also communicated a different proof to Baumslag.
                1.5. THE RESURGENCE OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS (1960S)                            41

                       n          n
B, and hence α´n β 2 αn “ β 3 in F . In particular, if n is the order of α, then we
deduce that the order of β must divide k “ 3n ´ 2n . Since k is obviously coprime
with both 2 and 3, by Bézout’s identity there are integers m1 , m2 P Z such that
1 “ m1 k ` 2m2 , and hence β “ β 2m2 is a power of β 2 . Thus, letting β1 “ φpa´1 baq,
we have that β1 is a power of α´1 β 2 α “ β12 , and β12 “ β 3 . Thus β1 is a power of β,
and so we must have rβ1 , βs “ 1. In other words, since φ was arbitrary, the word
c “ rx´1 yx, ys must vanish in all finite homomorphic images of B. But c ‰ 1 in B,
as Magnus’ breakdown procedure shows that if c “ 1, then in the torus knot group
xy0 , y1 | y02 y13 “ 1y we have ry0 , y1 s “ 1, which is false by standard properties of
amalgamated free products (or indeed since torus knots are not unknots). Thus B
is not residually finite.
      The above argument extends to show that if gcdpm, nq “ 1, and |m|, |n| ě
2, then BSpm, nq is not residually finite. However, characterizing precisely when
BSpm, nq is residually finite is somewhat non-trivial. Indeed, in [BS62, p. 199],
it is claimed that if m or n divides the other, then BSpm, nq is residually finite.
This is not correct, as one can show e.g. that BSp2, 4q is not residually finite. The
correct characterization would only be given by Meskin in 1972, as follows:
    Theorem 1.5.4 (Meskin, 1972 [Mes72, Theorem C]). A Baumslag-Solitar
group BSpm, nq is residually finite if and only if |m| “ 1 or |n| “ 1 or |m| “ |n|.
     Many other complications arise in the literature of Baumslag–Solitar groups,
including for stating precisely when they are hopfian. Baumslag & Solitar them-
selves state that BSpm, nq is hopfian if and only if either m divides n or n divides
m, or if Πpmq “ Πpnq, where Πpkq denotes the set of prime divisors of k. This is
not correct, as e.g. BSp2, 6q can be shown to not be hopfian. The correct charac-
terization is as follows.
    Theorem 1.5.5 (Collins & Levin [CL83]). A Baumslag–Solitar group BSpm, nq
is hopfian if and only if it is residually finite, or if Πpmq “ Πpnq.
     Thus, for example, BSp12, 18q is hopfian, but it is not residually finite. Indeed,
as stated (but not proved) by Baumslag & Solitar [BS62, Theorem 2], it has a
finite index subgroup which is not hopfian (and therefore also not residually finite).
The earliest complete published proof of Theorem 1.5.5 that we are aware of only
appeared in 1992, see [ARV92, Corollary 1]. There, the authors attribute this
result to Collins & Levin [CL83], who do not give a full proof of the result, but
prove that for all |m|, |s| ‰ 1, if Πpmsq “ Πpmq, then BSpm, msq is hopfian. This
is one of the more difficult parts of proving Theorem 1.5.5, and it seems very
likely that Collins & Levin were aware of, and could have written down a proof of,
Theorem 1.5.5. The above characterization also leads to some curious results: for
example, it is not difficult to show that in BSp12, 18q “ xx, y | x´1 y 12 x “ x18 y the
group generated by xx, y 6 y is isomorphic to BSp2, 3q. Thus BSp2, 3q ď BSp12, 18q,
even though the former is non-hopfian, but the latter is hopfian because Πp12q “
Πp18q. Thus the Baumslag–Solitar groups also serve to illustrate just how elusive
a property hopficity can be from a group-theoretic point of view.33
     Baumslag–Solitar groups have come to play a central role in the theory of one-
relator groups since their introduction (indeed, recall that some examples of them

   33Even understanding when direct products of hopfian groups is hopfian is rather complicated,
see e.g. [Cor65, Hir69].
42                                    1. HISTORY


appeared already in Magnus’ 1930 article, §1.3.1). They act as counterexamples,
as we have seen, to many natural conjectures about one-relator groups, and have a
rich structural theory. We now give an overview of some of this structure to finish
this section. We first remark that the groups BSp1, mq, with m P Z, which above
are distinguished as residually finite as well as hopfian, are in fact solvable. Indeed,
                                             1
the derived subgroup is isomorphic to Zr m     s, and the groups split as a semidirect
            1
product Zr m s ¸ Z, with obvious conjugating action. Indeed, they are linear, arising
as subgroups of GL2 pRq, via the representation
                           ˆ 1            ˙              ˆ      ˙
                            m2        0                    1 1
(23)                  x ÞÑ              1     and y ÞÑ
                              0     m´ 2                   0 1

In fact, a Baumslag–Solitar group is linear if and only if it is residually finite. One
direction is Mal’cev’s famous theorem, and the other is obtained by constructing
linear representations for all groups in Theorem 1.5.4. Thus, in view of the linear
representation (23), it suffices to show that BSpm, mq is linear for all m P Z. How-
ever, it is not hard to prove that BSpm, mq has a finite index subgroup isomorphic
to a direct product Fn ˆ Z, where Fn is a free group of rank n. Since such direct
products are obviously linear, so too is BSpm, mq.
     The results by Baumslag & Solitar were quickly picked up by Rapaport, who
in 1964 used them to prove certain results on free products of groups. In a rather
obscure article [Rap64a], she proves among other results two which are relevant to
our story: first, the minimal number of defining relations of a free product of two
finitely presented groups may be less than the sum of that of the two factors (later
rediscovered by Hog, Lustig & Metzler [HLM85]). Second, she proved a result
on the deficiency of a one-relator group. Here, the deficiency of an n-generator k-
relator presentation is defined to be n ´ k, and the deficiency of a finitely presented
group is the maximum, taken over all presentations of the group, such deficiency.
Thus the deficiency of an n-generator one-relator group is at least n ´ 1, and
Rapaport proved that it is no larger:
    Theorem 1.5.6 (Rapaport, 1964 [Rap64a, Corollary 2]). Let G “ xA | r “ 1y
be a one-relator group. Then G has deficiency |A| ´ 1.
     Baumslag–Solitar groups continue to be a rich area of research, and although
we cannot possibly mention all results regarding them, we will mention a few which
are naturally connected to hopficity and the above considerations. First, the en-
domorphisms of BSpm, nq with gcdpm, nq “ 1 and m, n ‰ ˘1 were described by
Anshel [Ans71, Ans72, Ans73] (see [Ans76c] for corrections). Using this, he
proceeded to prove that in this case, G “ BSpm, nq has a fully invariant subgroup
N such that G{N – G, a very strong form of non-hopficity. We mention also
that Hirshon [Hir75] has given a full description of the intersection of the sub-
groups of finite index in Baumslag–Solitar groups. Finally, regarding the quotients
of Baumslag–Solitar groups, Moldavanskii & Sibyakova [MS95] proved (with clas-
sical techniques) that the solvable Baumslag–Solitar groups BSp1, kq are profinitely
rigid among residually finite one-relator groups, i.e. for any residually finite one-
relator group G, the set of finite quotients of G is the same as that of BSp1, kq if
and only if G – BSp1, kq, cf. also [BS89]. We remark finally that a natural line
of investigation beyond Baumslag–Solitar groups comes from considering relations
of the type x´1 wm x “ wn , where w is some arbitrary word (possibly with more
                1.5. THE RESURGENCE OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS (1960S)                            43


generators). Hopficity in this case has been investigated e.g. by Collins [Col78b],
Rosenberger [Ros80], and Collins & Levin [CL83].
     1.5.4. The Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy. One of Magnus’ most promi-
nent students was M. Greendlinger (b. 1932), who completed his PhD in 1960.34
The subject matter of his thesis [Gre60b] was extending Dehn’s algorithm from sur-
face groups π1 pΣg q with g ą 1 (see §1.2.2) to broader classes. This class of groups,
which lie somewhat outside the scope of this survey, is now called small cancella-
tion groups, as they satisfy the “small cancellation condition” C 1 p1{6q (historically,
groups satisfying this condition were also called sixth groups). This condition, which
traces back to the 1940s in work by Tartakovskii [Tar49] (and independently Brit-
ton [Bri56, Bri57]), is intuitively speaking a condition on how much the relators
of a given group presentation overlap. It can be used to guarantee a solution to
the word problem and the conjugacy problem, using a well-known result known
as Greendlinger’s lemma, which gives rise to a similar algorithm to Dehn’s in the
setting of π1 pΣg q. Greendlinger would expand on his work in a series of articles
throughout the 1960s [Gre60c, Gre60d, Gri], which would be generalized by Lyn-
don [Lyn66, Lyn72] and his student Schupp [Sch68, Sch70]. Today, a classical
reference for small cancellation theory is [LS77, Chapter V].
     Greendlinger himself did not work directly with one-relator groups, even though
his results were all directly inspired by this subject. After he moved from New
York to the USSR (forgoing an NSF Grant for working with B. H. Neumann in
Manchester), Greendlinger would end up as one of the core members of the algebraic
school of mathematics in Ivanovo State University, and then in Tula, where he began
working in 1967 [BDTU17]. He would bring many of the results and methods
from Magnus to the USSR, and many of Greendlinger’s students would end up
proving significant results on one-relator groups. One of his students in Ivanovo
was D. I. Moldavanskii, who became a graduate student of Greendlinger’s in 1964,
but ”almost immediately declared that small cancellation theory did not appeal
to him” [Aza16, p. 4]. Greendlinger, very familiar with, and having access to,
Western literature on the subject, gave Moldavanskii a copy of Baumslag’s 1964
survey [Bau64] on one-relator groups, which ends with a question on the abelian
subgroups of one-relator groups. Moldavanskii began working on this question,
which would turn out to be very fortuitous for the development of one-relator
groups. His approach to the subject would pass (more or less explicitly) via HNN-
extensions, and would lead to a simplification of the Magnus hierarchy. This, in
turn, leads to simplifications of the classical results, and for deeper results to be
proved, heralding in a new era of one-relator group theory.
     Before presenting Moldavanskii’s method, we give a brief summary of HNN-
extensions. Such extensions were first introduced by G. Higman, B. H. Neumann,
and H. Neumann [HNN49] in 1949, and carries their initials. The main idea of
the extensions is that if G is a group with two isomorphic subgroups H1 , H2 ď G,
then such an isomorphism can be extended to an inner automorphism of a larger

  34Martin Greendlinger was born in New York in 1932. In 1957, he met Elena Ivanovna in
Moscow while visiting for a conference, and they married the next year. Because Elena was un-
able to get a US citizenship, Martin moved to the USSR in 1960, renounced his US citizenship,
and became a Soviet citizen in 1961, eventually settling in Tula. Thus Magnus’ school of combi-
natorial group theory also made its way to the USSR. For more details, see [VD22]. Occasionally,
Greendlinger’s name is incorrectly transliterated (via Russian) in English as Grindlinger.
44                                        1. HISTORY


group G˚ into which G embeds. Concretely, if G “ xA | Ry, and φ : H1 Ñ H2 is an
isomorphism between two subgroups of G, then the HNN-extension G˚φ of G with
associated subgroups H1 and H2 is the group with the presentation
(24)                   G˚φ “ xA, t | R, th1 t´1 “ φph2 q p@h1 P H1 qy
where t is some new symbol, called the stable letter. A basic result proved in
[HNN49] is that the natural map G Ñ G˚φ is injective, and one original motiva-
tion for introducing these extensions was to prove that every countable group G is
isomorphic to a subgroup of a two-generator group H. However, 10 years after its
introduction, the construction would find its key use by J. L. Britton (a student of
B. H. Neumann’s) in his proof of the undecidability of the word problem for groups.
    Let G˚φ be the group in (24), and let w be a word written as
(25)                                 u0 tε1 u1 tε2 ¨ ¨ ¨ tεn un
where ui P FA and εi “ ˘1 for all 0 ď i ď n. Suppose for simplicity of formulation
that n ą 0. Then Britton realized that deciding that the word problem in G˚φ can
be formulated in terms of H1 , H2 , and G in the following way:
Lemma 1.5.7 (Britton35 [Bri57, Lemma 4]). If w “ 1 in G˚φ , then w contains a
subword of the form th1 t´1 or t´1 h2 t, where h1 P H1 and h2 P H2 .
      Thus, via this “spelling theorem”, one can immediately get a solution to the
word problem as soon as one can solve membership in H1 , H2 P G. A stronger form
of Britton’s Lemma, called Theorem A by Britton [Bri63], has a direct proof via
normal forms in amalgamated free products, see [Mil68]. A direct consequence of
Britton’s Lemma is, of course, the aforementioned result that the map G Ñ G˚φ is
injective. But, more generally speaking, the lemma allows encodings into groups
of “combinatorial sequences”, particularly those associated to the instructions of
a (universal) Turing machine. In finitely presented semi groups, such encodings
are rather straightforward (cf. §1.4.4), but for groups the first known encodings,
by Boone [Boo57] and Novikov [Nov55], were messy and full of combinatorial
intricacies. The simplicity of Britton’s formulation permitted the explosion of new
undecidability results in the 1950s (again see §1.4.4).
      This simplicity of formulation would also turn out to be applicable to one-
relator group theory. In 1967, Moldavanskii [Mol67] would be the first to notice
this, and used some of the properties of HNN-extensions in the study of the Magnus
hierarchy. First, we remark that if G “ xA | r “ 1y is a one-relator group in which
some generator t, actually appearing in r, has exponent sum zero in r, then it
is not hard to see that G is an HNN-extension of a one-relator group G1 , where
the associated subgroups are Magnus subgroups of G1 and t is the stable letter
(for a proof see [MS73, Theorem 1]). Indeed, continuing the example (10) and
(11), the stable letter is b, the first associated subgroup is xa0 , c0 y, the second is
xa1 , c1 y, and the isomorphism is induced by a0 ÞÑ a1 , c0 ÞÑ c1 . Furthermore, by
using Nielsen transformations and Euclidean division in the obvious way, we can
always assume that at least one generator of G has exponent sum zero in r and
appears in r. Let us call this the Euclidean trick. For example, in the torus knot
group xa, b | a2 “ b3 y, we can apply the Nielsen transformation a ÞÑ ba and fixing b,
   35HNN-extensions, and an essentially equivalent form of Britton’s Lemma, also appear inde-
pendently in Novikov’s proof of the undecidability of the word problem in groups, where they play
a key role [Nov52, Nov55].
                1.5. THE RESURGENCE OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS (1960S)                            45


followed by the Nielsen transformation fixing a and mapping b ÞÑ a2 b, which results
in the isomorphism
                     T2,3 “ xa, b | a2 “ b3 y – xa, b | ababa´2 b “ 1y.
In this new presentation, a has exponent sum zero. Hence, our group is an HNN-
extension with stable letter a, and applying the Magnus method (from §1.3.1) we
see that it is an HNN-extension of xb0 , b1 , b2 | b1 b2 b0 “ 1y, a free group.
     The Euclidean trick is sufficient for proving certain results about one-relator
groups, and Moldavanskii uses it e.g. to give a necessary and sufficient criterion
for a one-relator group to be (f.g. free)-by-cyclic (see §1.5.5 below). However, in
general the Euclidean trick will not lend itself easily to inductive arguments, since
it can increase the length of the relator.36 Instead, we need another trick. Suppose
(for simplicity) that G1 “ xa, b | rpa, bq “ 1y, where the exponent sums of both a
and b are non-zero, say α resp. β. Then we can map G1 into the group
                    G11 “ xy, x, b | rpy, bq “ 1, b “ xα y – G1 ˚b“xα Z
where the exponent sum of x is zero. When rewriting the relator via the Magnus
process, the relator length does indeed decrease compared to that of G1 , allowing
the use of induction. Let us call this the Magnus trick. Using this trick, we can
then prove the following:
    Theorem 1.5.8 (Moldavanskii, 1967 [Mol67]). Every one-relator group G1 “
xA1 | r1 “ 1y can be embedded in a one-relator group G11 which is the HNN-extension
of a one-relator group G2 “ xA2 | r2 “ 1y, in which the associated subgroups are
Magnus subgroups and |r2 | ă |r1 |.
     The finite hierarchy of one-relator groups G1 , G2 , . . . , Gn that this gives rise
to is called the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy. Notice that the groups of this
hierarchy are the same as the original Magnus hierarchy, with the only conceptual
difference being the addition of the HNN-extensions. Furthermore, Theorem 1.5.8
as stated does not appear in Moldavanskii’s article, but is implicit in his reasoning
(e.g. [Mol67, p. 1379]). The main result of Moldavanskii’s article is the following:
     Theorem 1.5.9 (Moldavanskii, 1967 [Mol67]). Any abelian subgroup of a one-
relator group is cyclic, free abelian of rank 2, or locally cyclic.
    This almost resolved Baumslag’s 1964 question of the abelian subgroups of one-
relator groups. However, it leaves unanswered the question of which locally cyclic
groups can appear as subgroups of a one-relator group, and in particular whether
pQ, `q can appear as a subgroup of some one-relator group. This has a negative
answer, and we shall see its full resolution, given by B. B. Newman in 1968, later
in §1.7.3.
    Moldavanskii continued to use this new hierarchy, and other tools, to prove
more results about one-relator groups and combinatorial group theory in general.
For example, in 1969 he gave an algorithm for deciding whether two subgroups of
a free group are conjugate [Mol69b] (cf. also [Gre70]), and an extension of the
Nielsen method to free products of groups, resulting in a new proof of Grushko’s
theorem [Mol69c] (for more on extensions of Nielsen’s methods in the context of

   36Moldavanskii seemingly missed this fact at first, since he only in a footnote [Mol67, Proof
of Theorem 3] remarks that the Magnus trick is needed to make a proof of his correct.
46                                        1. HISTORY


one-relator groups, see §1.6.3). The same year, he also gave a complete proof of the
following claim made by Magnus [Mag32, p. 297] in 1932:
    Theorem 1.5.10 (Magnus / Moldavanskii [Mol69a]). Except for Z and BSp1, kq
for k P Z, every one-relator group contains a free group of rank 2
    Note that the class of exceptional groups in Theorem 1.5.10 has a number of
other characterizations, and appears as a frequent class of “easy” one-relator groups.
They are, among other things precisely the amenable one-relator groups, and as
proved by Gildenhuys [Gil79], the groups in Theorem 1.5.10 also form precisely
the class of solvable groups of cohomological dimension ď 2. We shall see some
extensions by other students of Greendlinger of Theorem 1.5.10 in §1.7.
    For a final note on the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy, we note that a modern
and simple proof of its validity was given by McCool & Schupp [MS73], which
continues to be an excellent resource for understanding the elements of one-relator
group theory. Indeed, therein they use the well-developed machinery of HNN-
extensions to give simple proofs of the Freiheitssatz (§1.3.1), the decidability of the
word problem (§1.3.2), and the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem (which we will
encounter later in §1.6.1).
    1.5.5. Free-by-cyclic one-relator groups. One important class of one-relator
groups are those which are free-by-cyclic. Recall that a group G is said to be free-
by-cyclic if there exists a short exact sequence
(26)                            1 ÝÑ F ÝÑ G ÝÑ C ÝÑ 1,
where F is a free group and C is cyclic. We do not a priori assume that F is
finitely generated, nor non-trivial; similarly, we do not require C to be non-trivial.
However, in essentially all cases we will encounter in this brief section F will be
finitely generated, and C will be infinite cyclic. Note that in the case that C “ Z,
G splits as a semidirect product G “ F ¸φ Z, where Z acts by F via conjugation
by some automorphism φ P AutpF q.
      Let now G be a one-relator group. In 1967, Moldavanskii [Mol67] proved that
if ϕ : G Ñ Z is any surjective homomorphism, then it is possible to find a generating
set a11 , a12 , . . . , a1n of G, with a defining relator r1 “ 1, such that kerpϕq is precisely
the normal closure of a12 , . . . , a1n . In particular, a11 has exponent sum zero in r1 .
Using this result, he proved that [Mol67, Corollary 2] the commutator subgroup
of G is finitely generated if and only if the following holds: n “ 2, and the normal
closure of a12 is a finitely generated free group. Combining his results, we obtain
the following characterization of precisely when this happens:
    Theorem 1.5.11 (Moldavanskii, 1967 [Mol67]). Let G “ xa, b | r “ 1y be a
non-abelian37 one-relator group with the exponent sum of a in r equal to zero. Let
bm resp. bM be such that m resp. M is the smallest resp. largest index occurring
when rewriting r over bi “ ai ba´i . Then the following are equivalent:
     (1) G is (finitely generated free)-by-cyclic;
     (2) The commutator subgroup G1 is finitely generated;
     (3) m ă M , and am resp. aM occur exactly once in the rewritten form of r.


   37In the statement of [Mol67, Corollary 2], this assumption is inadvertently omitted, but it is
there in the proof, cf. the statement of [Mol67, Theorem 1].
                1.6. ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION (1960–1980)                          47


Remark 1.5.12. The equivalence (1) ðñ (3) is often called “Brown’s criterion”
for a one-relator group to be (finitely generated free)-by-cyclic, as it was indepen-
dently rediscovered in 1987 by Brown [Bro87, §4].
    Now, (finitely generated free)-by-cyclic groups are residually finite, as proved
by Mal’cev [Mal58, Theorem 1, p. 50] in 1958, see also [Bau71a] (also extended by
Wong [Won87]). Thus one consequence of Moldavanskii’s results is the following:
Corollary 1.5.13 ([Mol67, Corollary 1]). If the commutator subgroup of a one-
relator group G is finitely generated, then G is residually finite.
     Given a one-relator group G and a surjective homomorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z, Molda-
vanskii also notes that his criterion gives an effective procedure for deciding whether
or not kerpϕq is finitely generated. In particular, one corollary of his methods is the
following.
Corollary 1.5.14 (Moldavanskii, 1967 [Mol67, p. 1375]). There is an algorithm
for deciding if a one-relator group is (finitely generated free)-by-cyclic.
     Residual finiteness is, in general, a significantly weaker property than being
free-by-cyclic, even in the class of one-relator groups. It remains an open problem
whether residual finiteness is decidable for one-relator groups.

             1.6. One-relator groups with torsion (1960–1980)


                              It seems to be commonly believed that the presence of
                              elements of finite order in a group with a single defining
                              relation is a complicating rather than a simplifying factor.
                              This note is in support of the opposite point of view.

                                                         —G. Baumslag, 1967 [Bau67c]

                              [...] apart from the complications introduced by having
                              elements of finite order, one-relator groups with torsion
                              behave much like free groups.

                                                            —S. J. Pride, 1977 [Pri77b]
This far into the story, none of the theorems about one-relator groups have singled
out one-relator groups with torsion as forming a particularly simple class compared
to their torsion-free counterparts. Indeed, sometimes the opposite seems true: for
example, Lyndon’s Identity Theorem (Theorem 1.4.4, §1.4.2) is significantly neater
to state in the torsion-free case. Nevertheless, in the 1960s and 1970s a number of
remarkable results would be proved for one-relator groups with torsion which, in full
accordance with the above quotations. The crowning achievement of such theorems
was the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem, which in modern terminology states that
one-relator groups with torsion are hyperbolic. Before stating this result, we state
a number of important conjectures made by G. Baumslag around this time:
Conjecture 1.6.1 (Baumslag’s Conjectures). Let G “ xA | rn “ 1y, where n ą 1,
be a one-relator group with torsion. Then the following hold:
     (1) G is virtually free-by-cyclic [Bau86, Problem 6]
     (2) G is coherent [Bau86, Problem 1]
48                                   1. HISTORY


     (3) G is residually finite [Bau67c, Conjecture A],
     (4) G is hopfian [Bau67c, Conjecture A5],

     We make some remarks on these conjectures. First, even for arbitrary groups
G, (1) is the strongest of these properties, and implies all others: (1) ùñ (3),
and (3) ùñ (4) are both classical results. The implication (1) ùñ (2) is
due to Feighn & Handel [FH99] in 1999. Since BSp2, 3q is non-hopfian, it follows
that the only one of the four conjectures that can hold in the torsion-free case
is (2). In fact, that is precisely the conjecture that Baumslag made in [Bau86,
Problem 1]: all one-relator groups are coherent. We note that already in 1974,
Baumslag [Bau71b] had stated that it remained an open problem whether all one-
relator groups are coherent. The above conjectures would be driving forces behind
many of the developments of one-relator group theory in the 1970s until the present
day. Today, we know that they all have affirmative answers, including (2) in the
general case. In this section, we will present some of the partial progress made on
these conjectures before their full resolution, and present some general theorems
indicating why one-relator groups with torsion are significantly simpler than their
torsion-free counterparts.

     1.6.1. The B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem.
                                     I don’t believe it! I don’t believe it!

                                     —W. Magnus in 1968, upon seeing B. B. Newman
                                       present his Spelling Theorem [NB21a, p. 119]

                                            He could not believe that an unheard-of
                                            mathematician, from some unknown
                                            university in outback Australia, could have
                                            come up with these results.

                                                —B. B. Newman, remarking on Magnus’
                                                       reaction above [NB21a, p. 120]
Spelling theorems, being theorems which provide information on the spelling of
words equal to 1 in a group, date back to the very beginning of one-relator group
theory, the prime example being Dehn’s Spelling Theorem (Theorem 1.2.2) for the
fundamental groups of 2-surfaces. Britton’s Lemma (see Lemma 1.5.7), with its
importance for the Magnus–Moldavanskii, is another. And in 1968, B. B. Newman,
a PhD student of Baumslag’s, provided perhaps the most important one. We will
be brief on the biographical details of this story, since this is expanded on at length
by the author in [NB21a]. We mention only that the starting point for Newman’s
work on the subject was Baumslag giving him a draft of the chapter on one-relator
groups from the now famous book by Magnus, Karrass & Solitar [MKS66]. After
some work, he was able to prove the following remarkable theorem:

    Theorem 1.6.2 (The B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem, 1968). Let G “ xA |
rn “ 1y be a one-relator group with torsion, with n ą 1, and r cyclically reduced
and not a proper power. Let w P FA be a non-trivial word such that w “ 1 in G.
Then w contains a subword u such that either u or u´1 is a subword of rn , and
such that the length of u is strictly more than n´1                     n
                                                 n times the length of r .
                1.6. ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION (1960–1980)                        49


    The proof of this theorem goes, as expected, by the Magnus hierarchy. However,
the 1968 article in which the theorem was first announced was only a bulletin article
[New68a], and no proofs appeared therein. The proof only appeared in Newman’s
PhD thesis [New68b], which was until recently completely inaccessible: indeed,
the author’s (eventually successful) hunt for this thesis is the subject of [NB21a].
A simpler proof of the Spelling Theorem was given by McCool & Schupp [MS73]
in 1973, using the full power of HNN-extensions (see §1.5.4).
    We now give some immediate consequences of the Spelling Theorem, all of
which appear in B. B. Newman’s thesis. First, and most obviously, it gives a
linear-time solution to the word problem in all one-relator groups with torsion.
This is significantly better than the time-complexity of Magnus’ solution to the
word problem in general one-relator groups (see §1.3.3). Next, Newman realized
that his Spelling Theorem gave an easy solution also to the conjugacy problem:
    Theorem 1.6.3 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Theorem 3.2.3]). The conju-
gacy problem is decidable in any one-relator group with torsion.
    Newman also solved (see [New68b, Theorem 3.3.1]) the power problem in one-
relator groups with torsion, i.e. the problem of deciding whether a given element in
a group is a proper power or not. This problem, which we will not discuss further,
appeared in a similar setting of small cancellation groups also in work by Lipschutz
[Lip65, Lip68] and Reinhart [Rei62]. The next corollary of the Spelling Theorem
was a stronger form of the Freiheitssatz.
      Theorem 1.6.4 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Corollary 2.1.6]). Let G “
xa1 , a2 , . . . , ak | rn “ 1y with n ą 1 be a one-relator group with torsion, where r is
cyclically reduced involving the letters a1 , a2 P A non-trivially. Let β be any integer
which does not divide the exponent sum of a1 in rn . Then taβ1 , a2 , . . . , ak u freely
generates a free subgroup of G.
     Thus, for example, in xa, b | pa2 b3 q2 “ 1y, the subgroup generated by ta3 , bu is
free on that basis. Note that the ordinary Freiheitssatz only gives information about
cyclic subgroups for this example. Thus Theorem 1.6.4 gives an abundance of free
subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion. The same year, Ree & Mendelsohn
[RM68] had proved a weaker version of this result, for the two-generator case, by
using representations for some one-relator groups with torsion in SLp2, Cq. Magnus
[Mag75], however, has shown that their technique cannot yield the full strength of
Theorem 1.6.4. As a final application of the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem, we
mention the following subgroup result.
    Theorem 1.6.5 (Newman, 1968 [New68b, Corollary 2.3.4]). The centralizer
of every non-trivial element of a one-relator group with torsion is cyclic.
     This theorem was also proved and extended by Karrass & Solitar [KS71a,
p. 956], who elaborated on the properties of free products with a malnormal amal-
gamated subgroup. B. B. Newman had made central use of some of the properties
of such amalgams, particularly using the malnormality of Magnus subgroups in one-
relator groups to prove his results. This property of Magnus subgroups remains also
a key theme in the modern setting. We elaborate on this theme in §1.7.1.
     These were only some the initial applications of the B. B. Newman Spelling
Theorem, all of which appeared already in his thesis. Newman also used it to study
abelian and solvable subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion; we detail this
50                                    1. HISTORY


further in §1.7.3. Furthermore, it would come to play a particularly prominent role
in the subsequent work by S. J. Pride on one-relator groups with torsion, which
we will detail more in §1.6.3. We mention one of his results here, as its proof
heavily relies on the Spelling Theorem. B. B. Newman and Pride once thought
that every finitely generated subgroup of a one-relator group would either be free
or have torsion [Pri77b, p. 483]. That this is not true can be seen either from
Theorem 1.6.8 together with the fact that not every one-relator group with torsion
is free, or else from the example (27) below. Nevertheless, much can be said of the
two-generator subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion:
     Theorem 1.6.6 (Pride, 1977 [Pri77b]). Every two-generator subgroup of a
one-relator group with torsion is either a free product of cyclic groups, or a one-
relator group with torsion.
    Further results on subgroups of one-relator groups is the subject of §1.7. We
now conclude this present section with some brief remarks on the Spelling Theorem.
First, a strengthening of the theorem was obtained by Gurevich [Gur72, Gur73],
see also Schupp [Sch76a] for a complete proof and further strengthening. As noted
by Pride [Pri74, p. 57], a proof of this stronger result can be obtained by the
same method as the proof of Newman’s result given by McCool & Schupp [MS73].
Furthermore, one of the consequences, indeed one of the reformulations, of the
Spelling Theorem is that one-relator groups with torsion admit Dehn presentations.
This is known to be equivalent to Gromov hyperbolicity, and hence all one-relator
groups with torsion are hyperbolic. This places many of the above theorems in their
proper context: for example, in any hyperbolic group the centralizer is virtually
cyclic, yielding in particular Theorem 1.6.5 for one-relator groups with torsion.
However, the proof of Theorem 1.6.5 predates the definition of hyperbolic groups
by two decades.

     1.6.2. Residual and virtual properties. As mentioned before, today we
know that all of Baumslag’s conjectures (Conjecture 1.6.1) are true. However,
there had been some partial progress on these before this resolution, including for
residual finiteness. We now present some of these results. We remark first that a
natural conjecture might be that all one-relator groups with torsion are residually
(torsion-free) nilpotent. But this is not so, as indicated by the following example
due to B. B. Newman [New68b, p. 72]: let
(27)                        G “ xa, b | pa´1 b´1 ab2 q2 “ 1y
Then the index 2 subgroup of G generated by xa, b2 , bab´1 y admits the presentation
xx, y, z | ry, zsry, xs “ yy, and clearly y lies in the intersection of every term in the
lower central series. Hence G is not residually torsion-free nilpotent. One of the
first theorems on residual properties of one-relator groups with torsion was also due
to B. B. Newman, in his thesis:
   Theorem 1.6.7 ([New68b, Corollary 2.1.7]). Let G “ xa1 , a2 , . . . , ak | rn “ 1y
where n ą 1. Then G is residually a two-generator one-relator group with torsion.
     The proof is not difficult, but uses the Spelling Theorem. A few years later,
Fischer, Karrass & Solitar [FKS72] wrote a short but influential note giving struc-
tural information about one-relator groups with torsion. Two of their results are
as follows:
                1.6. ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION (1960–1980)                     51


    Theorem 1.6.8 (Fischer, Karrass & Solitar, 1972 [FKS72]). Let G “ xA |
rn “ 1y with n ą 1 be a one-relator group with torsion. Then: (1) G is virtually
torsion-free; and (2) G is virtually free if and only if r is a primitive word in FA .
     The authors also prove that the elements of finite order in G generate a sub-
group that is the free product of conjugates of the cyclic group generated by r, a
result that appears implicitly already in work of Cohen & Lyndon [CL63]. Part
(2) of Theorem 1.6.8 was reproved, among other results, by Karrass, Solitar &
Pietrowski [KPS73] the next year. Part (1) of Theorem 1.6.8 was expanded on
by Fischer [Fis77], who proved that (with the same notation as in Theorem 1.6.8)
if H is a subgroup of G with rG : Hs “ k ă 8 and H is torsion-free, then n
divides k. Furthermore, if some generator in r has exponent sum s ‰ 0, then G
has a torsion-free |s|-relator subgroup of finite index; if further gcdps, nq “ 1 then
G has a one-relator subgroup H of finite index. As a corollary, he deduced that
if G contains a torsion-free subgroup H with rG : Hs “ kn, then H is a k-relator
group. Finally, while we cannot pass into the details of ends of groups here, instead
referring the reader to [Sta68], we note that another important result proved in
[FKS72] is that any freely indecomposable one-relator group with torsion has at
most one end. Thus, in this case, it follows from Theorem 1.6.8 that if the defining
word is non-trivial and not a power of a primitive word, then the group has exactly
one end.
     We now list some families of one-relator groups with torsion which were known
to be residually finite before the full resolution of Baumslag’s conjecture:
      (1) (Fischer, 1977 [Fis77]) The groups xA Y B | puvqn “ 1y, n ą 1, where
          u P FA and v P FB are non-trivial elements, and A X B “ ∅.
      (2) (Fischer, 1977 [Fis77]) The groups xa, b | pabk a´1 y r qn “ 1y, where n ą 1,
          n does not divide r or k, and gcdpr ` k, nq “ 1.
      (3) (B. Baumslag & Tretkoff, 1978 [BT78]) The groups xa, b | pa´1 bl abl qn “
          1y where n ą 1 and l P Z.
      (4) (B. Baumslag & Levin, 1979 [BL79]) The groups xA, x | pxux´1 vqn “ 1y
          where n ą 1 and u, v P FA and either (i) u, v are words over disjoint sets
          of generators; or (ii) u and v are non-trivial powers of a single element,
          e.g. xx, y | pxy k x´1 y l qn “ 1y with k, l P Z.
      (5) (Allenby & Tang, 1981 [AT81a, AT81b]) Many different sporadic classes
          of one-relator groups with torsion; a typical example is [AT81a, Theo-
          rem 4.4], which states that xa, b | praα , bβ sra´γ , b´δ sqt “ 1y, n ą 1 and
          α, β, γ, δ P N.
     After these sporadic results, Egorov [Ego81] (a student of Moldavanskii) proved
the following remarkable result on positive one-relator groups with torsion:
    Theorem 1.6.9 (Egorov, 1981 [Ego81]). Let G “ xA | rn “ 1y with n ą 1
and r a positive word in FA , i.e. including no inverse of any generator. Then G is
residually finite.
    For extensions of this result, we refer the reader to Wise [Wis01]; for compar-
isons with positive torsion-free one-relator groups, see §1.7.5. Finally, we mention
a connection with another “residual-like” property. Tang [Tan82] proved that the
groups xa, b | pam bn qk “ 1y where k ą 1 are all conjugacy separable, a stronger prop-
erty than residual finiteness. Recall that a group G is conjugacy separable if for
any g, h P G which are not conjugate, there exists some finite quotient Q of G such
52                                           1. HISTORY


that the images of g and h are not conjugate in Q. Thus conjugacy separability is
to the conjugacy problem what residual finiteness is to the word problem. Further
results on conjugacy separability in some classes of one-relator groups with torsion
were obtained by Allenby & Tang [AT86] a few years later, see also [KMT95].
Today, like residual finiteness, we know that one-relator groups with torsion are
conjugacy separable, a result due to Minasyan & Zalesski [MZ13].

     1.6.3. The isomorphism problem for one-relator groups with torsion.
By deep results of Dahmani & Guirardel [DG11], we know today that the iso-
morphism problem for all hyperbolic groups is decidable. As mentioned in §1.6.1
(Theorem 1.6.2), all one-relator groups with torsion are hyperbolic. Hence, the
isomorphism problem is decidable for one-relator groups with torsion. However,
this problem was by no means a mystery before this point, and it was known to be
decidable in a large number of cases. Thus, we will now go through some of this
earlier literature on the subject, focussing particularly on the remarkable results by
Pride.
     First, in line with asking about isomorphisms of one-relator groups, it is natural
to ask whether there is a converse to the isomorphism result from Theorem 1.5.2.
Such a converse would show that the isomorphism problem for one-relator groups
would be somewhat more tractable, since it would show that it would be sufficient
to solve it in the torsion case. However, B. B. Newman suggested to Pride that a
counterexample to this converse might exist [Pri74, p. 71], and Pride was able to
construct such a counterexample:
    Theorem 1.6.10 (Pride, 1974 [Pri74, Theorem 4.7]). Let n ě 1 and consider
the groups
        Bn “ xa, t | pa´3 t´1 a2 tqn “ 1y         and     Cn “ xa, t | pa´1 rt, as2 qn “ 1y.
Then Bn – Cn if and only if n “ 1.
    Thus, this theorem provided a counterexample to the converse of Theorem 1.5.2.
Indeed, it also provided another counterexample to an old conjecture by Magnus
(Conjecture 1.3.5), since it proves that there is an isomorphism
                   B1 “ xa, t | t´1 a2 t “ a3 y – xa, t | rt, as2 “ ay “ C1
but it is readily checked that t´1 a2 ta´3 and rt, as2 a´1 are not related by a free group
automorphism (this example was also obtained by Brunner [Bru74], cf. [Bru76]).
     The above negative result is, in hindsight, not surprising: the isomorphism
problem for one-relator groups with torsion turns out to be significantly easier than
in the torsion-free case. To state some of the positive results, we recall the notion of
a T -system (Ger. Transitivitätssystem, i.e. transitivity system) of a group, following
[Pri75]. Let G be an n-generated group, and let
                        g “ pg1 , . . . , gn q,   and g1 “ pg11 , . . . , gn1 q
be two generating tuples for G. We say that g and g1 are Nielsen equivalent if there
is some automorphism
                           xi ÞÑ Yi px1 , . . . , xn q,   i “ 1, 2, . . . , n
of the free group Fn on x1 , . . . , xn such that gi1 “ Yi pg1 , . . . , gn q. Thus, for example,
the tuples pg1 , g2 q and pg2 g1´1 , g1 q are always Nielsen equivalent. We say that g and
                1.6. ONE-RELATOR GROUPS WITH TORSION (1960–1980)                             53


g1 lie in the same T -system if there is some automorphism ϱ P AutpGq such that g1
is Nielsen equivalent to ϱpgq, where
                                  ϱpgq “ pϱpg1 q, . . . , ϱpgn qq.
This equivalence relation was defined by B. H. Neumann & H. Neumann [NN51] in
1951. For our purposes, the importance of T -systems comes via Magnus’ Conjugacy
Theorem (Theorem 1.3.3). First, continuing the above notation, let
                             xx1 , . . . , xn | r1 “ 1, . . . , rm “ 1y
is a presentation of G with respect to the generating tuple g (i.e. the kernel of the
map xi ÞÑ gi coincides with the normal closure of the rj ). Then g1 lies in the same
T -system as g if and only if there is some ϕ P AutpFn q such that
                         xx1 , . . . , xn | ϕpr1 q “ 1, . . . , ϕprm q “ 1y
is a presentation of G with respect to the generating tuple g1 . In general, G may
have many different m-relator presentations with respect to g1 , and one of the
difficulties (indeed undecidability) of the isomorphism problem in full generality
arises from this issue. However, when m “ 1, i.e. the one-relator case, Magnus’
Conjugacy Theorem (Theorem 1.3.3) tells us that two generating sets lying in the
same T -system gives very strict control over the defining relator:
Proposition 1.6.11. Two one-relator presentations xA | r “ 1y and xA | s “ 1y
of a group G are associated with elements from the same T -system in G if and only
if s is equal in FA to the image of r˘1 under some automorphism of FA .
    In particular, if a one-relator group G only has one T -system of generating
tuples, then the isomorphism problem is decidable for the class of one-relator groups
with respect to that one-relator group; in other words, it is decidable whether a
given one-relator group is isomorphic to G or not. Brunner’s example of BSp2, 3q
above shows that in general a one-relator group may have infinitely many T -systems
of generating tuples. In the case of one-relator groups with torsion, however, more
can be said.
    First, for example, consider the class of groups Sn “ xa, b | ra, bsn “ 1y, where
n ą 1. These groups Sn are virtually surface groups π1 pΣg q, indeed it is not hard
to show that kerpSn ↠ D2n q is isomorphic to π1 pΣ2n´1 q (see e.g. [BT08]). The
fact that Sn is Fuchsian was observed also by Rosenberger [Ros73], who studied
these groups in 1973. He furthermore proved that the only generating sets tu, vu of
Sn are those of the form where ru, vs is conjugate to ra, bsε , where ε “ ˘1 (see also
Purzitsky & Rosenberger [PR72, PR73] and Pride [Pri73], cf. [Pri74, p. 72]).
By Nielsen’s result (Proposition 1.2.4), this implies that tu, vu is a basis of the
underlying free group, so in particular Sn has only one T -system of generators. In
1972, Rosenberger [Ros72] also considered the “higher genus” Sn,g variants of the
groups Sn , defined by
(28)            xa1 , b1 , . . . , ag , bg | pra1 , b1 sra2 , b2 s ¨ ¨ ¨ rag , bg sqn “ 1y
with n, g ě 1, and proved that the isomorphism problem for one-relator groups
relative to this class is decidable. For other related examples, and a slight general-
ization, see [RK76, Ros76].
     However, a few years later, in 1977 Pride [Pri77a] was able to clarify the
situation of generating tuples of all two-generator one-relator groups with torsion.
He proved that if G “ xA | rn “ 1y is a one-relator group with torsion, with
54                                   1. HISTORY


n ą 1 and r not a proper power, then G has only one T -system of generating tuples
(when n “ 2) or 21 ϕpnq such systems when n ą 2. Here ϕ denotes Euler’s totient
function. He moreover showed that these T -systems can be effectively found, and
hence deduced the following remarkable theorem:
    Theorem 1.6.12 (Pride, 1977 [Pri77a]). The isomorphism problem is decid-
able for two-generator one-relator groups with torsion.
    The method of proof involves much use of the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem
and, of course, induction on the length of the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy.
Beyond the isomorphism problem, other structural information can also be deduced
from a one-relator group having only one T -system of generating tuples.
    Theorem 1.6.13 (Pride, 1977 [Pri77a]). Let G be a two-generator one-relator
group with torsion. Then:
     (1) G is a hopfian group.
     (2) The automorphism group of G is finitely generated;

     We remark that Rosenberger was able to extend these methods to a slightly
more general setting; we do not recount all such extensions here, but mention a typi-
cal example. Let X1 X X2 ‰ ∅, let wi P Fi for i P t1, 2u be two words. Then Rosen-
berger [Ros77] gave conditions under which the group xX1 , X2 | pw1 w2 qn “ 1y
with n ą 1 only has one T -system of generating tuples, and hence the isomorphism
problem for one-relator groups is decidable with respect to this class.

                     1.7. Subgroups of one-relator groups
Subgroups of zero-relator groups, i.e. free groups, are themselves zero-relator groups;
this is the Nielsen–Schreier Theorem, as presented in §1.2.3. Similarly, many sub-
groups of one-relator groups are free, as the Freiheitssatz tells us. Thus, it seems
natural to ask: what are the subgroups of one-relator groups? In particular, is
every subgroup of a one-relator group a one-relator group? The answer to this
latter question is emphatically no. The subgroup structure of one-relator group
carries a great richness, and although we today know that all one-relator groups
are coherent, much was known already before this was proved. In this section, we
will present several different flavours of such results about subgroups of one-relator
groups.
     We first remark that there is, in general, an abundance of subgroups in one-
relator groups. Baumslag & Miller [BM86] prove that certain one-relator groups
contain many non-isomorphic subgroups. Indeed, they prove, using a simple ar-
gument that as soon as a group G contains a countably infinite number of non-
isomorphic, freely indecomposable subgroups, then G ˚ Z contains continuously
many non-isomorphic subgroups. For example, one can take the solvable Baumslag–
Solitar group
                             BSp1, 2q “ xa, b | b´1 ab “ a2 y
                                      i
in which the subgroup Ei “ xa, b2 y is solvable, and Ei fl Ej if i ‰ j since
H1 pEi , Zq clearly grows in i. Thus BSp1, 2q ˚ Z contains continuously many non-
isomorphic subgroups. Note also that every one-relator group can be embedded
into a 2-generator one-relator group (see e.g. [MKS66, p. 259]), and hence there
                        1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                                    55


are 2-generator one-relator groups containing continuously many non-isomorphic
subgroups, e.g. the Baumslag–Gersten group
(29)                         BG “ xa, t | ta´1 t´1 atat´1 “ a2 y
which is clearly an HNN-extension of BSp1, 2q. By the above results, it contains
continuously many non-isomorphic subgroups. Thus it also contains countable sub-
groups which are not recursively presentable. Nevertheless, in general, much can be
said about particular classes of subgroups of one-relator groups, particularly their
finitely generated subgroups. In this section, we will see many examples of this.
     We caution the reader that because of the often simultaneous and overlapping
developments at this time, unlike previous sections, the subsections of this section
(and the next) can be read more or less independently of one another, and will
frequently pass from one subject to another with only some connective tissue.
     1.7.1. Magnus subgroups and malnormality. Let G “ xA | r “ 1y, with
r cyclically reduced. Then recall (from §1.3.1) that a Magnus subgroup of G is
any subgroup generated by a proper subset of A. The Freiheitssatz, being the
first result about one-relator groups, was a result about these subgroups: they are
free. More can be said about Magnus subgroups, however. One particular classical
theme which we now expand on is that of malnormality. For an arbitrary group
G, a non-trivial subgroup H ď G is said to be malnormal if gHg ´1 X H “ t1u
for all g P GzH. The terminology malnormal for this property was introduced
by B. Baumslag in his 1965 PhD thesis [Bau65a], see also [Bau68, p. 601]. The
structure of a finite group with a malnormal subgroup is rather restricted. A finite
group G has a (non-trivial) malnormal subgroup H if and only if it is a Frobenius
group, i.e. it acts transitively on some finite set where no non-trivial element fixes
more than one point, and some non-trivial element fixes some point. Then H being
malnormal is a restatement of H being a Frobenius complement, and G splits as a
semidirect product G “ K ¸ H where K is the (normal) subgroup consisting of all
elements not in any conjugate of H [Fro01].
     In general, in infinite groups malnormal subgroups are more complicated. In-
deed, even the problem of deciding whether a subgroup of a free group is malnormal
or not is non-trivial, albeit decidable [BMR99]. Early work on malnormal sub-
groups, other than that by B. Baumslag [Bau65a, Bau68], are four other PhD
theses, all of which were by students of G. Baumslag: the first is by Driscoll [Dri67],
who used it in her study of the conjugacy problem is some amalgamated free prod-
ucts; the second was Whittemore [Whi67], who used malnormal subgroups in her
study of the Frattini subgroups of amalgamated free products; and third by Taylor
[Tay63, Lew67]38 in her study of groups with unique roots. The fourth, and for us
the most important, was by B. B. Newman, who proved the following remarkable
result in his thesis:



  38Here, a possible source of confusion regarding surnames arises. Tekla Taylor and Jacques
Lewin were the first two PhD students of G. Baumslag’s, and they married in 1965. Tekla
took her husband’s surname, and the two would publish together frequently, including the article
containing their famous Lewin–Lewin construction for the group ring of a torsion-free one-relator
group [LL78]. Nevertheless, possibly because of delays in publishing, Tekla’s surname still appears
as Taylor in 1968 in her joint article with Baumslag on the centre of one-relator groups [BT68],
see §1.7.2.
56                                       1. HISTORY


    Theorem 1.7.1 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Lemma 2.3.1(I)]). Any Mag-
nus subgroup of a one-relator group with torsion is malnormal.
     This result, and a strengthening of it using the notion of strong malnormality,
was used by Newman in his solution to the conjugacy problem in all one-relator
groups with torsion. Newman’s result would also, many decades later, come to play
a key role in Wise’s recent proof of the residual finiteness of one-relator groups with
torsion [Wis09]. We remark that Moldavanskii [Mol68] further proved that the
intersection of Magnus subgroups generated by disjoint subsets of the generators is
always trivial in a one-relator group with torsion.
     Outside the torsion case, Bagherzadeh [Bag76b, Bag76a] proved in 1976 that
for any one-relator group G, if H ă G is a Magnus subgroup, then H X g ´1 Hg
is cyclic for g R H. Thus any Magnus subgroup of a one-relator group is what
Bagherzadeh calls cyclonormal (a term which later appears also in work by Wise
[Wis01]). It is somewhat surprising that new results are still proved about Mag-
nus subgroups in general one-relator groups, even using mostly classical methods.
Moldavanskii [Mol68] proved that if G is a one-relator group xA | r “ 1y with
X1 , X2 Ď A and X1 X X2 “ ∅, then xX1 y X xX2 y is either trivial or isomorphic
to Z. Collins [Col04] extended this result in 2004 by proving that if X1 , X2 Ă A
generate two Magnus subgroups H1 “ xX1 y and H2 “ xX2 y, then H1 X H2 is either
free on X1 X X2 , or else is a free product of Z with this group.
     1.7.2. The centre of one-relator groups. For any group G, it is natural
to ask about its centre ZpGq. This is also true of one-relator groups. Indeed, Levi,
in his 1933 investigation [Lev33] on free groups 1933, includes as an example the
group BSp2, 2q “ xx, y | x´1 y 2 x “ y 2 y (see §1.5.3), and notes that its centre is
infinite cyclic, and generated by the element y 2 . Generalizing such examples, in
1935 Kalashnikov & Kurosh [KK35] studied subgroups of amalgamated free prod-
ucts in which the amalgamated subgroups are all subgroups of the centres of the
factors, a precursor to the tree products which we shall encounter below. Comput-
ing the centre of finitely presented groups is in general an undecidable problem39,
and Remeslennikov proved that there are finitely presented groups whose centre
is not finitely generated [Rem74] (answering a question of Baumslag [Bau67a,
Question 1]). However, it turns out that for one-relator groups, there is a complete
answer. We give a brief exposition of these results in this section.
     Perhaps the first general result on the centres of one-relator groups is that
the centre of a one-relator group with torsion is necessarily trivial, proved in 1960
[KMS60, Corollary]. The real impetus for the study of the centre of one-relator
groups, however, came in 1964, when Murasugi [Mur64] proved several beautiful
theorems. Let G “ xa1 , . . . , an | R “ 1y be a one-relator group. Then Murasugi
proved: first, if n ą 2, then ZpGq “ 1.40 Furthermore, if we suppose that n “ 2, G
is non-abelian, and ZpGq is non-trivial, then ZpGq is infinite cyclic. Thus the centre
of any one-relator group G is either trivial, infinite cyclic, or Z2 – and the last case
happens if and only if G – Z2 (and there is only one cyclically reduced one-relator
presentation for Z2 , see §1.3.2). The proofs of this pass via the Alexander polynomial

   39This is not a direct consequence of the Adian–Rabin theorem [Adi55, Rab58], but follows
from a 1959 extension of it by Baumslag, Boone & Neumann [BBN59].
   40In a sequel article, Murasugi [Mur65] conjectured that any group with deficiency d ě 2 has
trivial centre, which remains an open problem.
                     1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                           57


of G, as defined by Fox [Fox54], and the proofs also give sufficient conditions for
ZpGq to be trivial. However, the question of completely characterizing when ZpGq
is trivial was left open. In 1968, this problem was solved by Baumslag & Taylor
[BT68], who proved that there exists an algorithm for deciding whether a one-
relator group has trivial centre or not. This was the starting point for a natural
line of investigation: what is the structure of one-relator groups with a non-trivial
centre?
     Some partial results in this line were obtained by Meskin, Pietrowski & Stein-
berg [MPS73]. The question was fully answered by Pietrowski in 1974 (although
the results already appear in his 1972 PhD thesis [Pie72]) using subgroup theorems
of Karrass & Solitar. Recall that a tree product of groups is the fundamental group
of a graph of groups, where the underlying graph is a simple tree. A stem product
is a tree product in which the underlying tree is a path, introduced in [KS70].
     Theorem 1.7.2 (Pietrowski, 1974 [Pie74]). Any one-relator group with non-
trivial centre is a (finite) stem product of cyclic groups or an HNN-extension of
such a group with cyclic associated subgroups.
     Associated to any finite stem product of cyclic groups is a finite sequence of
pairs of integers, corresponding to the amalgamated subgroups. This sequence can,
it turns out, be used to essentially uniquely determine the one-relator group up to
isomorphism. As a consequence, we have the following corollary:
Corollary 1.7.3 (Pietrowski, 1974 [Pie74]). The isomorphism problem is decid-
able for one-relator groups with non-trivial centre.
     The problem of deciding precisely when a stem product of cyclic groups is a one-
relator group is non-trivial and was left open by Pietrowski. Some partial results
were obtained by, among others, McCool [McC91], and it was eventually solved in
1999 by Metaftsis [Met99]. As pointed out by Meskin, the above structural result
(Theorem 1.7.2) makes no essential use of the fact that the group is a one-relator
group, but applies equally well to any two-generator infinite (f.g. free)-by-cyclic
groups with a non-trivial center. This was expanded on by Karrass, Pietrowski &
Solitar [KPS73], where they completely characterize the structure of infinite (f.g.
free)-by-cyclic groups with a non-trivial centre as a tree product of infinite cyclic
groups.
     We mention another decidability result for one-relator groups with a non-trivial
centre, proved by Moldavanskii & Timofeeva in 1987. Recall that a finitely gener-
ated subgroup H ď G is said to be separable if for every g P GzH, there is some
subgroup Kg P G such that H ď Kg and g R Kg . In particular, separability of the
trivial subgroup is precisely residual finiteness. We say that G is subgroup separable
if all its finitely generated subgroups are separable.
    Theorem 1.7.4 (Moldavanskii & Timofeeva, 1987 [MT87]). All one-relator
groups with non-trivial centre are subgroup separable. In particular, the subgroup
membership problem is decidable in one-relator groups with non-trivial centre.
    We conclude our discussion on the centre by mentioning the centre of subgroups
of one-relator groups. The subgroups of one-relator groups can be complicated in
general, but their centres can be completely understood, analogously to Murasugi’s
theorem.
58                                  1. HISTORY


    Theorem 1.7.5 (Mahimovski, 1971 [Mah71] / Karrass, Pietrowski & Solitar,
1974 [KPS74]). Let G be a torsion-free one-relator group and H ă G be a subgroup
with non-trivial centre 1 ę ZpHq ę H. Then ZpHq is infinite cyclic.
     Related to this theorem is a question posed by Baumslag [Bau71b] in 1974: if
G is a one-relator group with at least 3 generators, and N Ÿ G is such that G{N
is infinite, does G{N 1 have trivial centre? Here N 1 is the derived subgroup of N .
Fischer [Fis76] gave a negative answer to this question shortly thereafter.
     Just as for many other theorems about subgroups of one-relator groups, there
is an important (co)homological point of view. Swan [Swa69, p. 156] proved
in 1969 that for any finitely generated non-abelian group G with cdZ pGq ă 8,
we have cdZ pZpGqq ă cdZ pZpGqq. In particular, Swan’s theorem can be used to
prove Theorem 1.7.5, as the cohomological dimension of any torsion-free one-relator
group is ď 2 (see §1.4.2), and any abelian group of cohomological dimension ď 1
is of course either 1 or Z. In 1976, Bieri [Bie76, Theorem C] extended Swan’s
theorem by dropping the hypothesis of finite generation. In the same article, Bieri
[Bie76, Theorem D] also gave a homological generalization of many of the above
results on the centre, by proving the following: let G be a group of type FP8 pZq
with cdZ pGq “ n with ZpGq free abelian of rank n ´ 1. Then G is a treed HNN-
extension over a finite tree with all edges and all vertices – ZpGq. In particular,
when G is a torsion-free one-relator group with non-trivial centre, we obtain the
following consequences:
       (1) every finitely generated subgroup of G is finitely presented and of type
           FP8 pZq,
       (2) rG, Gs X ZpGq “ 1,
       (3) rG, Gs is free.
We refer the reader to [Bie76, Corollary 6.6] for more details. In this line there
are also earlier results by Baumslag & Gruenberg [BG67], e.g. that for any two-
generated subgroup H ď G of a one-relator group, if ZpHq is cyclic and H{ZpHq
is periodic, then H is itself cyclic.
     For a final note on one-relator groups with non-trivial centre, we mention that
their (outer) automorphism groups are also known. As a classical example, recall
that Schreier (see §1.2.2) determined the automorphism group of Gm,n “ xa, b |
am bn “ 1y, and it is easy to see that the corresponding group is virtually free
(note that Pettet [Pet95] has also proved a structural result for all finitely gen-
erated groups with virtually free automorphism group). Extending this result,
Gilbert, Howie, Metaftsis & Raptis [GHMR00] proved that the outer automor-
phism group of a one-relator group G with non-trivial centre falls into two cases:
first, if rkZ Gab “ 1, then either Z{2Z, or else G – xa, b | am “ bm y for some
m ě 2, and in the latter case OutpGq – pZ{2Zq2 , as proved by Schreier in 1924,
see §1.2.2. If instead rkZ Gab “ 2, then either G – Z2 , or OutpGq – D8 , or
OutpGq – D8 ˆ pZ{2Zq.

    1.7.3. Commutativity in one-relator groups. As we mentioned earlier
(in §1.5.4), in his 1964 survey article Baumslag asked which abelian groups arise
as subgroups of one-relator groups. In particular, he [Bau64, p. 391] conjectured
that the additive group of rationals is not a subgroup of any one-relator group.
He also says “one might however ask just which abelian groups are subgroups
of a group with one defining relator”. We have already seen that Moldavanskii
                     1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                          59


[Mol67] gave a nearly complete answer to this question in 1967, see §1.5.4, but
that he left unresolved the question of whether pQ, `q embeds into any one-relator
group. This would be done by B. B. Newman in 1968, again in his thesis, who gave
an independent proof of Moldavanskii’s result (Theorem 1.5.9), and clarified the
situation of the locally cyclic subgroups as follows:
     Theorem 1.7.6 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Corollary 1.2.4]). Let G be
a torsion-free one-relator group. Then no non-trivial element of G has more than
finitely many prime divisors. Moreover, a non-trivial element is not divisible by
more than finitely many powers of a prime p if p is greater than the length of the
relator.
    As an immediate consequence of this theorem, we see that:
Corollary 1.7.7 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Corollary 1.2.4]). The additive
group of rationals is not a subgroup of any one-relator group.
    This completed the classification of the abelian subgroups of one-relator groups.
New proofs of these results, particularly characterizing the abelian subgroups of
amalgamated free products, were given by Wright [Wri79] using Bass–Serre theory,
and Nagata [Nag80].
    We now turn to solvable subgroups of one-relator groups. This is a more difficult
question, but again it becomes easier to answer in the case of one-relator groups
with torsion. Unlike the proof of the Spelling Theorem, the proof of this result
(which was also announced in [New68a]) was published in the literature, and the
proof of Theorem 1.7.8 is the subject of the 1973 article [New73].
    Theorem 1.7.8 (B. B. Newman, 1968 [New68b, Corollary 2.3.3]). The solv-
able subgroups of a one-relator group with torsion are cyclic.
    Karrass & Solitar [KS69] determined which one-relator groups contain abelian
normal subgroups. In particular, the only one-relator group, other than Z2 itself,
containing a normal subgroup isomorphic to Z2 is xa, b | abab´1 “ 1y, the funda-
mental group of the Klein bottle. Another student of Greendlinger in Tula was
A. A. Chebotar, who proved several remarkable theorems in the 1970s, extending
Moldavanskii’s work. First, in 1971 [Che71], he extended Theorem 1.5.10 to all
subgroups of one-relator groups, proving that if H ď xA | r “ 1y is non-abelian and
such that H does not contain a free subgroup of rank 2, then either H – C2 ˆ C2
or G – BSp1, kq for k P Z. Thus, we also get a full classification of the solvable
subgroups of one-relator groups, and a “Tits alternative” for one-relator groups.
Next, in 1975 he extended Karrass & Solitar’s aforementioned result on abelian
normal subgroups to all subgroups of one-relator groups [Che75]. But perhaps the
most important result proved by Chebotar was the following, which was also given
a proof by Bagherzadeh around the same time:
    Theorem 1.7.9 (Bagherzadeh, 1976 [Bag76b] / Chebotar, 1978 [Che78]).
Let G “ xA | r “ 1y be a one-relator group, and let H1 ˆ H2 ď G be a non-trivial
direct product. Then one of H1 and H2 is isomorphic to Z, and the other is locally
cyclic.
     In particular, the direct product F2 ˆF2 of two non-abelian free groups does not
embed into any one-relator group. This direct product has a range of bad properties,
e.g. undecidable membership problem [Mik58] and incoherence [Sta77]. Today,
60                                    1. HISTORY


we know that one-relator groups are coherent, giving another (significantly more
difficult) proof of Chebotar’s theorem. Finally, Chebotar notes that his results
give an answer to Question 6 from Baumslag’s 1974 survey [Bau71b], published
only four years earlier. This showcases the efficiency of transferring results and
open problems across the Iron Curtain even during this time, and particularly the
remarkable work by Greendlinger at making Tula a leading centre of combinatorial
group theory.
    1.7.4. Coherence and subgroup separability. The first property we will
consider is coherence. Recall that a group is said to be coherent if all of its finitely
generated subgroups are finitely presented. As mentioned at the beginning of §1.6,
Baumslag conjectured that all one-relator groups are coherent, which we today
know is the case. The coherence of all one-relator groups was also said to be
“conceivable” by Bieri [Bie76, p. 36]. Some classical results yield coherence in
small classes of one-relator groups: for example, it follows from Theorem 1.2.3 that
surface groups π1 pΣg q are coherent for all g ě 1. Perhaps the first large contribution
to the coherence of one-relator groups came in 1976. As we have seen in §1.7.2,
one-relator groups with non-trivial centre are in general significantly better behaved
than their centreless counterparts, and general theorems easier to come by. This is
true also for coherence:
   Theorem 1.7.10 (Bieri, 1976 [Bie76, Corollary 6.6]). One-relator groups with
non-trivial centre are coherent.
    Beyond this result, however, few truly general results were known regarding
coherence. More was known on the structure of particular finitely presented sub-
groups of one-relator groups. For example, one can ask what the finitely presented
normal subgroups of one-relator groups are. In this line, we have the following
theorem, which can be obtained by combining two closely related results due to
Bieri and Karrass & Solitar.
    Theorem 1.7.11 (Bieri [Bie76, Theorem B] / Karrass & Solitar [KS78]). Let
G be a one-relator group and let H Ĳ G be a non-trivial finitely presented normal
subgroup. If H has infinite index in G, then H is free, and G is torsion-free and has
two generators. Furthermore, G is an infinite cyclic or infinite dihedral extension
of a finitely generated free group.
     In fact, Bieri proved a stronger statement: the above theorem holds for all
finitely generated groups of cohomological dimension ď 2, which includes all torsion-
free one-relator groups (see §1.4.2). Notably, the proof of both the results of Bieri
and Karrass & Solitar use cohomological methods, including the rational Euler
characteristic, cf. [Wal61, Chi76].
     Similarly, one can also ask about when finitely generated normal subgroups have
infinite index in one-relator groups. Recall that Schreier (§1.2.3) proved that any
finitely generated normal subgroup of a free group has finite index. The analogous
theorem fails already for some very basic one-relator groups: for example, in the
torus knot group G “ xa, b | a2 “ b3 y the commutator subgroup is finitely generated
and free (cf. Theorem 1.5.11), but and hence has infinite index in G as the defining
word a2 b´3 is not primitive (see Theorem 1.4.2). Note that G – Z ˚Z Z, where the
amalgamated subgroup of course has finite index in both factors; this turns out to
one source of obstructions to extending Schreier’s result. Karrass & Solitar [KS73]
                     1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                          61


proved a number of results on amalgams with no such obstructions, and we state
one of the relevant corollaries of their results:
     Theorem 1.7.12 (Karrass & Solitar [KPS73, p. 23]). Let G “ A ˚U B be an
amalgamated free product where U has infinite index in A, the subgroups of U are
all finitely generated, and every finitely generated normal subgroup of A has finite
index in A. Then every finitely generated normal subgroup of G has finite index in
G.
    Thus, for example, the group G1 “ xa, b, c | a2 “ b3 y does have the property
that every finitely generated normal subgroup of G1 has finite index in G1 .
    Other than coherence, another finiteness property for groups in relation to
their finitely generated subgroups is subgroup separability, which we have mentioned
above (see Theorem 1.7.4). Since not every one-relator group is residually finite,
neither is every one-relator group subgroup separable. However, in general subgroup
separability is a much stronger condition even for one-relator groups. Indeed, Burns,
Karrass & Solitar [BKS87] proved that the one-relator group defined by
(30)                xa, b | ra, bab´1 s “ 1y – xa, b | rab, bas “ 1y
is not subgroup separable. However, the group (30) is residually finite, indeed (f.g.
free)-by-cyclic, by Theorem 1.7.15.
     Finally, we mention the Howson property. We say that a group G has the
Howson property if the intersection of any two finitely generated subgroups of G is
again finitely generated. Howson [How54] proved that free groups have the Howson
property (see [Imr77] for a simple proof), and it is known that free products
of Howson groups are Howson [Bau66], also reproved by Bezverkhnii & Rollov
[BR74]; cf. also [Bur72, Kap97]. It is thus natural to ask to what extent the
Howson property holds in one-relator groups. Greenberg [Gre60a, Theorem 2]
proved in 1960 that all surface groups are Howson. Moldavanskii [Mol68] proved
that BSp1, nq for n P Z have the Howson property. However, Moldavanskii [Mol68]
also proved that any one-relator group with a non-trivial centre fails to have the
Howson property. Kapovich [Kap99] gave an example of a hyperbolic torsion-free
one-relator group which is not Howson. Kapovich [Kap96] also proved that if
G “ xA | rn “ 1y is a finitely generated one-relator group with torsion such that
n ě 5, then the intersection of any two 2-generated subgroups of G is again finitely
generated.

     1.7.5. Quotients and residual properties of one-relator groups. We
discuss some results on quotients of one-relator groups, beginning with their fi-
nite quotients and some results on residual solvability and nilpotency. Of course,
Baumslag–Solitar groups (§1.5.3) give examples of non-residually finite one-relator
groups, but many other examples of residually finite one-relator groups are known.
     In 1963, G. Baumslag [Bau63b] proved several fundamental results regard-
ing residual finiteness and nilpotent groups: for example, he proved that the free
product of two residually finite groups, amalgamated in a finite subgroup, is al-
ways residually finite (see also [Tre73] for a simple proof of this fact). One of his
results concerns one-relator groups directly, and we have already seen it in §1.5.2:
the free product of two free groups, amalgamated in a cyclic subgroup, is residu-
ally finite [Bau63b, Theorem 7] (cf. also [Eva73, Weh73, Shi88] in this line).
Such amalgams, called cyclically pinched one-relator groups, provide a rich source of
62                                    1. HISTORY


residually finite one-relator groups (including the surface group π1 pΣ2 q, and hence
also all π1 pΣg q for g ą 1, see §1.2.2).
    Theorem 1.7.13 (Baumslag, 1963 [Bau63b]). Cyclically pinched one-relator
groups are residually finite.
     Strengthening this, in 1981 Allenby [All81] proved that cyclically pinched one-
relator groups are potent, a stronger form of residual finiteness (for every non-trivial
element g and every n P N, there is a homomorphism onto a finite group which maps
g onto an element of order exactly n).
     We turn to positive one-relator groups and related classes of groups. A one-
relator group G is said to be positive if it admits some presentation xA | r “ 1y
where r P FA contains no inverse letters. Note that this condition has some subtlety:
for example G “ xa, b | bab´1 a “ 1y is, in spite of its disguise, a positive one-relator
group, since G – xx, y | x2 y 2 “ 1y. Indeed, the isomorphism problem of one-
relator groups with respect to the class of positive one-relator groups is still an
open problem, i.e. it is unknown whether we can decide if a given one-relator group
is positive or not. Note that e.g. the group Z2 “ xa, b | ra, bs “ 1y is not positive,
by Proposition 1.3.4. Positive one-relator groups enjoy some particular properties.
The first, and perhaps most striking, theorem in this line is the following:
    Theorem 1.7.14 (Baumslag, 1971 [Bau]). Positive one-relator groups are
residually solvable.
     In particular, every perfect subgroup of a positive one-relator group is trivial.
It follows essentially from the local indicability of one-relator groups (see below)
that all finitely generated perfect subgroups of one-relator groups are trivial; if one
drops the assumption of finite generation, then the answer is negative, as evidenced
by the Baumslag–Gersten group BGp1, 2q defined in (31).
     When the defining relator is positive and a proper power, i.e. we are consid-
ering a positive one-relator group with torsion G, then G is residually finite by
Theorem 1.6.9 in §1.6.2. Of course, solvable groups are not in general residually fi-
nite, indeed they can have undecidable word problem, by Kharlampovich [Kha81].
Furthermore, positive one-relator groups are not residually finite in general. Indeed,
any Baumslag–Solitar group BSpm, ´nq with m, n ě 0 admits a positive presen-
tation, as noticed by Higman [Bau, p. 166] and, independently, Perrin & Schupp
[PS84].
     One-relator groups are, in general, not residually solvable, as e.g. the Baumslag–
Gersten group G “ xa, b | ra, bab´1 s “ ay has a lie in every term of the derived
series. It is not hard to see that G – xx, y | x2 yxy “ yxy, and so in general one-
relator groups with a defining relation of the form uv ´1 “ 1 for two positive words
is not residually solvable. However, with some additional assumptions, more can
be said also in this case. This was the subject of a 1983 article by Baumslag, some
of the results of which we now present. First, recall that for a word w P FA and a
letter a P A, we let σa pwq be the exponent sum of a in w.
     Theorem 1.7.15 (Baumslag, 1983 [Bau83]). Let G “ xA | u “ vy where
u, v P FA are positive words, and where σa puq “ σa pvq for all a P A. Then G is
free-by-cyclic.
    Note that one particular case of groups in the class from Theorem 1.7.15 is the
case of a commutator ru, vs “ 1, where u, v P FA are positive words. Not every
                      1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                              63


one-relator group of the form ru, vs “ 1 with general u, v P FA is free-by-cyclic (see
[Bau83, §4.3]), but it is possible to add further conditions on u and v, other than
positivity, to ensure residual finiteness.
    Theorem 1.7.16 (Baumslag, 1983 [Bau83]). Let G “ xA Y B | ru, vs “ 1y
where A X B “ ∅ and u P FA , v P FB . Then some term in the lower central series
of G is free; and G is residually finite.
     Thus, for example, the group xa, b, c | ram , cbn c´1 s “ 1y is residually finite for
all m, n P Z. For extensions of Theorem 1.7.16 to a slightly more general setting,
see Loginova [Log99].
     On the other hand, some one-relator groups have residual finiteness fail in a
rather dramatic fashion. By basic linear algebra, every infinite one-relator group
obviously surjects Z, and hence also has all cyclic groups as a quotient. Baumslag
[Bau69b] proved, remarkably, that there also exist non-cyclic one-relator groups
all of whose finite quotients are cyclic. This can be seen as a very strong failure
of residual finiteness. The group in question was generalized to a family of groups
known as the Baumslag–Gersten groups
(31)                  BGpm, nq “ xa, b | bab´1 am ba´1 b´1 “ an y
and the original example in [Bau69b] is the case of pm, nq “ p1, 2q. The groups
have seen some study. Gersten [Ger92] proved that the Dehn function of BGp1, 2q
grows faster than any finite tower of exponentials, later sharpened by Platonov
[Pla04]. Brunner [Bru80] investigated the automorphism group of BGpm, nq, and
Kavutskii & Moldavanskii [KM88] proved that BGpm, nq is residually finite if and
only if |m| “ |n|, and it is not hard to see that all of the finite quotients of BGpm, nq
are cyclic if and only if m “ n ˘ 1.
     Recall that finitely generated nilpotent groups are residually finite (§1.4.3). In
1964, A. Steinberg [Ste63, Ste64] studied free nilpotent quotients of one-relator
groups. Specifically, let G “ xA | R “ 1y where R P rFA , FA s, i.e. the exponent sum
of every generator in R is zero. Steinberg then proved that there exists an algorithm
for deciding whether or not G has a rank 2 free nilpotent quotient. Shapiro &
Sonn [SS74b] reproved his theorem in a cohomological setting and extended it
to a somewhat broader class of one-relator groups, see also [Son74]. One of the
corollaries of Steinberg’s results in [Ste64] is that the one-relator group xa, b, c |
a2 b2 c3 “ 1y has free nilpotent quotient groups of rank 2 and all classes; however,
it does not surject the free group of rank 2 (this follows e.g. by a theorem of
Schützenberger [Sch59]). We shall see more of such groups in §1.7.6. Finally,
we remark that although automorphism groups of one-relator groups remain in
general somewhat mysterious, a very elegant and short argument due to Baumslag
[Bau63a] shows that the automorphism group of any finitely generated residually
finite group is again residually finite. Thus, automorphism groups of residually
finite one-relator groups provide a rich source of residually finite groups.
     Free groups are one-relator groups, and studying the residual properties of
free groups often leads to interesting questions related to one-relator groups more
general. First, note that by a simple argument, Fn is residually F2 for all n ě 2, see
[Pel66]. Peluso [Pel66] also proved that the free group of rank n ě 2 is residually
PSLp2, pq for any p ą 3. In relation to this result, we mention briefly that an old
conjecture by Magnus was that for any infinite family of finite non-abelian simple
groups G, the free group F2 is residually G. This led to many significant articles,
64                                    1. HISTORY


e.g. [KM68, GL70, Pos70, Pri72, Wie77, Lub86, Wil91], leading finally to a
full resolution [Wei92b, Wei92a, Wei93], cf. also [Val93]. Magnus [Mag69, p.
309] raises the point that non-abelian free groups are residually xa, b | an y for n ą 1,
as proved by [KM68], and also “possibly residually S for a large number of other
one-relator groups S”. This line of investigation was taken up by Pride [Pri72],
and especially in [Pri74, Chapter 3], where he investigates when free groups are
residually one-relator groups with torsion, making heavy use of the B. B. Newman
Spelling Theorem. In particular, he proves:
    Theorem 1.7.17 (Pride, 1974 [Pri74, §3.2]). Let G “ xx1 , x2 , . . . , xk | rn “ 1y
with n ą 1 be an arbitrary one-relator group with torsion.
     (1) If k ą 3, then Fk is residually G.
     (2) If k “ 2, and r ‰ rx1 , x2 s, then F2 is residually G.
     (3) If k “ 2, and r “ rx1 , x2 s, then F2 is not residually G.
    For more on the class of groups Sn “ xa, b | ra, bsn “ 1y with n ą 1, see §1.6.3.
    We now turn to more general quotients of one-relator groups. There is in
general no shortage of quotients of one-relator groups. Recall that a countable
group G is SQ-universal if every countable group embeds in some quotient of G.
In 1973, P. Neumann [Neu73] conjectured that any one-relator group is either
solvable (and hence either BSp1, nq or cyclic) or else is SQ-universal, which remains
an open problem. In 1974, Sacerdote & Schupp [SS74a] proved that every one-
relator group with at least three generators is SQ-universal. B. Baumslag & Pride
[BP78] generalized this to prove that if G is a group with n generators and r
relators, such that n ´ r ě 2, then G has a finite index subgroup which surjects F2 .
Finally, Stöhr proved the following general result in 1983:
    Theorem 1.7.18 (Stöhr, 1983 [Stö83]). Every one-relator group with torsion
is SQ-universal.
     In looking at quotients of one-relator groups, it is natural to ask the follow-
ing question: given two one-relator groups which are homomorphic images of one
another, are they necessarily isomorphic? This question was first posed by Mol-
davanskii in 1969 (see Question 3.33 in the Kourovka Notebook [KM24]). The
question was given a negative answer only 40 years later by Borshchev & Molda-
vanskii [BM06], indicating the difficulty of even such simple-sounding problems.
     Finally, we briefly mention a very important result on quotients of one-relator
groups. A group is said to be indicable if it surjects Z, and locally indicable if
all of its finitely generated subgroups also surject Z. The notion of an indicable
group was introduced by Higman [Hig40, p. 242], who proved that if G is locally
indicable and R is an integral domain, then RG has no zero divisors and no non-
trivial units [Hig40, Theorem 12]. Baumslag [Bau71b] conjectured that every
torsion-free one-relator group is locally indicable. Brodskii [Bro80] announced in
1980 the theorem that this conjecture is true, i.e. all torsion-free one-relator groups
are locally indicable. Brodskii [Bro84] only published the full proofs of these facts
four years later; in the meantime, the theorem was also given topological proof by
Howie [How82]. The subject of local indicability and its many fascinating links
with many broader topics reaches far outside the scope of this survey, however.
   1.7.6. Lower central series and parafree groups. Let G be any group.
Recall that the lower central series γ1 pGq, γ2 pGq, . . . of G is defined inductively by
                     1.7. SUBGROUPS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                            65


γ1 pGq “ G Àand γn`1 pGq “ rG, γn pGqs. This determines a Z-graded Lie (Z´)algebra
grpGq :“ ně1 γn pGq{γn`1 pGq, where the factor γn pGq{γn`1 pGq is termed the nth
lower central factor of G. The sequence of lower central factors is sometimes called
the lower central sequence of G. The lower central factors of any finitely presented
group are finitely generated abelian groups, and are furthermore computable from
the presentation (by a commutator collection process [Hal34], see e.g. [AP90,
Bau99]) and thus form a particularly convenient set of invariants of groups. This
is in stark contrast to the derived series of a group: if G2 denotes the second derived
subgroup of G, then G{G2 need not be finitely presented, even if G is a one-relator
group. Indeed, as proved by Baumslag & Strebel [BS76a]: if Gm,n,r “ xa, t |
tr am t´r “ an y, where mnr ‰ 0 and gcdpm, nq ą 1 or |r| ą 1 and mn “ 1, then
H2 pG{G2 , Zq is not finitely generated. On the other hand, if gcdpm, nq “ 1 and
|m| ‰ 1 ‰ |n|, then G{G2 is not finitely presented, even though H2 pG{G2 , Zq is
finitely generated.
     The structure of the Lie algebra grpGq has seen some study in the case of one-
relator groups. We mention some results briefly. First, if G “ Fn , a free group
on n generators, then grpFn q is the free Lie algebra on n generators (see [MKS66,
Chapter 5]). If G “ F {R, then there is a canonical surjection grpF q ↠ grpGq. This
kernel is quite non-trivial already for some very simple examples of one-relator
groups. For example, it was determined when G “ xx, y | xp “ 1y with p a prime
by Labute [Lab77]. In the case that the defining word is not a proper power,
more can be said. Indeed, Labute [Lab70] found an explicit formula for the rank
of γn pGq{γn`1 pGq when G “ xA | r “ 1y, as long as r is not an nth power
modulo certain terms of the lower central series of the free group F “ F pAq, and
furthermore that in this case the associated Lie algebra grpGq is itself definable by a
single defining relation (as a Lie algebra), cf. also [Lab67]. This, for example, gives
a closed formula for the rank of γn pπ1 pΣ2 qq, where π1 pΣ2 q is the fundamental group
of a genus 2 surface. If gn denotes the Z-rank of the free abelian group γn pπ1 pΣ2 qq,
then
                                  ¨                                     ˛
                                                          ˆ      ˙
                       1 ÿ     n       ÿ              d     d ´ i d´2i ‚
(32)             gn “       µp q ˝            p´1qi                4
                       n       d                    d´i       i
                        d|n        0ďiďtd{2u

where µ?denotes the Möbius function. One can use (32) to show that gn grows
as p2 ` 3qn , and more generally the exponential   agrowth rate of the ranks in the
case of π1 pΣg q with genus g ą 1 is given by g ` g 2 ´ 1. It also follows from the
aforementioned result by Labute that grpπ1 pΣg qq is a one-relator Lie algebra (in
particular, it has decidable word problem [Shi62]). By contrast, it is not hard to
show that grpBSp1, 3qq is not finitely presented as a Lie algebra.
     We now turn to a very important aspect of the lower central series. This goes
back to the 1939 theorem by Magnus (see Theorem 1.4.3(3)) that any n-generator
group with the same sequence of lower central factors as the n-generator free group
is itself free. This prompted H. Neumann to ask whether any residually nilpotent
group with the same sequence of lower central factors as a free group is necessarily
free. This leads to the following definition. A group G is said to be parafree if it is
residually nilpotent and has the same sequence of lower central factors as some free
group. Thus H. Neumann’s conjecture simply asked: do non-free parafree groups
exist? G. Baumslag [Bau64, Bau65b, Bau67b, Bau69a] would approach this
question in a series of papers (cf. also [BS64]), and prove:
66                                     1. HISTORY


     Theorem 1.7.19 (G. Baumslag, 1964 [Bau64]). Non-free parafree groups exist.
     One such example given in [Bau64], with proof going via a careful study of
amalgamated free products to be found in [Bau65b], is xa, b, c | a2 b3 c5 “ 1y. We
note the reader that the terminology used in [Bau64] is pseudofree, rather than
parafree. Other examples of non-free parafree groups given in 1969 by Baumslag
[Bau69a] are the groups xa, b, c | a “ rci , asrcj , bsy which are parafree, but not free,
for all i, j P Z such that ij ‰ 0. Of course, the free group with which they share their
sequence of lower central factors is the free group of rank 2. This family belongs to
the broader class of parafree-by-cyclic groups, studied by Wong [Won78, Won80]
in his PhD thesis, supervised by G. Baumslag. Parafree groups share a great deal
of properties with free groups. Recall (§1.7.5) that any non-cyclic free group is
residually free of rank two. Similarly, one can show that any non-cyclic parafree
group is also residually parafree of rank two [Bau69a, Theorem 5.2]. We also have
the following curious result, showing that the local behaviour of parafree groups is
remarkably like that of free groups:
    Theorem 1.7.20 (G. Baumslag [Bau69a, Theorem 4.2]). Any two-generator
subgroup of a parafree group is free.
     Baumslag & Stammbach [BS76b] have also given an example of a non-free
parafree group all of whose countable subgroups are free. We remark that for a
residually nilpotent group G, we have that G is a parafree group if and only if grpGq
is a free Lie algebra. Using the Nielsen–Schreier theorem for free Lie algebras due
to Witt [Wit37], it is possible to give another proof of Theorem 1.7.20. This final
part of the section is only intended to serve as a small sampler of parafree groups.
Very much more can be written, particularly on parafree one-relator groups. Many
of the techniques and results involved in the study of such groups go far beyond
the classical, and is better left for a separate survey.
     We conclude this section by noting that one can go beyond residual nilpotence
in the following way. Let G be any group. Then its transfinite lower central series
is
Ş defined as in the finite case by γ1 pGq “ G, γα`1 “ rG, γα pGqs, and γλ pGq “
   αăλ γα pGq for limit ordinals λ. Then the nilpotency class of G is the minimal
α such that γ1`α pGq “ 1. Thus, for example, a residually nilpotent group has
nilpotency class ď ω. Baumslag [Bau71b] asked whether every one-relator group
has nilpotency class ă ω 2 . Indeed it was open for some time whether there were
finitely presented groups of nilpotency class ą ω, until Levine [Lev91] gave an
example of such groups in 1991. Baumslag’s question was only answered in 2016,
when Mikhailov [Mik16] proved that xa, b | ab´1 a3 “ b´2 aby has nilpotency class
ω2 .

                         1.8. More on decision problems
    Even though the word problem was solved for one-relator groups almost a
century ago, as presented in §1.3.3, remarkably both the conjugacy problem and
isomorphism problem – the other two of Dehn’s three fundamental problems –
remain open for one-relator groups. In this section, we will discuss some partial
progress made on these problems, and the general approaches to the problems.
Finally, we will discuss the word problem in some greater depth, including some
open problems, and the possibility of extending the solution of the word problem
to all two-relator groups.
                         1.8. MORE ON DECISION PROBLEMS                              67


     1.8.1. The conjugacy problem. We begin with a general remark regarding
the difficulty of the conjugacy problem. Decidability of the conjugacy problem
implies decidability of the word problem, and hence the conjugacy problem is for
general finitely presented groups undecidable. However, P. S. Novikov [Nov54]
proved in 1955 the existence of finitely presented groups Ap1 ,p2 with undecidable
conjugacy problem, the construction of which is significantly simpler than his group
with undecidable word problem (see §1.4.4). He left the question of the decidability
of the word problem in Ap1 ,p2 open. In 1960, A. A. Fridman (a student of Novikov)
proved that the groups Ap1 ,p2 have decidable word problem, thus showing that the
conjugacy problem is in general strictly harder than the word problem. We note
that in 1967, Bokut [Bok67] simplified both Novikov’s argument and Fridman’s
argument, and Collins [Col69c] in 1969, proved that the conjugacy problem can
be arbitrarily difficult – i.e. of any recursively enumerable degree of unsolvability –
even in groups with decidable word problem.
     More specifically to one-relator groups, recall that Magnus’ solution to the
word problem (§1.3.3) in all one-relator groups depends, as clarified by Moldavan-
skii (§1.5.4), in large part on properties of HNN-extensions and amalgamated free
products. Summarizing this argument, heavy appeal is made to the fact that if
the word problem is decidable in two groups G1 , G2 , and H ď G1 , G2 is a common
subgroup in which membership is decidable for both G1 and G2 , then the amalga-
mated free product G1 ˚H G2 has decidable word problem; the analogous statement
also holds for HNN-extensions, mutatis mutandis. Thus the word problem (more
specifically membership in Magnus subgroups) can be passed down from a one-
relator group to the next one-relator group in the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy,
possibly embedding the group into a larger one-relator group along the way, until
a free group is reached, and the word problem is decidable in all one-relator groups
by induction. In seeking to extend this line of argument to the conjugacy problem,
we are faced with two problems:

     (1) Decidability of the conjugacy problem is a much more delicate property
         to preserve when taking HNN-extensions or amalgamated free products;
         and
     (2) Decidability of the conjugacy problem is not, in general, preserved by
         taking subgroups, even of finite index.

     We elaborate on these two points. For the first part, there is the following gen-
eral undecidability result which, a priori, shows that additional ingredients must be
added to the Magnus–Moldavanskii hierarchy to adapt it to the conjugacy problem:

    Theorem 1.8.1 (Miller, 1971 [Mil71, Theorem III.10]). There exists a finitely
presented HNN-extension of a free group with undecidable conjugacy problem. There
exists an amalgam Fn ˚Fk Fm of two finitely generated free groups over a finitely
generated free subgroup with undecidable conjugacy problem.

    Note that the groups in Theorem 1.8.1 all have decidable word problem, since
the subgroup membership problem is decidable in free groups. We refer the reader
to [BMR07a, BMR07b] for more in-depth investigations into the complexity of
the conjugacy problem in such amalgams of free groups. We also note that the
conjugacy problem in HNN-extensions, and thus in some one-relator groups, has a
68                                   1. HISTORY


very combinatorial flavour, and can thus often be phrased in terms of semigroup-
theoretic problems. For example, for certain HNN-extensions the conjugacy prob-
lem reduces to reachability problems of vector addition systems, see [Ans76c,
Ans76b, Ans78], and sometimes further reduced to the word problem for commu-
tative semigroups; see [Ans76a]. Similarly, Horadam & Farr [HF94] have reduced
the conjugacy problem in some HNN-extensions to membership problems in inverse
semigroups.
     For the second part, i.e. closure under taking subgroups, it was probably first
recognized by Collins [Col69a] that there exists a finitely presented group G with
a finitely presented subgroup H ď G such that G has decidable conjugacy problem,
but H has undecidable conjugacy problem. In 1971, C. F. Miller [Mil71] proved
that there exist subgroups of F2 ˆ F2 with undecidable conjugacy problem, even
though the conjugacy problem in F2 ˆ F2 is almost trivial. His example is based on
the undecidability of the membership problem in F2 ˆ F2 due to K. A. Mikhailova
[Mik58] (a PhD student of P. S. Novikov). In 1977, Collins & Miller [CM77]
proved that in general neither passing to index 2 subgroups nor index 2 extensions
preserve decidability of the conjugacy problem. In this line, see also [GK75]. A
natural question that arises in this context is the following:
Problem 1.8.2. Do subgroups of one-relator groups have decidable conjugacy prob-
lem?
     We emphasize that it is possible that Problem 1.8.2 has a negative answer, even
if all one-relator groups have decidable conjugacy problem.
     In spite of all the above negative results, in the setting of one-relator groups
there is nevertheless a case to be made for optimism. Collins [Col69d] proved that
the conjugacy problem can be undecidable in 11-relator groups, but the problem
remains open for k-relator groups for all 1 ď k ď 10. Furthermore, as mentioned in
§1.2, Dehn gave already in 1911 a solution for the conjugacy problem in the funda-
mental group π1 pΣg q of surface groups of genus g ą 1. In 1966, Lipschutz [Lip66]
generalized this to all cyclically pinched one-relator groups, i.e. amalgamated free
products Fn ˚Z Fm of free groups amalgamating a cyclic subgroup (of which surface
groups are central examples), to give the following theorem:
    Theorem 1.8.3 (Lipschutz, 1966 [Lip66]). Cyclically pinched one-relator groups
have decidable conjugacy problem.
     Lipschutz later extended these results to other cyclic amalgams of non-free
groups, see [Lip69, Lip75]. For a different solution to the conjugacy problem
in BSpm, nq with gcdpm, nq “ 1, see [AS74]. In 1980, Dyer [Dye80] extended
Theorem 1.8.3 by proving that cyclically pinched one-relator groups are conjugacy
separable. Larsen [Lar77] also proved that any one-relator group with non-trivial
centre has decidable conjugacy problem, using the structure theorem for one-relator
groups (see §1.7.2) with non-trivial centre. In this line, see also [Hur80]. Finally,
we have already mentioned that B. B. Newman proved (see §1.6.1) that every one-
relator group with torsion has decidable conjugacy problem.
     We remark that it might be tempting to consider the well-behaved class of
residually nilpotent one-relator groups as natural targets, since finitely generated
nilpotent groups have decidable conjugacy problem; indeed they are even conjugacy
separable, as proved in 1965 by Blackburn [Bla65]. However, unlike for the word
problem, it turns out that residually nilpotent groups need not have decidable
                         1.8. MORE ON DECISION PROBLEMS                               69


conjugacy problem, as proved in 1999 by G. Baumslag [Bau99]. Whether residually
nilpotent one-relator groups have decidable conjugacy problem also seems to be an
open problem.

       1.8.2. The isomorphism problem for torsion-free one-relator groups.
                                       The isomorphism problem is perhaps the most
                                       important as well as the most intractable
                                       problem in the theory of one-relator groups.

                                                 —G. Baumslag, 1971 [Bau71b, p. 75]
We have already outlined some of the results about the isomorphism problem for
one-relator groups with torsion in §1.6.3. In particular, we know that in this case,
the problem is decidable. By contrast, the isomorphism problem for torsion-free
one-relator groups remains wide open. In this section, we will discuss some par-
tial results, as well as some particularly difficult instances of the problem. Before
beginning, we mention that by far the two largest classes of one-relator groups for
which the isomorphism problem is decidable are one-relator groups with torsion (see
§1.6.3) and one-relator groups with non-trivial centre (see §1.7.2). Beyond this, few
truly general results are known: the quotation by G. Baumslag above remains as
true today as it was 50 years ago.
     Nevertheless, we can say some generalities. First, recall that two one-relator
groups xA | r “ 1y and xA | s “ 1y are said to be (Nielsen) equivalent if there
is an automorphism of FA mapping r to s. Of course, any two Nielsen equivalent
one-relator groups are isomorphic, but whether the converse holds was for some
time an open problem (Conjecture 1.3.5, sometimes called the Magnus Conjecture,
cf. e.g. [MKS66, p. 401]). We have seen that Whitehead proved the conjecture
true in 1936 in the case that the one-relator group is free (Theorem 1.4.2. However,
for general one-relator groups the conjecture was disproved in 1970 by Zieschang
[Zie70] and independently in 1971 by McCool & Pietrowski [MP71]. The examples
by McCool & Pietrowski come from torus knot groups. Let p, q P Z with |p|, |q| ą 1,
and let Tp,q “ xx, y | xp “ y q y. If p “ st ` 1 for some s, t P N with t ‰ 1, then the
authors proved that Tp,q – xa, b | b “ pap b´s qt y, but that these presentations are
not equivalent. Zieschang’s examples also come from Tp,q . Such counterexamples
produce finite classes of isomorphic but non-equivalent one-relator groups. This
was extended in 1976 by Brunner [Bru76] (cf. also [Bru80]), who proved that if
for r ě 0 we define
                                           r          r
(33)                   Gr “ xx, y | y ´1 x´2 yxy ´1 x2 y “ x2 y,
then Gr – Gs for all r, s ě 0, but no two such groups are Nielsen equivalent for
r ‰ s. This gives an even stronger failure of the Magnus Conjecture. Thus, it
would be interesting to know whether it is decidable if a given one-relator group
has infinitely many pairwise non-Nielsen-equivalent one-relator presentations. In
principle this can be decidable even if the isomorphism problem is undecidable,
and vice versa.
    The isomorphism problem, and the above failure of Magnus’ Conjecture, is
closely related to finding non-equivalent generating sets of one-relator groups, i.e.
generating sets lying in different T -systems. We discussed this subject in §1.6.3,
and note that there is also some literature on this subject in the torsion-free case
(beyond what is cited above). For example, Zieschang’s article [Zie70] is primarily
70                                      1. HISTORY


concerned with extending Nielsen’s method of finding a basis for a subgroup in
free groups to amalgamated free products. This is not possible in general, and
Zieschang was able to point out several obstructions to this together with sufficient
conditions on the amalgam for the method to work; such obstructions are also
the source of the failure of Magnus’ Conjecture. Similar conditions were given in
1978 by Peczynski & Reiwer [PR78] for HNN-extensions. The Nielsen method in
this broader context of amalgams and HNN-extensions was surveyed in [Ros79],
in which it is among other things used to give a proof of the Tits alternative for
SL2 pRq. Nielsen’s method was extended to all Bass–Serre theory in [Wei02]; see
also [FRS95] for a survey. We note that even Baumslag–Solitar groups BSpm, nq
(see §1.5.3) can also be elusive from the point of view of their generating sets.
In particular, the group BSp2, 3q “ xx, y | x´1 y 2 x “ y 3 y requires more than one
relation to define it in terms of the generators x and y 4 (in this connection, see also
[Pic71]). Dunwoody & Pietrowski [DP73] gave infinitely many non-equivalent
generating sets of the trefoil knot group xa, b | a2 “ b3 y. These generating sets do
not, however, have one-relator presentations.
     One can also consider the isomorphism problem with respect to particular
classes. For example, Whitehead’s Theorem (Theorem 1.4.2) implies that it is de-
cidable whether a one-relator group is free or not; thus, the isomorphism problem
is decidable for one-relator groups relative to free groups. Similarly, one can prove
using classical methods that the isomorphism problem is decidable for one-relator
groups relative to the class of cyclically pinched one-relator groups, i.e. cyclic amal-
gams of free groups Fn ˚Z Fm . This was proved for n “ m “ 2 and some constraints
on the amalgam by Rosenberger [Ros82], and finally in general by Rosenberger
[Ros94a] in 1994 (cf. also [Zie77] and [Col78a]). The strategy was to prove that
such groups have only finitely many T -systems of generators (as in §1.6.3), yielding
in particular the following result:
    Theorem 1.8.4 (Rosenberger 1994, [Ros82, Ros94a]). The isomorphism prob-
lem for one-relator groups is decidable relative to the class of cyclically pinched
one-relator groups.
    Another reason for the difficulty of the isomorphism problem in torsion-free one-
relator groups comes from parafree groups (discussed in §1.7.6). In this direction,
Chandler & Magnus [CM82] mention a particular family of parafree one-relator
groups:
(34)                 Gi,j “ xa, b, c | a “ rci , asrcj , bsy   pi, j P Nq
as being particularly difficult. Finding necessary and sufficient conditions on the
parameters i, j P Z for pairs of groups in the family Gi,j to be isomorphic is partic-
ularly difficult, and for decades, only sporadic isomorphism results were proved for
these groups (see e.g. [FRS95, FRS95], and [BCH04] for an overview). Finally,
the isomorphism problem for the family of groups tGi,j | i, j P Nu was solved in
2021 by Chen [Che21], using character varieties: it turns out that the group Gi,j
is uniquely determined by the pair pi, jq when i, j ą 0. In a similar vein, Me-
skin [Mes68, Mes69] in his PhD thesis studied the isomorphism problem for the
one-relator groups
                          xx1 , x2 , . . . , xt | xm1 m2       mt
                                                   1 x2 ¨ ¨ ¨ xn “ 1y
where t ě 2 and m1 , . . . , mt are arbitrary integers. These groups are parafree when
t ą 3 and gcdpm1 , . . . , mt q “ 1. Already within this class of one-relator groups
                            1.8. MORE ON DECISION PROBLEMS                               71


the isomorphism problem is difficult, but was eventually fully solved in 1975 by
Meskin [Mes75]: the integers m1 , . . . , mt , up to permutation, determine the group
uniquely.
    In practice, there are many useful group invariants that can distinguish a given
pair of torsion-free one-relator groups. The most basic invariant comes from the
abelianization. The second homology group also provides some information: it is a
consequence of Lyndon’s Identity Theorem (§1.4.2) that if G “ xA | r “ 1y, then
H2 pG, Zq “ Z if and only if r P rFA , FA s. In this case, when the second homology
group is non-trivial, there is much more to be said. This was explored by Horadam
[Hor81a, Hor81b] in 1981, who provides a simple and straightforward test for
non-isomorphism (later expanded on in [Hor82a, Hor82b]). For example, as in
[Hor81b, p. 197], if we let A “ tx1 , . . . , x4 u, and take
                 r1 “ rx3 , x4 srx1 , x2 srx1 , x24 srx3 , x2 srx2 , x4 srx3 , x4 s3 ,
                 r2 “ rx3 , x4 srx1 , x2 srx1 , x24 srx3 , x2 srx2 , x4 srx3 , x4 s2 ,
the only difference being the final exponent, and set Gi “ xA | ri “ 1y for i “ 1, 2,
then her methods prove that G1 fl G2 . The technique can also be used to show
that there exist infinitely many pairwise non-isomorphic one-relator groups of the
form xa, b | r “ 1y where r P rF2 , F2 s, which is not trivial to demonstrate otherwise.
We note that her methods were also strengthened later by Gromadzki [Gro85].
     There is more to be said on using finite quotients, and whether the set of all
finite quotients of a residually finite one-relator group uniquely determines the group
up to isomorphism (profinite rigidity of one-relator groups). In this direction, we
mention only [MS95], who prove that the groups BSp1, kq for k P Z are profinitely
rigid among all one-relator groups, i.e. if a residually finite one-relator group has
the same finite images as BSp1, kq for some k P Z, then G – BSp1, kq.
     1.8.3. More on the word problem. The first major result on one-relator
groups was the Freiheitssatz, and one of the first application of this result was the
decidability of the word problem in all one-relator groups. It is therefore remarkable
that since these results, proved almost a century ago, few general results on the
word problem in one-relator groups have appeared. For example, it remains an open
problem whether it can be decided in polynomial time. There also exist examples
of one-relator groups with very rapidly growing Dehn functions, but nevertheless
having word problem decidable in polynomial time [MUW11]. In this section, we
will discuss some open problems closely related to the word problem in one-relator
groups.
     One approach to better understand time complexity of the word problem in
one-relator groups is via finite complete rewriting systems. We give brief definitions
here, referring the reader to the monographs [Jan88, OZ91] for significantly more
thorough treatments. Let A be a finite set, A˚ the free monoid on A, and let
R Ď A˚ ˆ A˚ be a set of pairs of words, which we call rules. The set R of rules
induces a relation Ñ  Ý R on A˚ , where w1 Ñ Ý R w2 if and only if there exist words
         ˚
x, y P A and some rule r “ pu, vq P R such that w1 ” xuy and w2 ” xvy. The
reflexive and transitive closure of ÑÝ R is denoted ÑÝ ˚R . If there is no infinite chain
u1 ÑÝ R u2 ÑÝ R ¨ ¨ ¨ , then we say that R isterminating. For u P A˚ , if there exists
some v P A˚ such that u Ñ     Ý R v, then we say that u is reducible, and otherwise
irreducible. If R is a terminating rewriting system in which for every word w P A˚
there exists a unique irreducible w1 P A˚ such that w Ñ      Ý ˚R w1 , then we say that
72                                       1. HISTORY


R is complete (cf. [Jan88, Prop. 1.1.25]). Every rewriting system R induces an
equivalence relation Ø˚R , being the least equivalence relation containing R. In
fact, this is a congruence, and A˚ { Ø˚R , which we call the monoid associated to
R, is simply the monoid presented by MonxA | Ry. If a group G is isomorphic to
the monoid associated to a finite complete rewriting system, then we say that G
admits a finite complete rewriting system. Of course, any group admitting a finite
complete rewriting system has decidable word problem: simply rewrite any word
to an irreducible one by successively applying the rules of the system.
     Thus a finite complete rewriting system for a group is a particularly nice type
of monoid presentation for the group, giving rise to a simple solution to the word
problem. This leads to the following natural question:
Problem 1.8.5 (Otto & Kobayashi, 1997 [OK97, Q3]). Does every one-relator
group admit a finite complete rewriting system?
     If Problem 1.8.5 has a positive answer, then if the rules are concrete enough,
it may be possible to gain upper bounds on the complexity of the word problem
in any one-relator group. On the other hand, the property of admitting a finite
complete rewriting system does not, in general, entail any upper bound (beyond re-
cursiveness) on the complexity of the word problem [BO84]. Regarding a negative
answer to Problem 1.8.5, we first note that there exists a finitely presented monoid
xA | Ry which does not admit a finite complete rewriting system R Ď A˚ ˆ A˚ ,
but which does admit a finite complete rewriting system over some other gener-
ating set [Ott84]. Thus Problem 1.8.5 is intricately linked with the problem of
generating sets and alternate presentations of one-relator groups. Second, it seems
difficult to even approach the question of how one might give a negative answer
to Problem 1.8.5. However, it turns out that finite complete rewriting systems are
closely related to homological finiteness properties. Squier [Squ87] proved in 1987
that every monoid admitting a finite complete rewriting system has the homological
finiteness property FP3 pZq, later strengthened to FP8 pZq by Kobayashi [Kob90],
cf. also [Ani86, Gro90, SOK94]. Since there are finitely presented groups with
decidable word problem but which are not FP3 pZq [Sta63], there are finitely pre-
sented groups with decidable word problem but not admitting any finite complete
rewriting system. Whether the same is true for one-relator groups is thus the crux
of Problem 1.8.5. Lyndon’s Identity Theorem (Theorem 1.4.4) shows that all one-
relator groups are FP8 pZq, showing that any negative answer to Problem 1.8.5
would have to involve some fundamentally new technique. We also remark here
that there exist finitely presented groups of cohomological dimension 2 with unde-
cidable word problem [CM99], and thus not admitting a finite complete rewriting
system.
     Another angle on the word problem comes from embedding one-relator groups
into finitely presented simple groups: any finitely presented simple group has de-
cidable word problem by Kuznetsov’s elegant algorithm [Kuz58].41 Recall that the
classical Boone–Higman Theorem [BH74] from 1974 states that a finitely gener-
ated group G has decidable word problem if and only if there exists a simple group
S and a finitely presented group K such that G ď K ď S. The Boone–Higman
   41If G “ xA | Ry is a finitely presented simple group and w P F , then to decide if w “ 1
                                                                     A
in G, run the following two procedures in parallel: (1) enumerate all words equal to 1 in G; (2)
enumerate the elements of Gw “ xA | R, w “ 1y. Then (1) terminates if w “ 1, and (2) terminates
if w ‰ 1 in G, since G being simple then implies that Gw is trivial.
                          1.8. MORE ON DECISION PROBLEMS                                73


Conjecture asks whether there is furthermore some such S and K exist with K “ S,
i.e. whether every finitely generated group with decidable word problem embeds in
some finitely presented simple group. This conjecture remains open, but it has
recently seen remarkable progress: Belk & Bleak [BB63] proved in 2023 that every
finitely generated hyperbolic group embeds in some finitely presented simple group.
Thus, for example, by combining this with the B. B. Newman Spelling Theorem
(§1.6.1) we have that every one-relator group with torsion embeds into a finitely
presented simple group. Whether this can be extended to all one-relator groups
seems a next natural step for the Boone–Higman Conjecture.
Problem 1.8.6. Can every one-relator group be embedded into a finitely presented
simple group?
     Extensions of the Boone–Higman Theorem to other decision problems also
exist, including for the order problem [BH75] and the conjugacy problem [Sac77],
giving rise to analogous questions for one-relator groups. Dual to the above problem
is the following classical problem:
Problem 1.8.7 (Baumslag, 1964 [Bau64, p. 391]). Can a one-relator group con-
tain a non-abelian simple subgroup?
    Finally, we make a brief remark on membership problems, being in some ways
a natural step following the word problem. The subgroup membership problem for
a group G “ xA | Ry asks, on input a set of words w1 , . . . , wn P FA and a word
w P FA , whether or not w belongs to the subgroup of G generated by w1 , . . . , wn .
Thus the word problem is simply the membership problem for the trivial subgroup.
Recall that Magnus (§1.3.3) proved that membership in Magnus subgroups of one-
relator groups is decidable. However, for arbitrary finitely generated subgroups,
deciding membership remains an unsolved problem in general:
Problem 1.8.8. Is the subgroup membership problem decidable in every one-relator
group?
     Any subgroup separable one-relator group has decidable subgroup membership
problem. Thus a large class of one-relator groups with decidable subgroup mem-
bership problem is formed by the one-relator groups with non-trivial centre (see
§1.7.2 and particularly Theorem 1.7.4). However, there are non-subgroup sepa-
rable one-relator groups which nevertheless have decidable subgroup membership
problem. e.g. the groups Hm,k “ xa, b | a´m bam “ bk y, with m, n P N, of Novikova
[Nov98]. Problem 1.8.8 can also be extended to instances of the submonoid mem-
bership problem, defined analogously. Here undecidability appears rather quickly,
and many one-relator groups have undecidable submonoid membership problem,
e.g. xa, b | rab, bas “ 1y or xa, b | ra2 , b2 s “ 1y. There are also positive one-relator
groups with undecidable submonoid membership problem [FGNB24]. However,
all currently known such examples arise from embedding the right-angled Artin
group ApP4 q, which has undecidable submonoid membership problem (see [LS08]).
Such subgroups obviously cannot appear as subgroups of hyperbolic groups. Thus
whether there is some hyperbolic one-relator group with undecidable submonoid
membership problem, and whether there is a one-relator group with torsion with
undecidable submonoid membership problem, both remain open problems, being
Problems 20.68 & 20.69, respectively, in the Kourovka Notebook [KM24].
74                                    1. HISTORY


     1.8.4. Two-relator groups.
                                       So my survey ends fittingly, as it began, with the
                                       work of Wilhelm Magnus.

                                                         —G. Baumslag [Bau86, p. 55]
This survey has told the story of one defining relation. What question could now be
more natural than: what about two-relator groups? Unfortunately, here much less is
known. The question of extending the methods of one-relator groups to two relators
dates back to the very foundations of the former subject, being present already in
an appendix to Magnus’ 1930 article [Mag30, §8]. Very little has been produced in
way of results for two-relator groups qua two-relator groups. Even the problem of
classifying all finite two-relator groups is still a mystery. Certainly, any finite two-
relator group must by basic linear algebra also be generated by two elements, and
thus admit a balanced (i.e. deficiency zero) presentation. It follows that any finite
two-relator group G must satisfy H2 pG, Zq “ 0. Beyond such generalities, the class
of finite two-relator groups seems, at present, far too broad to understand in its
entirety, and contains groups such as SLp2, 5q ˆ SLp2, 25q, as proved in [CRK` 86],
and much computational work has been directed towards finding two-generator,
two-relator presentations for similar groups, see e.g. [CRK` 86, RW89]. Even the
finiteness problem for two-relator groups, i.e. the isomorphism problem for two-
relator groups with respect to the class of finite two-relator groups, is at present
wide open.
     The word problem, conjugacy problem, and isomorphism problem are all open
for two-relator groups. The latter two are less surprising, since they also remain
open for one-relator group, and currently known methods for encoding undecidable
problems in groups tend to produce a relatively large number of relators. Indeed, as
for the word problem, as discussed in §1.4.4 the currently smallest known number
of defining relators for a group with undecidable word problem is 12, as proved
by Borisov [Bor69]. His proof (simplified by Collins [Col72]) uses the fact that
the word problem in any n-relation monoid can be encoded into an pn ` 9q-relator
group, and Matiyasevich [Mat67] gave an example of a three-relation monoid with
undecidable word problem. It seems very plausible, but remains an open problem,
that there is a two-relation monoid with undecidable word problem; and recent
trends (see e.g. [Gra20b, FGNB24]) have indicated that there may even be a one-
relation monoid with undecidable word problem (see [NB21b] for an introduction
to this problem). Nevertheless, we see that Borisov’s method would only yield a 11
resp. 10-relator group with undecidable word problem if these undecidability results
would hold, respectively. Thus, if the word problem is undecidable in two-relator
groups, then to prove it would require some fundamentally new way of encoding
undecidability into groups. If it is decidable, then some fundamentally new way
of solving word problems must be developed, perhaps by extending the Magnus
hierarchy to this setting. In either case, much exciting mathematics will surely
follow!
                                   CHAPTER 2


                             Recent progress

                                2.1. Introduction
    The origins of combinatorial group theory are often identified with Dehn’s
solutions to the word and conjugacy problem for fundamental groups of closed
hyperbolic surfaces. Dehn presented two approaches, one utilising the geometry of
the hyperbolic plane H2 [Deh11] and another abstracting the geometric properties
to purely combinatorial properties of their one-relator presentations [Deh12]:
                       C                         ˇ           G
                                                 ˇź g
                  Σg “ a1 , b1 , . . . , ag , bg ˇ rai , bi s , g ě 2.
                                                 ˇ
                                                 ˇ i“1

Generalisations of Dehn’s ideas would eventually lead to the very fruitful study of
small cancellation groups and, later, hyperbolic groups.
    The theory of amalgamated free products, developed by Schreier in the decade
that followed [Sch27], provided a third method of solving the word problem for
surface groups. This algebraic method was picked up by Dehn’s doctoral student
Magnus who used it to investigate the much more general class of one-relator groups;
that is, groups admitting a presentation
                                    G “ xS | wy
with a single defining relation. Magnus made two fundamental initial contributions
to the theory by proving the Frieheitssatz in 1930 [Mag30] and solving the word
problem for all one-relator groups in 1932 [Mag32]. These results initiated the
systematic study of one-relator groups which has continued to develop and mature
over the last century. After Magnus’ foundational work, one-relator groups quickly
became a test-piece for new conjectures in group theory. Indeed, one-relator groups
exhibit a wide variety of behaviours so that few properties hold for the whole class
and characterising one-relator groups with a certain property is often a nuanced
problem. This has the corollary that even fundamental problems like Dehn’s conju-
gacy and isomorphism problems are very difficult to solve for all one-relator groups
and in fact remain wide open. On top of this, not a single theorem is known to
hold for all two-relator groups that does not already hold for all finitely presented
groups. It is therefore remarkable that one-relator groups admit a cohesive theory
at all and even more so that it is sufficiently deep and developed that one can hope
to approach most difficult problems.
     Until the 80s, group theory remained a mostly algebraic and combinatorial sub-
ject. The focus in group theory then shifted towards more geometrically flavoured
problems when Gromov introduced hyperbolic groups in [Gro87]. By the very
nature of their definition, one-relator groups do not admit any obvious intrinsic
geometry and so this shift initially had little impact on the theory of one-relator
                                         75
76                              2. RECENT PROGRESS


groups. Indeed, the geometry of one-relator groups has proven to be surprisingly
complicated, resisting any form of decisive classification for some time.
     On the other hand, one-relator groups have turned out to be very amenable for
study via topological and homological means. The recent developments in CATp0q
cube complexes, 2-complexes with non-positive immersions and L2 -invariants have
all had a significant impact on one-relator groups, resulting in new insights and
resolutions of old conjectures that had seen little progress for many years. This
includes, but is not limited to, the residual finiteness conjecture (posed by Baumslag
in [Bau67c] and solved by Wise in [Wis21]), the coherence conjecture (posed
by Baumslag in [Bau74b] and solved by Jaikin-Zapirain and the first author in
[JZL23]) and the virtually free-by-cyclic conjecture (posed by Baumslag in [Bau86]
and solved by Kielak and the first author in [KL24]).
     The purpose of this chapter is to survey the current state of the art in the
theory of one-relator groups with a particular emphasis on homological, topological
and geometric aspects of one-relator groups, topics which, as mentioned above,
have seen considerable advancement in the last decade. Some of the content of this
survey is based on work of the first author, but the majority is based on recent
work of Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain, Dawid Kielak, Lars Louder, Henry Wilton, Daniel
Wise and many others, without whom this article would not warrant writing.
     We aim to complement other pre-existing treatments of one-relator groups
which are more classical and combinatorial in nature, see [Bau64, Bau74b, Bau86,
LS01, MKS04, BFR19] for example. We include proofs of a few selected results,
but mostly content ourselves with sketch proofs and ideas. Throughout, we also
present open problems and directions for future research. As such, we hope this
document can serve both as an invitation to the theory of one-relator groups and
as a point of reference for anyone wishing to contribute and expand on the topics
presented here.
     Many results and questions we discuss here in reality apply (or can be gener-
alised) to broader classes of groups which include:
       ‚ One-relator products of groups (possibly with extra conditions on the
         factors),
       ‚ Fundamental groups of 2-complexes with non-positive immersions,
       ‚ Groups of cohomological dimension two with vanishing second L2 -Betti
         number.
Indeed, often results for these classes of groups arise from direct generalisations
of arguments used to prove the same result for the simplest non-trivial case in the
corresponding class, one-relator groups. For the sake of simplicity, in this article we
mostly only state the versions of results for one-relator groups, pointing the reader
towards references for further information.

    2.1.1. A brief description of the content. In Section 2.2 we begin by dis-
cussing Magnus’ main tool for studying one-relator groups, the Magnus hierarchy.
We discuss subsequent improvements to the hierarchy and cover a topological ver-
sion using two-complexes in detail, as developed by the first author in [Lin22a].
The treatment includes several examples and a somewhat complete proof of the
Freiheitssatz.
    In Section 2.3 we cover what is known about splittings of one-relator groups.
We begin with an in depth analysis of the action of a one-relator group on the
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                         77


Bass–Serre tree associated with the splittings arising from its hierarchy. We then
provide a sufficient condition for when a one-relator group is free-by-cyclic which
we conjecture to also be necessary. We then consider the more specific case of
when a one-relator group is {finitely generated free}-by-cyclic, which was com-
pletely determined by Moldavanskiı̆ and later by Brown. Finally, we cover the
work of Friedl–Tillmann and Henneke–Kielak on polytopes and splitting complexi-
ties for one-relator groups, finishing with some open problems on JSJ and amalgam
decompositions.
     In Section 2.4 we cover (co)homological topics and properties of the group ring
of one-relator groups. We discuss Lyndon’s identity theorem and the implications
this has for the (co)homology of a one-relator group. We then cover recent re-
sults on groups with cyclic relation module and connections with the relation gap
and relation lifting problems. We also cover L2 -invariants, the resolution of the
strong Atiyah conjecture for one-relator groups by Jaikin-Zapirain–López-Álvarez
and embeddings of group rings of torsion-free one-relator groups into division rings.
Finally, we sketch a proof of the fact that the rational group ring of a one-relator
group is coherent.
     In Section 2.5 we cover properties of subgroups of one-relator groups. We
begin by covering the non-positive immersions property as introduced by Wise. We
then cover work of Louder–Wilton who characterise when a one-relator group has
the stronger property of negative immersions. This then leads us to connections
between the k-freeness property and primitivity rank of elements of the free group.
Combining these results with some homological properties, we then sketch a proof
of the fact that all one-relator groups are coherent, covering also a strengthening of
this theorem for the subclass of 2-free one-relator groups. Finally, we cover what
is known about when a one-relator group is virtually free-by-cyclic, Mel’nikov’s
conjecture, surface subgroups and subgroups of infinite index.
     In Section 2.6 we cover geometric properties of one-relator groups. We discuss
Gersten’s conjecture on the hyperbolicity of one-relator groups, discuss a method
of proving a one-relator group is hyperbolic which leads to a reduction of Ger-
sten’s conjecture to the case of primitive extension groups and mention results
that are known to hold for hyperbolic one-relator groups. Then, we cover CATp0q
and cubulated one-relator groups, demonstrating further the difficulty of geomet-
ric characterisations of one-relator groups with some pathological examples due to
Gardam–Woodhouse. Finally, we discuss Wise’s quasi-convex hierarchies, Wise’s
solution of the residual finiteness conjecture and an extension to the class of 2-free
one-relator groups.
     In Section 2.7 we cover residual properties such as residual solvability, residual
nilpotence, parafree groups and profinite completions.
     In Section 2.8 we cover the work that has been carried out on the complexity
of the word problem for one-relator groups, the conjugacy problem, various mem-
bership problems, the normal root problem, generating sets of one-relator groups
and the isomorphism problem.

                2.2. One-relator splittings and the hierarchy
    2.2.1. The Magnus–Moldavanskiı̆–Masters hierarchy. If S is a set, we
shall write S ˘1 to denote S \ S ´1 , the union of S with the set of its formal inverses
and by F pSq the free group freely generated by the set S. A one-relator group is a
78                              2. RECENT PROGRESS


group of the form
                                   G “ F {xxwyy
where F is a free group and where xxwyy denotes the normal closure of the single
element w P F . We will always be assuming that w ‰ 1. The most general tool
used to study one relator groups is known as the Magnus hierarchy, developed by
Magnus in his thesis [Mag30] in order to prove the Freiheitssatz.
    Theorem 2.2.1 (Freiheitssatz). Let F be a free group over a generating set
S and let w P F be a cyclically reduced element. If T Ă S is a subset such that
w R xT y, then the natural map
                                F pT q Ñ G “ F {xxwyy
is injective.
     A free subgroup of a one-relator group arising from Theorem 2.2.1 is called
a Magnus subgroup. The reader is directed to Section 1.3 for more on the Frei-
heitssatz.
     The idea of the original proof of Theorem 2.2.1 is to find a suitable epimorphism
G Ñ Z in which the kernel can be decomposed as an infinite amalgamated free
product of one-relator groups with strictly shorter relator length and then use the
explicit structure of this decomposition, together with induction, to prove that the
subset of generators we chose freely generate a free subgroup. There is a caveat
with this sketch; such an epimorphism exists only when a generator appears with
exponent sum zero in the relator, and this cannot always be the case. To get
around this, Magnus embeds the one-relator group into another suitably chosen
one-relator group in which some generator does appear with exponent sum zero.
Then some technical arguments allows one to show that if the Freiheitssatz holds
for the larger one-relator group, then it holds for the original one-relator group.
Several proofs of Theorem 2.2.1 have appeared that do not (explicitly) make use of
Magnus’ hierarchy. See, for instance, [Lyn72] and [LW22].
     The ideas in Magnus’ proof are extremely powerful as they subsequently allowed
Magnus to prove several strong results on the structure of one-relator groups, such
as the decidability of the word problem [Mag32]. As is often the case, in order to
make an inductive argument work, one needs to prove something stronger than the
desired statement. Indeed, in order to solve the word problem in HNN-extensions
or amalgamated free products, one needs both decidability of the word problem in
the base groups as well as decidability of the membership problem in the associated
subgroups. Thus, the actual statement that Magnus proved inductively in order to
solve the word problem for one-relator groups was that the membership problem
for any Magnus subgroup is decidable. Most other results on one-relator groups
follow a similar structure, usually one proves that the result is true ‘relative’ (in an
appropriate sense) to Magnus subgroups by induction on the length of a hierarchy,
highlighting the importance of Magnus subgroups.
     Over the many years that have passed since Magnus’ first paper, there have
been several improvements to Magnus’ original version of the hierarchy, the most
well known being due to Moldavanskiı̆ [Mol67] which utilises HNN-extensions. Ex-
plicitly, Moldavanskiı̆ noticed that the amalgamated product decompositions of the
kernel of some epimorphism G Ñ Z that arose in Magnus’ work could be bundled
together to obtain a HNN-decomposition G – H˚ψ , with the original epimorphism
being recoverd by quotienting by the normal closure of H. In particular, if G is a
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                        79


one-relator group, then Moldavanskiı̆ proved that there is a diagram of one-relator
groups
                               G “ G0          G10


                                    G1            G11


                                    ¨¨¨           ¨¨¨


                                    GN
where GN is a free product of a free group and a (possibly trivial) finite cyclic
group and where G1i´1 – Gi ˚ψi where ψi identifies a pair of Magnus subgroups of
Gi . All embeddings and splittings can also be described very explicitly in terms
of the presentations. We shall not do this here, we direct the reader to [LS01] for
more details. We remark that HNN-extensions had been introduced almost two
decades after [Mag32]. A variation of this version of the hierarchy was also proven
by Mihalik–Tschantz [MT92] who proved that all the embeddings above can be
replaced with embeddings as (proper) free factors.
     Expressing the Magnus hierarchy with HNN-extensions simplifies many of Mag-
nus’ original arguments; indeed, McCool–Schupp then used Moldavanskiı̆’s improve-
ment to reprove many of Magnus’ original results on one-relator groups in a short
paper [MS73].
     Another version of the hierarchy that is worth mentioning is due to Masters.
In an unpublished prepreint, Masters [Mas06] showed that one can do away with
the embedding step in the hierarchy and obtained the following theorem.
    Theorem 2.2.2 (The Algebraic Hierarchy). Let F be a finitely free generated
group, w P F cyclically reduced and consider the one-relator group G “ F {xxwyy.
There is sequence of finitely generated subgroups FN ď . . . ď F1 ď F0 “ F contain-
ing w and isomorphisms ψi : Ai Ñ Bi between Magnus subgroups of Gi “ Fi {xxwi yy
for each 1 ď i ď N , such that FN – Z and
                                    Gi´1 – Gi ˚ψi
for each 0 ă i ď N .
    The splittings that arise in this version are the same as those from the Magnus–
Moldavanskiı̆ hierarchy. However, in order to find them, Masters modifies the
original presentation via Nielsen moves until a presentation with relator having
exponent sum zero on some generator appears. This idea was already present in
previous articles, the issue in using it to obtain a hierarchy had previously been
that there was no argument to overcome the fact that the relator might get longer
under this modification. The novelty of Masters proof is to show that, regardless,
continuing to split one eventually reaches a free product of a free group with a finite
cyclic group.
    Some classical results follow directly from this version of the Magnus hierarchy,
combined with general theory of HNN-extensions. However, the splittings are not
given so explicitly in terms of the original presentation of the one-relator group
making it more difficult to apply than the Magnus–Moldavanskiı̆ hierarchy.
80                              2. RECENT PROGRESS


     Yet another version of the hierarchy is provided by the first author in [Lin22a].
This hierarchy is phrased and proven in terms of 2-complexes. It both eliminates the
embedding step from the Magnus–Moldavanskiı̆ hierarchy and expresses the HNN-
splittings very explicitly. Given that in this article we shall mostly be studying
one-relator groups via 2-complexes, we shall cover this hierarchy in much more
detail now. Moreover, this version implies Theorem 2.2.2.
      2.2.2. The topological hierarchy and some classical results. Before
reaching the topological hierarchy statement, let us first set up some notation and
definitions.
      A graph is a 1-dimensional CW-complex. A combinatorial map of graphs is
one that sends 0-cells to 0-cells and open 1-cells homeomorphically to open 1-
cells. An immersion of graphs is a combinatorial map that is locally injective,
which we denote by í. If λ : S 1 í Λ is an immersion of a cycle, denote by
degpλq the maximal degree of a covering map S 1 í S 1 that λ factors through.
Note that degpλq “ 1 if and only if λ˚ p1q is not a proper power in π1 pΛq, where
here 1 P Zř“ π1 pS 1 q is a generator. If λ “ \i λi where λi : S 1 í Λ, then write
degpλq “ i degpλi q. Here we are implicitly Ů putting a combinatorial structure on
S 1 . When λ is an immersion of cycles S “ S 1 , we will write |λ| to denote the
number of 1-cells in S.
      A 2-complex will be used throughout to mean a two-dimensional CW-complex
X in which all attaching maps of 2-cells are combinatorial immersions. We will
usually write X “ pΛ, λq where Λ “ X p1q is the 1-skeleton and where λ : S “
   S 1 í Λ is the attaching map for the 2-cells in X.
Ů
      Our maps between 2-complexes will always be assumed to be combinatorial,
that is, they will send open n-cells homeomorphically to n-cells. An immersion of
2-complexes is a locally injective combinatorial map which we shall usually use the
arrow í to denote. If Z í X is an immersion of 2-complexes, it will be useful to
bear in mind that there is an induced diagram of immersions
                                    SΓ ì      SΛ
                                    ì



                                               ì




                                    Γ ì        Λ
where the map SΓ í SΛ is a homeomorphism on each component.
    A natural 2-complex to associate to a one-relator group is its presentation
complex. That is, the 2-complex with a single 0-cell, a 1-cell for each generator
and a single 2-cell whose attaching map spells out the relator. However, for the
statement and proofs of results in this article it will be more useful to consider
arbitrary 2-complexes with a single 2-cell.
Definition 2.2.3. A connected 2-complex X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex if
λ is an immersion of a single cycle.
    In direct analogy with the definition of Magnus subgroups, we define Magnus
subgraphs.
Definition 2.2.4. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, say a connected subgraph
Γ Ă Λ is a Magnus subgraph if Γ does not support λ.
   The aim of the next sections is to sketch a proof of topological versions of
Magnus’ original results. The Freiheitssatz has an obvious translation.
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                     81


   Theorem 2.2.5 (Topological Freiheitssatz). If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator
complex and Γ Ă Λ is a Magnus subgraph, then the map on π1 induced by inclusion
                                  π1 pΓq Ñ π1 pXq
is injective.
     The Magnus hierarchy and variations do not have an immediate useful trans-
lation to the setting of 2-complexes. However, in [Lin22a], the following theorem
is proven. The statement is heavily influenced by Howie’s towers [How81].
     Theorem 2.2.6 (The Topological Hierarchy). If X “ pΛ, λq is a finite one-
relator complex, then there exists a sequence of immersions
                           XN í . . . í X1 í X0 “ X.
such that
     (1) For all 0 ď i ď N , Xi is a finite one-relator complex.
     (2) π1 pXN q – Z{nZ where n “ degpλq.
     (3) For all 1 ď i ď N , we have
                              π1 pXi´1 q – π1 pXi q˚ψi
          where ψi is induced by an isomorphism between Magnus subgraphs of Xi .
Remark 2.2.7. One could drop the assumption that X be finite in Theorem 2.2.6
at the expense of removing the word ‘finite’ from the first conclusion and modifying
the second conclusion to ‘π1 pXN q – F ˚ Z{nZ for some free group F and where
n “ degpλq’. However, if X is a one-relator complex, all the interesting information
about π1 pXq can be derived by only looking at the smallest one-relator subcomplex,
which is necessarily finite.
     We now note some classical results which were proved using Magnus origi-
nal hierarchy for one-relator groups. The proofs can all be simplified somewhat
by using Theorem 2.2.6 and the explicit description of the splittings provided by
Theorem 2.2.14.
     The first result is known as the Magnus property. A group G has the Magnus
property if for any two elements w, v P G, we have xxwyy “ xxvyy if and only if w
is conjugate to v or v ´1 . Magnus proved in [Mag30] that free groups have the
Magnus property. Below is the restatement in terms of one-relator complexes.
     Theorem 2.2.8 (Magnus property). Let X “ pΛ, λ1 q and Y “ pΛ, λ2 q be two
one-relator complexes such that the identity map on π1 pΛq induces an isomorphism
π1 pXq Ñ π1 pY q. Then the identity map on Λ extends to an isomorphism of one-
relator complexes X Ñ Y .
    Cockcroft characterised when a one-relator complex is aspherical in [Coc54].
His proof made use of Lyndon’s identity theorem [Lyn50], which we shall cover in
Section 2.4.1.
     Theorem 2.2.9 (Asphericity). If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, then X
is aspherical if and only if degpλq “ 1.
    Karrass–Magnus–Solitar characterised which elements in a one-relator group
have finite order in [KMS60]. The criterion is very easily checked by inspecting
the relator.
82                              2. RECENT PROGRESS


    Theorem 2.2.10 (Torsion). If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, then π1 pXq
has torsion if and only if degpλq ě 2. Moreover, every element of finite order in
π1 pXq is conjugate to a root of λ˚ p1q.
     Theorem 2.2.10 follows from Theorem 2.2.6 by noting that an element of finite
order acting on a tree (the Bass–Serre tree of the splittings) must have a fixed point.
     Theorem 2.2.10 can be stated in terms of presentations as follows. Let F be a
free group, w P F not a proper power and n ě 1 an integer. Then G “ F {xxwn yy
has torsion if and only if n ě 2. Moreover, all elements of finite order in G are
conjugate into the subgroup xwy.
     To conclude this section, we state a result due to Howie [How82] and, indepen-
dently, Brodskiı̆ [Bro84]. Recall that a group is locally indicable if every non-trivial
finitely generated subgroup admits an epimorphism to Z. The proof of this theorem
is not carried out using the Magnus hierarchy, rather using the method of towers.
    Theorem 2.2.11 (Local indicability). If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex
with degpλq “ 1, then π1 pXq is locally indicable.
    2.2.3. One-relator splittings. Before diving into the details of Theorem 2.2.6,
we now explain further where exactly these splittings come from. Firstly, we need
a notion of complexity. This notion is related to the relator length as used by Mag-
nus, and is also closely related to a notion of complexity used by Howie in [How82].
We are following [Lin22a] in this section and those that follow.
Definition 2.2.12. If λ : S 1 í Λ is an immersed cycle, denote by
                                     |λ|    ˇ         ˇ
                            cpλq “        ´ ˇImpλqp0q ˇ
                                            ˇ         ˇ
                                   degpλq
the complexity of λ. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, the complexity of X is
the tuple
                              cpXq “ pcpλq, ´χpXqq
which is given the dictionary order.
Remark 2.2.13. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, then cpλq “ 0 if and only
if λ factors through an embedded cycle S 1 ãÑ Λ. In particular, if cpλq “ 0, then
π1 pXq – F ˚ Z{nZ where F is a free group and n “ degpλq. Moreover, cpXq reaches
its minimal value p0, 0q if and only if π1 pXq – Z{nZ.
    The following theorem explicitly identifies the splittings that arise in Theo-
rem 2.2.6. The statement is rather technical, but we will show with some examples
how exactly one can apply it to compute hierarchies. Recall that a Z-cover is a
covering space ρ : Y Ñ X such that Deckpρq – Z. We shall be using the notion of
graphs of spaces, as introduced by Scott–Wall [SW79].
   Theorem 2.2.14 (One-relator splittings). Let X “ pΛ, λq be a finite one-relator
complex and let ρ : Y Ñ X be a connected Z-cover with t P Deckpρq a generator.
       ‚ (Existence of a one-relator Z-domain) There exists a finite connected sub-
         complex Z Ă Y , called a Z-domain, with the following properties:
          (1) Z is one-relator and Z p1q supports the attaching map of precisely one
              2-cellŤin Y .
          (2) Y “ iPZ ti pZq.
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                       83


          (3) Z0 “ t´1 pZq X Z and Z1 “ tpZ0 q “ Z X tpZq are Magnus subgraphs
              of Z.
          (4) For any i ą 0, we have Z X ti pZq Ă Z X ti´1 pZq.
       ‚ (Graph of spaces/groups decomposition) If Z Ă Y is any one-relator Z-
         domain as above, then, denoting by ι : Z0 ãÑ Z the inclusion and by
        X “ Z \ pZ0 ˆ r´1, 1sq {tιpzq „ pz, ´1q, pt ˝ ιqpzq „ pz, 1q, z P Z0 u,
         the map
                                     h: X Ñ X
         given by ρ when restricted to Z or Z0 ˆtiu for all i P p´1, 1q, is a homotopy
         equivalence. This homotopy equivalence induces an isomorphism:
                                  π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ
         where ψ : π1 pZ0 q Ñ π1 pZ1 q is induced by t |Z0 : Z0 Ñ Z1 .
       ‚ (Decreasing complexity) There exists some one-relator Z-domain Z Ă Y
         as above with
                                    cpZq ă cpXq.
   The first bullet point is [Lin22a, Proposition 4.9], the second is [Lin22a,
Proposition 4.3] and the third is [Lin22a, Proposition 4.11].
Definition 2.2.15. If X is a one-relator complex, we will call a splitting π1 pXq –
π1 pZq˚ψ as arising from Theorem 2.2.14 a one-relator splitting of π1 pXq.
Definition 2.2.16. If X is a one-relator complex, a one-relator tower for X is a
sequence of immersions of one-relator complexes
                            XN í . . . í X1 í X0 “ X
such that for each i, Xi`1 is obtained from Xi as in Theorem 2.2.14.
    If X is a 2-complex, the Z-covers of X are in bijection with non-trivial ho-
momorphisms π1 pXq Ñ Z, or rather, with non-zero elements of H 1 pX, Zq. The
connected Z-covers are in bijection with epimorphisms π1 pXq ↠ Z, or rather,
with basis elements of H 1 pX, Zq. We will make this bijection more explicit in
Section 2.2.6. When X is a one-relator complex, such epimorphisms exist if and
only if π1 pXq is not isomorphic to a finite cyclic group. In particular, at least one
epimorphism exists precisely when cpXq ą p0, 0q. Theorem 2.2.6 now follows by
Theorem 2.2.14 and induction.
     2.2.4. Explicit examples of the topological hierarchy. Our first exam-
ple will be the example which was the inspiration for Theorem 2.2.14. The pro-
totypical one-relator complex is a closed surface. So let X be a closed surface,
let C Ă X be a non-separating simple closed curve and consider the epimorphism
π1 pXq Ñ H1 pX, Zq Ñ Z ¨ rCs, where here rCs denotes the homology class of C in
H1 pX, Zq. We can always modify the 2-complex structure of X so that C actually
lies in the 1-skeleton of X. Then if ρ : Y Ñ X is the Z-cover associated with this
homomorphism, one can take Z Ă Y from Theorem 2.2.14 to be the closure of
ρ´1 pX ´ Cq. Here Z is a surface with two boundary components corresponding to
two distinct lifts of C. If t P Deckpρq is a generator, then Z0 “ t´1 pZq X Z and
Z1 “ Z X tpZq are precisely these two lifts. The space X from Theorem 2.2.14
is then obtained from Z by attaching a cylinder connecting these two boundary
components and expresses π1 pXq as a HNN-extension over an infinite cyclic group.
84                              2. RECENT PROGRESS




        Figure 1. A simple illustration of Theorem 2.2.14 in the case of
        a genus two surface.


Fig. 1 illustrates this example explicitly in the case X is a genus two surface and
C is a simple closed curve going around one of the genus.
    Our next example will be the presentation complex X of the following one-
relator group
                                G “ xa, b | a2 “ b3 y.
A simple computation shows that H1 pG, Zq – Z and so there is only one epimor-
phism ϕ : G Ñ Z (up to change of sign) given by
                                ϕpaq “ 3,    ϕpbq “ 2.
Denote by ρ : Y í X the associated Z-cover. Choose some lift v0 P Y of the 0-cell
in X and lifts a0 , b0 Ă Y of the two 1-cells in X such that they lead out of v0 .
Denote by vi “ ti pvq and ai “ ti pa0 q, bi “ ti pb0 q for each i P Z. Reading out the
relator a2 b´3 , we see that for each i P Z there is a 2-cell in Y whose attaching map
is given by the path
                                   ai ai`3 b´1   ´1 ´1
                                            i`4 bi`2 bi .

Hence, we see that there is a single attaching map (the one corresponding to i “ 0)
of a 2-cell of Y supported in the subgraph
                            ˜       ¸ ˜         ¸ ˜         ¸
                              ď 6          3
                                           ď          4
                                                      ď
                       Γ“         vi Y        ai Y       bi
                              i“0           i“0          i“0
                                                     ´1
and no attaching map of a 2-cell is supported in t pΓq X Γ or Γ X tpΓq. Letting
Z Ă Y be the one-relator subcomplex with 1-skeleton Γ, we see that Z satisfies all
the hypotheses of Theorem 2.2.14. This is depicted in Fig. 2.
                 2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                          85




                         Figure 2. A one-relator Z-domain.


    In order to obtain the one-relator splitting explicitly we need to choose gener-
ators for π1 pZq. The elements
          c1 “ a0 b´1    ´1 ´1
                   1 a1 b2 b0 ,      c2 “ b0 a2 b´1 ´1
                                                 3 a0 ,      c3 “ a0 a3 b´1 ´1 ´1
                                                                         4 b2 b0

are seen to generate π1 pZ, v0 q, with the first two generating π1 pZ0 , v0 q and the last
being trivial. They come from choosing the spanning tree T Ă Γ such that Γ ´ T
contains the 1-cells a1 , a2 , a3 . Denoting by
                                         d “ a0 b´1
                                                 1 ,

we have
           π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ
                   – xc1 , c2 , c3 | c3 “ 1y˚ψ
                   – xc1 , c2 , c3 , d | c3 “ 1, dc1 d´1 “ c2 c3 , dc2 d´1 “ c3 c´1
                                                                                 1 y

                   – xc1 , c2 , d | dc1 d´1 “ c2 , dc2 d´1 “ c´1
                                                              1 y

where the last isomorphism is obtained by applying a Tietze transformation remov-
ing the redundant generator c3 and relator c3 “ 1.
    The last presentation above expresses π1 pXq as an F2 -by-cyclic group with
monodromy an order four automorphism. One can see the fact that π1 pXq is free-
by-cyclic geometrically: the 2-cell in Z traverses the bottom edges and the top edges
each precisely once and so Z collapses to Z0 “ t´1 pZq X Z and to Z X tpZq. Thus,
the one-relator splitting expresses π1 pXq as a HNN-extension where the identifying
isomorphism is defined on all of π1 pZq - the fundamental group of a graph.
86                                 2. RECENT PROGRESS


    We remark here that our presentation for π1 pXq depended on our chosen span-
ning tree, however it is not hard to see that we also could have obtained the following
presentation:
               π1 pXq – xc1 , c2 , c3 , d | c3 c1 , d´1 c1 d “ c2 , d´1 c2 d “ c3 y
which is perhaps more what those familiar with the Magnus–Moldavanskiı̆ method
might expect.
Remark 2.2.17. If G “ F pSq{xxwyy is a one-relator group in which some generator
t P S appears with exponent sum zero, there is an epimorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z defined
by sending each generator different to t to zero and by sending t to one. Taking X
to be the presentation complex for G, the Z-cover associated with ϕ has 1-skeleton
a biinfinite line consisting of the lifts of 1-cells corresponding to t and at each 0-cell
there is a loop for every generator in S ´ ttu. The one-relator splitting arising from
a Z-domain of this cover as in Theorem 2.2.14 is precisely the type of HNN-splitting
that Moldavanskiı̆ finds in [Mol67].
     2.2.5. Sketch of the proof of Theorem 2.2.14. We now sketch out the
main ideas of the proof of Theorem 2.2.14. There are essentially three parts to the
proof with each part corresponding to the three points in Theorem 2.2.14.
     2.2.5.1. Part one: HNN-decompositions from Z-domains. The first step in-
volves showing that certain kinds of subcomplexes of Z-covers give rise to HNN-
splittings.
Definition 2.2.18. Let ρ : Y Ñ X be a Z-cover of 2-complexes and let t : Y Ñ Y
be a generator of Deckpρq “ Z. A subcomplex Z Ă Y is a Z-domain if the following
holds:
     (1) The Z-translates of Z cover all of Y . That is, Y “ iPZ ti pZq.
                                                             Ť
     (2) Z X tpZq is connected and non-empty.
     (3) For each i ą 0, we have that Z X ti pZq Ă Z X ti´1 pZq.
     The following result is the motivation behind the definition of Z-domains.
Proposition 2.2.19. Let ρ : Y Ñ X be a Z-cover of 2-complexes, let t : Y Ñ Y be
a generator of Deckpρq, let Z Ă Y be a Z-domain and denote by Z0 “ t´1 pZq X Z
and ι : Z0 ãÑ Z the inclusion. If
        X “ Z \ pZ0 ˆ r´1, 1sq {tιpzq „ pz, ´1q, pt ˝ ιqpzq „ pz, 1q, z P Z0 u,
then the map
                                          h: X Ñ X
given by ρ when restricted to Z or Z0 ˆ tiu for all i P p´1, 1q, is a homotopy
equivalence.
    Moreover, if ι˚ and pt ˝ ιq˚ are injective, then
                                     π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ
where
                  ψ “ pι ˝ t ˝ ι´1 q˚ : ι˚ pπ1 pZ0 qq Ñ pt ˝ ιq˚ pπ1 pZ0 qq.
    Proof. The map h is surjective by property (1) of Z-domains. Moreover,
property 2 says that Z0 is connected and non-empty. Finally, property (3) implies
that the fibers h´1 pxq are all connected (possibly infinite) lines. In particular, this
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                        87


implies that h is a homotopy equivalence. See [Lin22a, Proposition 3.2] for further
details and a more general result.
    If the homomorphisms ι˚ , pt ˝ ιq˚ are injective, then X is a graph of spaces with
a single vertex space Z and a single edge space Z0 ˆ r´1, 1s, attached to Z via ι
and t ˝ ι. Hence, we have π1 pX q – π1 pZq˚ψ . Since h is a homotopy equivalence, we
also have π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ as claimed.                                             □
     2.2.5.2. Part two: existence of one-relator Z-domains. The second step involves
proving that Z-domains always exist for Z-covers of one-relator complexes and that
they may additionally be chosen so that they only support a single attaching map
of a 2-cell. Then the Freiheitssatz combined with Proposition 2.2.19 will allow us
to find the desired splitting.
Proposition 2.2.20. [Lin22a, Lemma 4.7] If ρ : Y Ñ Λ is a connected Z-cover
of 1-complexes, then there exists a Z-domain Z Ă Y . Moreover, if Z is minimal
under inclusion of Z-domains, then Z X tpZq is a tree and, if Λ is finite, Z is finite.
    From Proposition 2.2.20 it is not hard to prove the following.
Corollary 2.2.21. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex and ρ : Y Ñ X is a
Z-cover, then there exists a Z-domain Z Ă Y , finite if X is finite, which supports
precisely one lift of λ.
    Proof. Let Γ1 Ă Y p1q be a Z-domain for the Z-cover Y p1q Ñ X p1q . Let k ě 0
be the smallest integer such that
                                         k
                                         ď
                                    Γ“         tk pΓ1 q
                                         i“0
supports some lift of λ. Let Z Ă Y be the one-relator subcomplex obtained from
Γ by attaching a 2-cell along a lift of λ. Since Γ1 was a Z-domain for Y p1q Ñ X p1q ,
the three properties (1), (2) and (3) required of a Z-domain holds for Z. Since Γ1 is
finite when Λ is, Z is finite when X is. Furthermore, if Z does not contain precisely
one lift of an attaching map of some 2-cell in X, this would imply that t´1 pZq X Z
supports a lift of λ, contradicting our choice of Γ. Thus, Z supports precisely one
lift of λ.                                                                         □
     It will sometimes be useful to have a refinement of Corollary 2.2.21 specifically
for one-relator complexes. This statement is [Lin24b, Proposition 4.4].
Proposition 2.2.22. Let X “ pΛ, λq be a one-relator complex with cpλq ą 0 and
let e Ă X be a 1-cell traversed by λ. There exists a Z-cover ρ : Y Ñ X and a one-
relator Z-domain pΛZ , λZ q “ Z Ă Y with cpλZ q ă cpλq such that ρ´1 pΛ ´ eq Ă Z
and the following holds. If ẽ Ă Z is a lift of e to Z and m, M P Z are, respectively,
the minimal and maximal integers such that tm pẽq Ă Z and tM pẽq Ă Z, then λZ
traverses both tm pẽq and tM pẽq.
    For an arbitrary Z-cover of a one-relator complex ρ : Y Ñ X, by Corollary 2.2.21
we know that there is some 1-cell e Ă X and a one-relator Z-domain Z Ă Y such
that the attaching map for the 2-cell in Z traverses the minimal lift of e and the
maximal lift. The advantage of Proposition 2.2.22 is that it allows us to first choose
a 1-cell in X and then procure a Z-cover and a Z-domain with these properties.
This version is particularly useful when generalising results on one-relator groups
to the setting of one-relator products of locally indicable groups.
88                               2. RECENT PROGRESS


Remark 2.2.23. One should compare Proposition 2.2.22 with the usual method of
finding a splitting of a one-relator group over a one-relator subgroup, as described,
for example, in [LS01].
Remark 2.2.24. With almost the same proof, Corollary 2.2.21 can easily be gen-
eralised to arbitrary finite 2-complexes X. Then using Proposition 2.2.19 one can
prove that for any finitely presented group G and any epimorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z, there
is an element t P G such that ϕptq “ 1, a finitely generated subgroup H ď kerpϕq
                                               ´1
and two finitely generated subgroups A “ H t X H, B “ H X H t of H such that
                                       G – H˚ψ
where ψ : A Ñ B is the isomorphism induced by conjugation by t. In fact, one only
needs G to have type FP2 pRq for some ring R. This is proven by Bieri–Strebel in
[BS78, Theorem A]. We will state a much more general, but much less explicit,
result in Section 2.5.4.
    2.2.5.3. Part three: decrease of complexity. The final step involves showing that
the complexity of the one-relator Z-domain from Corollary 2.2.21 goes down.
Lemma 2.2.25. If Z “ pΛZ , λZ q and X “ pΛX , λX q are one-relator complexes
and σ : Z í X is an immersion, then
                                     cpλZ q ď cpλX q
with equality precisely when σ | ImpλZ q is injective.
    Proof. If λX is the attaching map for X and λZ is the attaching map for Z,
we have that
                               |λZ |         |λZ |
                                        “           .
                             degpλX q      degpλZ q
Moreover, we have          ˇ           ˇ ˇ             ˇ
                           ˇImpλX qp0q ˇ ď ˇImpλZ qp0q ˇ
                           ˇ           ˇ ˇ             ˇ

with equality precisely when σ | ImpλZ qp0q is a bijection. Since σ is an immersion,
this would force σ to be injective on all of ImpλZ q.                             □
Corollary 2.2.26. Let X “ pΛ, λq be a one-relator complex and let ρ : Y í X be
a Z-cover. If Z Ă Y is a one-relator Z-domain, minimal under inclusion amongst
one-relator Z-domains, then
                                  cpZq ă cpXq.
    Proof. Let λZ denote the attaching map of the 2-cell in Z. The cover ρ sends
ImpλZ q surjectively to Impλq. If cpλZ q ě cpλq, then cpλZ q “ cpλq by Lemma 2.2.25
and ImpλZ q maps isomorphically to Impλq. By collapsing each 2-cell to a point in
X, we obtain an induced commutative diagram
                                                 ρ
                                 Z         Y           X

                                                 ρ1
                                Z1         Y1          X1
where vertical maps are collapse maps. In particular, Z 1 , Y 1 , X 1 are all 1-complexes.
Since Z 1 ´ t´1 pZ 1 q X Z 1 contains precisely one lift of each cell in X 1 , we have
´χpZ 1 q “ ´χpX 1 q ´ χpt´1 pZ 1 q X Z 1 q. Hence, by Proposition 2.2.20, since Z was
minimal, it follows that Z 1 X tpZ 1 q is a tree and so ´χpZ 1 q “ ´χpX 1 q ´ 1. This
implies that ´χpZq ă χpXq.                                                              □
                2.2. ONE-RELATOR SPLITTINGS AND THE HIERARCHY                      89


     2.2.5.4. Completing the proof: the Freiheitssatz. Combining Proposition 2.2.19,
Corollary 2.2.21 and Corollary 2.2.26, we have proven Theorem 2.2.14 under the
assumption that the Freiheitssatz holds. This is because in order to apply Propo-
sition 2.2.19, we needed π1 pZ0 q, π1 pZ1 q Ñ π1 pZq to be injective.
     In order to prove the Freiheitssatz for X “ pΛ, λq, we assume it holds for all
one-relator complexes Z with cpZq ă cpXq (the base case cpXq “ 0 is clear). Let
e Ă Λ be a 1-cell traversed by λ and denote by Γ “ Λ ´ e. By Proposition 2.2.22,
there is a Z-cover ρ : Y Ñ Z and a one-relator Z-domain Z Ă Y with cpZq ă cpXq
and such that Z XtpZq does not support any attaching map of a 2-cell and such that
ρ´1 pΓq Ă Z. Thus, the homomorphisms π1 pZ0 q, π1 pZ1 q Ñ π1 pZq are both injective
by the inductive hypothesis and we may apply Proposition 2.2.19 to conclude that
                                π1 pXq – π1 pZq ˚ψ .
In particular, π1 pZq injects into π1 pXq. This implies that two paths in X that
lift to Z are path homotopic if and only if they are path homotopic in Z. Since
ρ´1 pΓq Ă Z, any pair of paths in Γ lift to Z. Since each component of ρ´1 pΓq is a
Magnus subgraph of Z, by induction it follows that any pair of paths in ρ´1 pΓq are
path homotopic in Z if and only if they are path homotopic in ρ´1 pΓq. Thus, any
pair of paths in Γ that are path homotopic in X are path homotopic in Γ. Thus,
the map
                                   π1 pΓq Ñ π1 pXq
induced by inclusion is injective. We have proven the Freiheitssatz and hence,
Theorem 2.2.14.

    2.2.6. The character sphere and describing all one-relator splittings.
If G is a group, the character sphere SpGq is the following space
                                  `                ˘
                          SpGq “ H 1 pG, Rq ´ t0u {Rą0
of equivalence classes of homomorphisms ϕ : G Ñ R, where ϕ „ ϕ1 if ϕ “ r ¨ ϕ1 for
some r P Rą0 .
    Let S be a finite set of cardinality n, let F “ F pSq be a free group, let w P F
be a cyclically reduced word and let G “ F {xxwyy be a one-relator group. Denote
by Γ Ă Rn “ H 1 pF, Rq the Cayley graph for Fab “ Zn over the generating set given
by the image of S in Fab . Let λw : I Ñ Γ denote the path at the origin spelling out
the word w and denote by Λw Ă Rn its image. Let pw denote the endpoint of λw .
We have pw “ 0 if and only if w P rF, F s. The path λw is called the trace of w. See
Fig. 3 for an example.
    There is a natural correspondence:
                  ␣                                                        (
         SpGq Ø Directed lines L Ă Rn through the origin with pw P LK
where a line Lϕ Ă Rn is associated with a homomorphism ϕ : G Ñ R (unique in the
SpGq equivalence class) via the composition of the map G Ñ H1 pG, Rq “ Rn with
the orthogonal projection of Rn onto the line Lϕ . More explicitly, if pϕ P Lϕ is the
point at (positive) unit distance from the origin, then each element in r ¨ pϕ ` LK ϕ
gets mapped to r P R.
    Now let X “ pΛ, λq be the presentation complex for G “ F pSq{xxwyy and let
ϕ P H 1 pG, Rq be a homomorphism G Ñ R. Let Lϕ Ă Rn be the corresponding line.
The 1-skeleton of the abelian cover Y Ñ X associated with ϕ is the quotient of Γ
defined by identifying all Zn orbits of points that lie in the same plane r ¨ pϕ ` LK
                                                                                    ϕ
90                                2. RECENT PROGRESS




         Figure            3. The         trace        of         the        word
         a2 b3 ab´2 a´1 bab´1 a´2 bab´1 a´2 b´1 .

for each r P R. Note that Y p1q has a natural map Y p1q Ñ R given by sending the
points in r ¨ pϕ ` LK
                    ϕ to r P R. The path λw : I Ñ Γ projects to a loop in Y
                                                                             p1q
                                                                                 .
                                                            λ
Denote by λϕ : S 1 í Y p1q the cycle obtained from I ÝÝÑw
                                                          ΓÑ Ý Y p1q by identifying
the endpoints of I. The abelian cover Y is then obtained from Y p1q by attaching
cycles along the G-orbit of λϕ . Denote also by Λϕ Ă Y p1q the image of Λw so
that pΛϕ , λϕ q “ Zϕ Ă Y is a one-relator subcomplex. This construction can also
be generalised for arbitrary one-relator complexes by contracting and expanding a
spanning tree, we leave the details to the reader. Call Zϕ the one-relator complex
associated with ϕ. Note that Zϕ – Zψ for all ψ P ˘rϕs.
Example 2.2.27. Let us illustrate how to obtain the one-relator complex Zϕ asso-
ciated with ϕ through an example. In Fig. 3 we have depicted the trace of the word
w “ a2 b3 ab´2 a´1 bab´1 a´2 bab´1 a´2 b´1 . Since w P rF pa, bq, F pa, bqs we have pw “ 0
and so any directed line through the origin gives us a homomorphism ϕ : G Ñ R
where G “ F pa, bq{xxwyy. Let Lϕ Ă R2 be the directed line passing through the
                                                                                         p1q
origin and through the point p1, 2q. Then the induced surjective map Λw Ñ Zϕ
identifies two pairs of vertices, the pairs p0, 1q, p2, 0q and p1, 2q, p3, 1q, and does not
                                                          p1q
identify any edges. See Fig. 4 for a depiction of Zϕ . Then Zϕ is obtained from
 p1q                                                        p1q
Zϕ by attaching a 2-cell along the loop I Ñ Λw Ñ Zϕ .
    Note that by adding the missing b-edge and the missing a-edge to Zϕ (that is,
the b-edge connecting ?15 with ?35 and the a-edge connecting ?75 with ?85 ), then
we obtain a Z-domain for the Z-cover of the presentation complex induced by ϕ.
    We have the following which follows from the definition of one-relator splittings
and the fact that every 1-cell in Λϕ is traversed by the attaching map λϕ .
                      2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                            91




        Figure 4. The 1-skeleton of Zϕ , obtained by projecting Λw onto
        Lϕ .

Lemma 2.2.28. Let X be a one-relator complex, let π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ be a one-
relator splitting with ϕ : π1 pXq Ñ π1 pXq{xxπ1 pZqyy “ Z the associated epimorphism.
Then, after possibly replacing Z by a translate, the one-relator complex Zϕ associ-
ated with ϕ is a subcomplex of Z. In particular, π1 pZq splits as a free product of a
free group and π1 pZϕ q.
     In this way we may see all base groups of all one-relator splittings of π1 pXq
by looking at appropriate quotients of Λw , λw . In fact, there is always a maximal
such quotient, in the sense that this quotient one-relator complex quotients onto all
other Zϕ . Indeed, we may always choose a homomorphism ϕ : G Ñ R which factors
through an epimorphism G Ñ Z such that two points p, q P Λw Ă Γ in the same
Zn -orbit are identified under the quotient map Λw Ñ Λϕ if and only if p ` R ¨ pw “
q ` R ¨ pw . Let Λmax denote this maximal quotient and let λmax : S 1 í Λmax be the
induced cycle. Then by construction, the one-relator complex Zmax “ pΛmax , λmax q
admits a unique immersion Zmax í Zϕ1 for all epimorphisms ϕ1 : G Ñ Z. We have
proven the following lemma in the case X has a single 0-cell, the more general case
is left as an easy exercise to the reader.
Lemma 2.2.29. If X is a one-relator complex with π1 pXq infinite, then there is
a unique immersion of a one-relator complex Zmax í X such that Zmax í X
factors through all immersions of Z-domains of all Z-covers of X, with at least one
Z-domain containing Zmax as a subcomplex.
     Another way to see Zmax is as a minimal one-relator subcomplex of the maximal
torsion-free abelian cover of X. This is explained in more detail in [Lin22b].
     As an illustration of how to obtain Zmax , in Example 2.2.27 we may take the
line Lϕ to pass through the origin and p1, 3q instead of p1, 2q. In this way, no vertices
are identified under the projection map Λw Ñ Zϕ .

                      2.3. Splittings of one-relator groups
    2.3.1. Magnus subgroups and the Bass–Serre theory of one-relator
splittings. In this subsection, we discuss some properties of the action of a one-
relator group on the Bass–Serre tree associated with a one-relator splitting. In
order to understand the action, we need to understand the interaction between the
edge groups and their conjugates. Thus, in the first part of this subsection we shall
look at intersections of Magnus subgroups.
    2.3.1.1. Intersections of Magnus subgroups. Two results due to Collins are par-
ticularly important for this topic. The first involves exceptional intersections. A
92                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


pair of Magnus subgraphs A, B Ă X of a one-relator complex with AXB are said to
have exceptional intersection if π1 pAq X π1 pBq ‰ π1 pA X Bq. In other words, if the
intersection is not the obvious one. Collins characterised exceptional intersections
in [Col04]. Howie also characterised exceptional intersections for one-relator prod-
ucts and presented an algorithm to compute intersections of Magnus subgroups in
[How05].

   Theorem 2.3.1. Let X “ pΛ, λq be a one-relator complex and let A, B Ă X be
Magnus subgraphs such that A X B is connected. One of the following holds:
       ‚ π1 pAq X π1 pBq “ π1 pA X Bq.
       ‚ π1 pAq X π1 pBq “ π1 pA X Bq ˚ xcy for some c P π1 pXq.
Moreover, if degpλq ě 2, then only the first situation occurs.

    Howie’s result [How05] provides further information: if π1 pAq X π1 pBq have
an exceptional intersection, then there is an immersion of a one-relator complex
Z í X which expresses this intersection in an explicit way. This extra information
was exploited heavily in [Lin24a].
    The second result involves intersections between conjugates of Magnus sub-
groups and was proved by Collins in [Col08]. These turn out to be much more
controlled.

    Theorem 2.3.2. Let X “ pΛ, λq be a one-relator complex and let A, B Ă X be
Magnus subgraphs such that A X B is connected. If g P π1 pXq, one of the following
holds:
       ‚ g P π1 pAq ¨ π1 pBq, in which case π1 pAqg X π1 pBq “ pπ1 pAq X π1 pBqqb for
         some b P π1 pBq.
       ‚ π1 pAqg X π1 pBq “ 1.
       ‚ π1 pAqg X π1 pBq “ xcy for some c P π1 pXq.
Moreover, if degpλq ě 2, then only the first two situations occur.

   The rank rkpGq of a group G is the smallest cardinality of a generating set for
G. The reduced rank is then defined as:

                            rrpGq “ min t0, rkpGq ´ 1u.

A much stronger, but less precise result on intersections of Magnus subgroups of
one-relator groups was proven by Jaikin-Zapirain and the first author in [JZL23].

    Theorem 2.3.3. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group and A ď G is a Magnus
subgroup, then for any finitely generated subgroup H ď G, we have
                              ÿ
                                  rrpA X H g q ď rrpHq.
                             HgA

     Dicks–Ventura introduced the notion of being inert in [DV96]: a subgroup A ď
G is inert if for all finitely generated subgroups H ď G we have rkpAXHq ď rkpHq.
Theorem 2.3.3 says that Magnus subgroups of one-relator groups are strongly inert.
     2.3.1.2. The action on the Bass–Serre tree. Recall that if G – H˚ψ is a HNN-
extension, where ψ : A Ñ B is the identifying isomorphism and t P G is the stable
letter, then the Bass–Serre tree associated with the splitting is the tree T with
                      2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                         93


vertices and edges:
                                               ğ
                                  V pT q “            gH
                                             gHPG{H
                                              ğ
                                  EpT q “             gA
                                             gAPG{A

and adjacency given by:
                                     opgAq “ gH
                                     tpgAq “ gtH.
A priori it is not obvious why this is a tree: the fundamental theorem of Bass–Serre
theory states that it is, see Serre’s monograph [Ser03] for details. The Bass–Serre
tree has a natural left G action with a single orbit of vertices and a single orbit of
edges.
    If gH P V pT q is a vertex at distance n from the vertex H P V pT q, then we have
                               gH “ h1 tϵ1 h1 . . . hn tϵn H
for some sequence of elements hi P H and ϵi “ ˘1.
     If g1 H, g2 H P V pT q, denote by Sg1 H,g2 H Ă T the unique geodesic segment
connecting g1 H with g2 H. Then we have
                      Stab pSg1 H,g2 H q “ Stabpg1 Hq X Stabpg2 Hq
                                              ´1           ´1
                                       “ H g1 X H g2
                                                      ´1        ´1
                                       “ pH X H g2 g1 qg1
                                             ´            ¯g1´1
                                       “ Stab SH,g´1 g2 H
                                                       1


where Stabp´q denotes the pointwise stabiliser. Note that the length of Sg1 H,g2 H
is precisely the minimal number of t-letters which appear in the reduced form of
g1´1 g2 . Call this the t-length. More precisely, the t-length of an element g P H˚ψ ,
denoted by |g|t , is the smallest number of t˘1 -letters that appear in a word over H
and t˘1 that equals g in H˚ψ .
     If n ě 0 is any integer, denote by
                               Wn “ tg P G | |g|t “ nu.
By definition, we have W0 “ H. More generally, we have:
                             dpH, gHq “ n ðñ g P Wn .
    Using Collin’s results, in [Lin22a] the following result is shown.
    Theorem 2.3.4. If G – H˚ψ is a one-relator splitting, ψ : A Ñ B is the
identifying isomorphism, t P G is the stable letter and n ě 1 is an integer, then
                         ÿ
                              rrpH X H g q ď rrpAq ` rrpBq.
                        gPHWn H

If A X B has no exceptional intersection, then for some k ě 1, we have
                                   rrpH X H g q “ 0,
for all g P HWn H, n ě k.
94                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


     If k ě 0 is an integer, an action of a group G on a tree T is k-acylindrical if
for every segment S Ă T of length at least k, we have StabpSq “ 1. Say the action
is acylindrical if it is k-acylindrical for some k. The following theorem was proven
by Wise for one-relator groups with torsion in [Wis21]. The full statement is one
of the main theorems of [Lin22a].
     Theorem 2.3.5. Let G be a one-relator group and let G – H˚ψ be a one-relator
splitting. If G has torsion or is 2-free, then
                                 ÿ
                                     rkpH X H g q ă 8.
                              HgH

In particular, the action of G on the Bass–Serre tree is acylindrical.
    Recall that a group G is k-free if all k-generated subgroups of G are free.
We will revisit 2-free one-relator groups in detail in Section 2.5.3 and again in
Section 2.5.4.1. Importantly, the property of being 2-free is, in a precise sense,
generic and there is a straightforward algorithm which decides whether a one-relator
group is 2-free. Both of these results can be found in [LW22].
     2.3.2. Free co-abelian subgroups. A co-abelian subgroup of a group G is
a normal subgroup N Ÿ G such that G{N is torsion-free abelian. If G “ F {xxwyy
is a one-relator group, the aim of this section is to provide a simple criterion for
when a co-abelian subgroup of G is a free group. In particular, if G “ H˚ψ is a
one-relator splitting, we have a natural epimorphism
                                 G Ñ G{xxHyy “ Z
and we want to determine when the co-abelian subgroup xxHyy is a free group.
     Let X be the presentation complex for G. Any co-abelian subgroup of G can
be obtained as kerpϕq for some ϕ P H 1 pG, Rq – H 1 pX, Rq. Let ϕ P H1 pX, Rq and
let Y Ñ X be the induced abelian cover. Let µ : Y p1q Ñ R be the map given by
projection to Lϕ , as described in Section 2.2.6. Since kerpϕq “ π1 pY q, we want to
understand the structure of Y . For this we describe two conditions that depend
only on the homotopy type of Zϕ Ă Y .
     Recall that a subcomplex of a combinatorial complex is full if every cell whose
attaching map is supported in the subcomplex, also lies in the subcomplex. If
J Ă R is a connected subset, denote by YJ the full subcomplex of Y containing
all vertices that map within J Ă R via µ. Let amin , amax P R be the minimal and
maximal values that 0-cells in Zϕ map to. Consider the following two conditions:
      (1) (ϕ is freely descending) There is a 1-cell
                                      `                   ˘
                            eL Ă Zϕ ´ Zϕ X Ypamin ,amax s
         such that, Zϕ is homotopic to
                                       p1q
                                     Zϕ ´ eL
         relative to Zϕ X Ypamin ,amax s .
     (2) (ϕ is freely ascending) There is a 1-cell
                                           `             ˘
                           eU Ă Zϕ ´ Zϕ X Yramin ,amax q
         such that, Zϕ is homotopic to
                                       p1q
                                     Zϕ ´ eU
                       2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                            95




        Figure 5. An example of a one-relator complex Zϕ with ϕ freely
        descending and ascending.


          relative to Zϕ X Yramin ,amax q .

Remark 2.3.6. A homomorphism ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq is freely descending if, for in-
stance, some minimal edge in Zϕ is a free edge in the sense that it is traversed
precisely once by the attaching map of the 2-cell in Zϕ . By symmetry, the same
can be said about when ϕ is freely descending with minimal replaced with maximal.
    Sapir–Špakulová show in [Sv11] that a random one-relator group on three or
more generators has some epimorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z such that Zϕ has a topmost or
bottommost edge that is free.
     Theorem 2.3.7. Let X be a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell. If ϕ P
H 1 pX, Rq is freely descending and ascending then kerpϕq is a free group.
Example 2.3.8. Let us return to Example 2.2.27. In this example, both the
topmost b-edge and the bottommost b-edge in Zϕ are traversed precisely once by
the attaching map of the 2-cell. Hence, we may collapse the 2-cell through these
free edges to obtain a homotopy equivalence as required by the definitions of ϕ
being freely descending and ascending. Hence, the homomorphism ϕ from Exam-
ple 2.2.27 is both freely descending and ascending so that kerpϕq is a free group by
Theorem 2.3.7. In fact, kerpϕq is a finitely generated free group.
Example 2.3.9. For another type of example, consider the one-relator group
                            G “ xa, b | a2 babca3 a2 bababc´1 y.
Let ϕ : G Ñ Z be the epimorphism defined by sending c to 1 and a, b to 0. See Fig. 5
for the one-relator complex Zϕ . We see that Zϕ does not have any free faces and so
we cannot conclude that kerpϕq is free as in Example 2.3.8. However, since a20 b0 a0 b0
is a primitive element of F pa0 , b0 q (we can see this by applying the automorphism
                                                                             p1q
a0 Ñ a0 b´2           ´1
          0 , b0 Ñ a0 b0 ), we see that Zϕ is homotopy equivalent to Zϕ ´ a0
              p1q
relative to Zϕ ´ pv0 Y a0 Y b0 Y c0 q “ Zϕ X Yp0,1s . Hence, ϕ is freely descending.
Since a21 b1 a1 b1 a1 b1 is a primitive element of F pa1 , b1 q, we may also conclude that
ϕ is freely ascending. Thus, kerpϕq is free by Theorem 2.3.7.

Proposition 2.3.10. Let X be a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and sup-
pose that ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq factors through Z and is freely descending. Let t be the gen-
erator of DeckpY Ñ Xq – Z that translates in the positive direction. Let ∆L Ă Y p1q
be the subgraph consisting of the vertex mapping to amin and all outgoing edges and
96                                  2. RECENT PROGRESS


their endpoints except for eL . Then Y is homotopy equivalent to
                             ˜           ¸
                                ď
                                   i
                                  t p∆L q Y Yramin ,`8q
                                   iă0
relative to Yramin ,`8q .
    Proof. Since ϕ factors through Z, after multiplying by a suitable real number,
we may assume that ϕ maps surjectively to Z Ă R. After possibly replacing Zϕ
with a translate, we may assume that amin “ 0. If k ă 0 is an integer, denote by
                                  Yk “ tk p∆L q Y Yrk`1,`8q .
Since we have
                                `                     ˘    `                    ˘
       tk pZϕ q X Yrk`1,`8q “ tk Zϕ X Yramin `1,amax s “ tk Zϕ X Ypamin ,amax s
and since Yrk,`8q ´ Yrk`1,`8q contains no 2-cell, it follows from the definition of ϕ
being freely descending that Yrk,`8q is homotopy equivalent to tk p∆L q Y Yrk`1,`8q
relative to Yrk`1,`8q . Hence, for each k ă 0 there is a map fk : Yrk,`8q Ñ Yk that
is a homotopy equivalence relative to Yrk`1,`8q . Now define a map
                                ˜            ¸
                                  ď
                          Y Ñ        ti p∆L q Y Yramin ,`8q
                                      iă0
as the identity on Yramin ,`8q and as fk when restricted to Yrk,`8q ´Yrk`1,`8q for all
k ă 0. It can be checked that this is a homotopy equivalence relative to Yramin ,`8q ,
using the same idea for the homotopy inverse of each fk .                           □
     A symmetric proof yields the ascending version of Proposition 2.3.10.
Proposition 2.3.11. Let X be a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and sup-
pose that ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq factors through Z and is freely ascending. Let t be the gen-
erator of DeckpY Ñ Xq – Z that translates in the positive direction. Let ∆U Ă Y p1q
be the subgraph consisting of the vertex mapping to amax and all outgoing edges and
their endpoints except for eU . Then Y is homotopy equivalent to
                             ˜            ¸
                               ď
                                    i
                                   t p∆U q Y Yp´8,amax s
                                   ią0
relative to Yp´8,amax s .
Proposition 2.3.12. Let X be a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and sup-
pose that ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq factors through Z and is freely ascending. Let t be the gen-
erator of DeckpY Ñ Xq – Z that translates in the positive direction. Let ∆L , ∆U
be the subgraphs from Propositions 2.3.10 and 2.3.11. Then there is a homotopy
equivalence            ˜            ¸                  ˜           ¸
                         ď                               ď
                             i                              i
                 Y Ñ        t p∆L q Y Ypamin ,amax s Y     t p∆U q
                            iď0                             ią0
fixing Ypamin ,amax s . In particular, Y is homotopy equivalent to a graph.
    Proof. Combining Proposition 2.3.10 and Proposition 2.3.11, we see that Y
is homotopy equivalent to
                    ˜            ¸                   ˜          ¸
                      ď                                ď
                           i                              i
               Y Ñ        t p∆L q Y Yramin ,amax s Y     t p∆U q .
                            iă0                             ią0
                      2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                               97


Since Yramin ,amax s is homotopy equivalent to ∆L YYpamin ,amax s , the result follows.   □
     Proof of Theorem 2.3.7. The image of π1 pXq under ϕ is isomorphic to Zn
for some n. Since Zϕ is finite, we may find an appropriate epimorphism Zn Ñ Z
such that, if ϕ1 denotes the composition of ϕ with this map, then there is an
isomorphism Zϕ Ñ Zϕ1 respecting the order on the vertices. This may be done for
instance by choosing a line L Ă Rm (where m “ rkpπ1 pX p1q qq) with rational slope
sufficiently close to the line associated with ϕ. In particular, ϕ1 is freely descending
and ascending because ϕ is and so kerpϕ1 q is free by Proposition 2.3.12. Since
kerpϕq ď kerpϕ1 q, we have that kerpϕq is free as claimed.                            □
Conjecture 2.3.13. If X is a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and if ϕ P
H 1 pX, Rq, then kerpϕq is free if and only if ϕ is freely ascending and descending.
     In the next section we discuss Brown’s criterion which states that Conjecture
2.3.13 is true when χpXq “ 0. In other words, when π1 pXq is a two-generator
one-relator group.
     Propositions 2.3.10 and 2.3.11 actually imply the following weakening of The-
orem 2.3.7. Recall that a HNN-extension H˚ψ is ascending if the domain of ψ is
all of H, descending if the target of ψ is all of H.
     Theorem 2.3.14. Let X be a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and let
ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq. If ϕ is freely descending or freely ascending, then kerpϕq is locally
free. If ϕ also factors through Z, then π1 pXq splits as a descending or ascending
HNN-extension of a free group π1 pXq – F ˚ψ such that xxF yy “ kerpϕq.
Remark 2.3.15. A finitely generated ascending HNN-extension of a free group
embeds into an ascending HNN-extension of a finitely generated free group by work
of Chong–Wise [CW24]. Since an ascending HNN-extension of a finitely generated
free group is residually finite by work of Borisov–Sapir [BS05], Theorem 2.3.14 also
yields a criterion for residual finiteness of a one-relator group.
    We may also state a variation of Conjecture 2.3.13.
Conjecture 2.3.16. If X is a one-relator complex with a single 0-cell and if
ϕ P H 1 pX, Rq, then kerpϕq is locally free if and only if ϕ is freely ascending or
descending.
    Baumslag asked in [Bau74b] whether a (one-relator) group with locally free
derived subgroup is residually finite. Answering Conjecture 2.3.16 would solve this
problem by Remark 2.3.15.
     2.3.3. Algebraic fibring, Brown’s criterion and the Friedl–Tillmann
polytope. An algebraic fibring of a group G is an epimorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z with
kerpϕq finitely generated. One can think of this as an algebraic analog of a fibration
of a manifold over a circle. Algebraic fibrations of a group G are encoded in its
BNS-invariant, see Bieri–Neumann–Strebel [BNS87]. We shall not define what
the BNS-invariant of a group G is, but we remark that it is an open subset of the
character sphere Σ1 pGq Ă SpGq and that kerpϕq is finitely generated if and only if
rϕs, ´rϕs P Σ1 pGq. The reader is directed to [Str13] for further details.
     Brown computed the BNS-invariant for all one-relator groups in [Bro87] and
thus characterised when a one-relator group admits an algebraic fibring. Brown’s
theorem, known as Brown’s criterion, completely determines which homomorphisms
98                                   2. RECENT PROGRESS


G Ñ Z of a one-relator group have finitely generated kernel in terms of the relator.
Below we state Brown’s criterion in the language of Section 2.2.6.
    Theorem 2.3.17 (Brown’s criterion). Let G “ F pSq{xxwyy be a one-relator
group with w cyclically reduced, let X be its presentation complex and let ϕ : G Ñ Z
be an epimorphism. Then:
      (1) rϕs P Σ1 pGq if and only if |S| “ 2 and a bottommost edge in Zϕ “ pΛϕ , λϕ q
          is traversed once by λϕ .
      (2) ´rϕs P Σ1 pGq if and only if |S| “ 2 and a topmost edge in Zϕ “ pΛϕ , λϕ q
          is traversed once by λϕ .
In particular, kerpϕq is finitely generated if and only if |S| “ 2 and a topmost and
a bottommost edge in Zϕ is traversed once by λϕ .
Remark 2.3.18. Dunfield–Thurston investigated algebraic fibring of one-relator
groups from a probabilistic perspective in [DT06] using Brown’s criterion. Specif-
ically they showed that the probability that a random two-generator one-relator
group algebraically fibres lies somewhere between 0.0006 and 0.975. They also re-
mark that computer experiments indicate the probability may be limiting towards
0.94.
    As mentioned in Section 2.3.2, Brown’s criterion is a converse to Theorem 2.3.7
for two-generator one-relator groups. Let us provide a sketch proof of the last
statement of Theorem 2.3.17. This part of the statement was proved first by Mol-
davanskiı̆ [Mol67].

    Sketch proof. Let us first assume that a topmost and bottommost edge in
Zϕ is traversed once by λϕ , then by Proposition 2.3.12, we have
                        ˜˜            ¸                   ˜          ¸¸
                            ď                               ď
                                i                              i
            kerpϕq “ π1        t p∆L q Y Ypamin ,amax s Y     t p∆U q
                              iď0                                           ią0

For each integer k ě 1 , denote by
                   ˜               ¸                   ˜           ¸
                       ď                                 ď
                             i                              i
             Yk “           t p∆L q Y Ypamin ,amax s Y     t p∆U q
                      ´kďiď0                                              0ăiďk

By definition of ∆L and ∆U , Yk`1 ´ Yk contains a single vertex and |S| ´ 1 many
edges. Thus, χpYk`1 q “ χpYk q´|S|`2. This implies that kerpϕq is finitely generated
if and only if |S| “ 2. Note that |S| “ 1 cannot hold since otherwise there would
be no epimorphism to Z. We have established one direction of the claim.
     Now suppose that kerpϕq is finitely generated. By Theorem 2.2.14, if ρ : Y Ñ X
denotes the cover induced by ϕ and t P Deckpρq is a generator, there is a one-
relator Z-domain Z Ă Y such that π1 pXq – π1 pZq˚ψ where ψ is induced by an
isomorphism between two Magnus subgraphs Z0 , Z1 Ă Z, where Z0 “ t´1 pZq X Z
and Z1 “ Z X tpZq. Importantly, we have that Z0 , Z1 both have one more vertex
and |S| many more edges than Z. We have
(35)      kerpϕq “ π1 pY q “ . . .      ˚       π1 pZq       ˚         π1 ptpZqq        ˚          ...
                                     π1 pZ0 q            π1 ptpZ0 qq               π1 pt2 pZ0 qq

Hence, if π1 pY q is finitely generated, then for some k ě 0 we must have
            π1 pY q “ xπ1 pt´k pZqq, . . . , π1 pZq, π1 ptpZqq, . . . , π1 ptk pZqqy.
                      2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                           99




        Figure 6. Friedl–Tillmann’s marked polytope Mw for the one-
        relator group with relator w “ a2 b3 ab´2 a´1 bab´1 a´2 bab´1 a´2 b´1 .
        The marked vertices are in blue.


By the amalgam decomposition (35), we have that π1 ptk`1 pZqq ď π1 ptk pZqq which
implies that π1 ptk`1 pZqq “ π1 ptk`1 pZ0 qq. Arguing in the same way for π1 pt´k´1 pZqq,
we see that π1 pt´k´1 pZqq “ π1 pt´k´1 pZ1 qq also. Hence, we have
(36)                               π1 pZq “ π1 pZ0 q
(37)                                      “ π1 pZ1 q
We shall now need a lemma. It is the topological translation of [Mol67, Lemma
1].
Lemma 2.3.19. Let X “ pΛ, λq be a one-relator complex and let M Ă X be a
Magnus subgraph. The inclusion π1 pM q ãÑ π1 pXq is an isomorphism if and only
if there is a 1-cell e Ă Λ ´ M traversed by λ precisely once and Λ ´ e deformation
retracts onto M .
    In order to complete the proof, we may use (36) and (37) combined with
Lemma 2.3.19 to conclude that there are 1-cells eL Ă Z ´ Z1 and eU Ă Z ´ Z0
that are both traversed precisely once by λϕ . By the first part of the proof this also
implies that |S| “ 2 and so the proof is complete.                                   □
    2.3.3.1. The Friedl–Tillmann polytope. In this section we describe the Friedl–
Tillmann of a two-generator one-relator group, as introduced in [FT20]. This is
a marked polytope in H1 pG, Rq “ R2 which encodes the BNS-invariant of a one-
relator group via its marking. It can be constructed directly from a presentation
and it is (up to translation) independent of the choice of one-relator presentation.
    Let us fix a free group F “ F pa, bq and a cyclically reduced word w contained in
the commutator subgroup rF pa, bq, F pa, bqs. Recall from Section 2.2.6 the definition
of Λw . Let Cw Ă R2 be the convex hull of Λw . Mark all vertices in Cw that
are traversed precisely once by λw , the trace of w. The Friedl–Tillmann polytope
Mw Ă H1 pG, Rq “ R2 for F {xxwyy is then defined as the convex hull of the midpoints
of the squares contained in Cw . A vertex of the polytope Mw is marked if all the
vertices of the corresponding square in Cw are marked. See Fig. 6 for an illustration
of the marked polytope Mw for the one-relator group from Example 2.2.27.
100                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


    An element ϕ P H 1 pG, Rq pairs maximally with a vertex v of Mw if ϕpvq ą ϕpwq
for all other vertices w ‰ v in Mw . Friedl–Tillmann prove the following result in
[FT20], relating their polytope to the BNS-invariant of a one-relator group.
    Theorem 2.3.20. Let F “ F pa, bq, let w P rF, F s be a cyclically reduced word
and let G “ F {xxwyy. Then ϕ P H 1 pG, Rq lies in the BNS-invariant Σ1 pGq if and
only if ϕ pairs maximally with a marked vertex of Mw .
    In the same article, Friedl–Tillmann conjecture that Pw is an invariant of the
group F {xxwyy, up to translation. They prove that it is the case for a large class
of one-relator groups, but their conjecture was only confirmed in full by Henneke–
Kielak in [HK20, Theorem 5.12].
    Theorem 2.3.21. Let F “ F pa, bq, let w P rF, F s be a cyclically reduced word
and let G “ F {xxwyy. Then the marked polytope Mw is an invariant of G, up to
translation.
    See Section 2.3.4 for a connection between the thickness of the Friedl–Tillmann
polytope of a one-relator group and its splitting complexity.

    2.3.4. Splitting complexity, JSJ-decompositions and amalgamated
free products. If G is a group and ϕ : G Ñ Z is an epimorphism, a splitting
of pG, ϕq is an HNN-extension decomposition G – H˚ψ such that xxHyy “ kerpϕq.
Recall that if ψ identifies A ď H with B ď H, then A and B are the associated
groups. The splitting complexity of pG, ϕq is
          cpG, ϕq “ min trkpAq | pG, ϕq splits with associated group Au.
The free splitting complexity of pG, ϕq is
        cf pG, ϕq “ min trkpAq | pG, ϕq splits with free associated group Au.
If G is a finitely presented group (or more generally, of type FP2 pZq) and ϕ : G Ñ Z
is an epimorphism, then Bieri–Strebel proved [BS78, Theorem A] that cpG, ϕq ă 8.
Although cf pG, ϕq in general could be infinite, when G is a finitely generated one-
relator group it is finite for all ϕ by Theorem 2.2.14.
     In [FT20], Friedl–Tillmann related the splitting complexity of many pairs
pF {xxwyy, ϕq with the thickness of the polytope Mw with respect to ϕ:
                    thϕ pMw q “ max tϕppq ´ ϕpqq | p, q P Mw u
where here ϕ is defined on Mw via its natural extension to a homomorphism
H1 pG, Rq “ R2 Ñ R. Henneke–Kielak then generalised their results to all two-
generator one-relator groups in [HK20, Theorem 6.4].
    Theorem 2.3.22. Let F “ F pa, bq, let w P rF, F s be a cyclically reduced word
that is not a proper power and let G “ F {xxwyy. For any epimorphism ϕ : G Ñ Z,
we have
                        cpG, ϕq “ cf pG, ϕq “ thϕ pMw q ` 1.
Remark 2.3.23. The upper bound cf pG, ϕq ď thϕ pMw q from Theorem 2.3.22 is
[FT20, Proposition 7.3]. The proof shows that there is a one-relator splitting for
pG, ϕq with associated Magnus subgroups of rank precisely thϕ pMw q ` 1. This can
also be proved directly using Theorem 2.2.14 and the description of one-relator
splittings from Section 2.2.6.
                     2.3. SPLITTINGS OF ONE-RELATOR GROUPS                        101


Question 2.3.24. Is there an analogue to Theorem 2.3.22 valid for all one-relator
groups?
     Let G “ F {xxwyy be a one-relator group as in Theorem 2.3.22. One immediate
consequence of Theorem 2.3.22 is that G splits as a HNN-extension over Z if and
only if thϕ pGq “ 0 for some ϕ, or, equivalently, if and only if the polytope Mw is a
line. In light of Remark 2.3.23, G then splits as a HNN-extension over an infinite
cyclic group if and only if G admits a one-relator splitting with associated Magnus
subgroups isomorphic to Z.
     Gardam–Kielak–Logan applied this to two-generator one-relator hyperbolic
groups in [GKL24] to compute the JSJ-decomposition of G. Logan was able
to understand the case of two-generator one-relator groups with torsion in even
more detail and worked out a complete characterisation of all outer automorphism
groups in [Log16]. The reader is directed towards Guirardel–Levitt [GL17] for
more information on JSJ-decompositions.
Problem 2.3.25. Characterise the JSJ-decompositions of one-relator groups.
    Although a lot is known about HNN-extension decompositions, as evidenced
above and by Section 2.2, not much is known about amalgamated free product
decompositions of one-relator groups. Call an amalgamated free product G “
A ˚C B proper if A, B, C are finitely generated, C is a proper subgroup of A and
B, and C has index at least three in A or B. Wall asked the following question in
[Wa779, Question F2].
Question 2.3.26 (Wall). Which one-relator groups split as proper amalgamated
free products?
     It is not too hard to show that a proper amalgamated free product contains
a free subgroup of rank two. Thus, BSp1, nq is an infinite family of one-relator
groups that cannot admit any proper amalgamated free product decomposition.
Nevertheless, many one-relator groups do andmit such decompositions. Baumslag–
Shalen showed in [BS90] that every group G of deficiency at least two admits a
proper amalgamated free product decomposition. That is, G “ A˚C B with A, B, C
finitely generated, C a proper subgroup of A and B and with C of index greater
than two in A or B. In particular, this applies to one-relator groups generated by
at least three elements. Such decompositions were also shown to hold for all non-
cyclic one-relator groups with torsion by Benyash-Krivets [BK98]. Wall’s question
does not yet have an answer for torsion-free two-generator one-relator groups.
   Theorem 2.3.27. A one-relator group G “ F {xxwyy splits as a proper amalga-
mated free product unless rkpF q “ 2 and G is torsion-free.
     Beyond existence of amalgamated free product decompositions of one-relator
groups, it would also be interesting to know what structure such amalgamated
free products can have. Fine–Peluso proposed several conjectures in [FP99] which
became known as the Amalgam Conjectures. We state the weakest possible such
conjecture.
Conjecture 2.3.28 (The Amalgam Conjecture). If G is a one-relator group with
at least three generators, then G – A ˚C B with C a free group and A, B either
one-relator groups or free groups.
102                            2. RECENT PROGRESS


     Note that in general, if A ˚C B is finitely presented and A, B, C are finitely
generated, it is possible that A, B, C are not finitely presented, see [BS90, Section
6] for an example. In case G “ A ˚C B is a one-relator group, we know that A, B, C
are finitely presented since G is coherent, see Section 2.5.4.

                        2.4. Group algebra properties
    Recall that if G is a group and R is a ring, then the group algebra RG (or
RrGs) is the R-algebra with free R-basis in correspondence with the elements of G
and with multiplication of basis elements given by the multiplication from G. In
other words, it is the ring with underlying set
              #          ˇ                                                  +
                ÿ        ˇ
       RG “         rg g ˇ rg P R and rg “ 0 for all but finitely many g P G .
                         ˇ
                gPG
                         ˇ

and ring operations defined in the natural way. In this section we will be studying
the properties of group rings of one-relator groups.

    2.4.1. (Co)homology and the relation module. Let F be a free group
and let N Ÿ F be a normal subgroup. Then F acts by conjugation on the abelian
group
                              Nab “ N {rN, N s.
This action extends linearly to a (left) action of ZF on Nab . Since N acts triv-
ially on its abelianisation, this action descends to an action of ZG, making Nab
a (left) ZG-module called the relation module. Another way to view the rela-
tion module of a group presentation G “ F pSq{N is as the ZG-module of cycles
Nab “ Z1 pCaypG, Sqq of the Cayley graph with respect to the generating set S. See
Fig. 7.
     Lyndon computed the relation module of a one-relator group in [Lyn50], a
theorem which became known as Lyndon’s identity theorem.
     Theorem 2.4.1 (Lyndon’s Identity Theorem). Let G “ F {xxwn yy be a one-
relator group with w not a proper power and with n ě 1. Denoting by N “ xxwn yy,
we have
                               Nab – ZG{pw ´ 1q.
In particular, if n “ 1 then
                                    Nab – ZG.
    The simplest way to prove Theorem 2.4.1 is to show that xxwn yy Ÿ F has the
Cohen–Lyndon property: there is a set of xxwn yy, xwy double coset representatives
T Ă F such that xxwn yy – ˚tPT twn t´1 . This was first done by Cohen and Lyndon
in [CL63].
    The main use for Theorem 2.4.1 is to compute the (co)homology of a one-
relator group. Indeed, by [Bro94, Proposition 5.4], if G “ F pSq{N , we have an
exact sequence
                                À
            0       Nab           sPS ZG         ZG          Z      0.

So in the case that G “ F {xxwn yy, with w not a proper power and n “ 1, the
above gives us a free resolution of Z as a trivial ZG-module and we may compute
homology by applying ´ bZG M or cohomology by applying homZG p´, M q to the
                               2.4. GROUP ALGEBRA PROPERTIES                       103




         Figure 7. The Cayley graph for G “ F pa, bq{xxra, bsyy. The cycle
         p3a´1 ` b ´ ab´1 q ¨ ra, bsrN, N s in Z1 pCaypG, ta, buq is depicted in
         red.

above. If n ą 1, then Nab is not free (or even projective), but we may extend the
exact sequence to a free resolution:
                  řn´1
       w´1         i“0   wi        w´1            À
 ...         ZG               ZG         ZG           sPS ZG      ZG        Z      0.
We have not described three of the above maps. The remaining maps are:
                 ˆ         ˙
                   B                           ÿ                      ÿ
        z ÞÑ z ¨      pwn q      , pzs qsPS ÞÑ     zs ¨ ps ´ 1q, z ÞÑ     zg
                   Bs        sPS               sPS                    gPG
      B
where Bs denotes the Fox derivative with respect to s.
Corollary 2.4.2. If G “ F {xxwn yy is a one-relator group with w not a proper
power, then cdQ pGq ď 2. If n “ 1, then cdZ pGq ď 2.
    The fact that cdQ pGq ď 2 when G has torsion follows by noting that after
applying ´ bZ Q to Lyndon’s resultion, the map w ´ 1 becomes the zero map and
so we obtain a resolution
                             À
           0        QG          sPS QG        QG        Q        0.
since Q is a flat Z-module.
    Lyndon’s identity theorem allows us to compute the derived functors TorRG
                                                                           n p´, Rq
and ExtnRG p´, Rq when G a one-relator group. In order to compute
                                   TorRG
                                      n p´, ´q,   ExtnRG p´, ´q
one needs to be able to produce resolutions of arbitrary RG-modules M , not just
the trivial one R. Lewin–Lewin proved a ‘two sided simple identity theorem’ in
104                            2. RECENT PROGRESS


[LL78]. As a corollary, they showed that if G “ F pSq{xxwyy is a torsion-free one-
relator group, K is a field and M is a (left) KG-module, then
                             À
 0        KG bK M              sPS KG bK M         KG bK M            M         0.

is a free resolution of M . In particular, TorKG
                                               i  p´, ´q “ ExtiKG p´, ´q “ 0 for all
i ą 2. This resolution was used in [JZL23] to compute the weak dimension of
certain KG-modules with G a torsion-free one-relator group.
     Recall that a ring R has (left) global dimension at most n if Extn`1
                                                                      R pA, Bq “ 0
for all (left) R-modules A and B. [LL78, Theorem 9] states:
Corollary 2.4.3. Let G “ F {xxwyy be a torsion-free one-relator group and let R be
a ring. Then the (left) global dimension of RG is at most the (left) global dimension
of R plus two. In particular, if R “ K is a field, the global dimension of KG is at
most two.
    Note that if R is commutative, the opposite ring RGop is isomorphic to RG
and so left and right global dimension of RG coincide.
Remark 2.4.4. Such a resolution can be constructed in a similar way for arbitrary
groups, see [JZL23, Proposition 2.2].
    2.4.2. Groups with cyclic relation module. A natural question that arises
from Theorem 2.4.1 is whether having a cyclic relation module is limited to one-
relator groups.
Question 2.4.5 (Harlander). If G “ F {N is a group with relation module Nab
cyclic, is N normally generated by a single element?
     This question is a special case of the relation gap problem which asks whether
a finitely presented group G “ F {N can have strictly fewer relation module gen-
erators than N has normal generators. Bestvina–Brady showed in [BB97] that
there exist groups with infinite relation gap. That is, groups that are not finitely
presented but have type FP2 pZq, a property equivalent to the relation module be-
ing finitely generated. Counterexamples to the relation gap problem could lead to
counterexamples to old conjectures on the homotopy type of CW-complexes such
as Wall’s Dp2q conjecture. The following theorem from [Lin24b] makes it unlikely
that counterexamples will come from groups with cyclic relation module.
     Theorem 2.4.6. If G “ F {N is a right orderable group with Nab a cyclic
relation module, then N is normally generated by a single element. In particular,
G is a one-relator group.
    Recall that a locally indicable group is right orderable by the Burns–Hale the-
orem [BH72] and a right orderable group is one with a total order on its elements,
invariant under multiplication from the right. A key step in the proof of The-
orem 2.4.6 involved showing that normal subgroups of one-relator groups which
have right orderable quotients, must be normally generated by a single element.
Indeed, if G “ F {N and Nab is cyclic, then there is an element w P N whose image
in Nab generates the relation module and such that the map F {xxwyy Ñ G has
perfect kernel. This is explained in detail in [Har15].
Question 2.4.7. Are normal perfect subgroups of one-relator groups normally
generated by a single element?
                              2.4. GROUP ALGEBRA PROPERTIES                                    105


      A positive answer to this question would solve Question 2.4.5. Note that perfect
subgroups of one-relator groups are necessarily infinitely generated. In the torsion-
free case this is by local indicability, in the torsion case, the natural quotient map
F {xxwn yy Ñ F {xxwyy onto the torsion-free one-relator group allows us to reduce to
considering finitely generated subgroups in the kernel. But the kernel splits as a
free product of (infinitely many) copies of Z{nZ, a group which contains no perfect
subgroups. This last fact is due to Fisher–Karrass–Solitar [FKS72, Theorem 1].
      Another closely related problem is the relation lifting problem, asked by Wall
in [Wal66]. If G “ F {N is a presentation and r1 , . . . , rn P Nab are ZG-module
generators, then the relation lifting problem asks whether there exist elements
w1 , . . . , wn P N such that
               xxw1 , . . . , wn yy “ N,   w1 rN, N s “ r1 , . . . , wn rN, N s “ rn .
The relations w1 , . . . , wn are called lifts of r1 , . . . , rn . Using the fact that ZG is a do-
main and contains no non-trivial units under the hypotheses of Theorem 2.4.6, one
can show that every generator of Nab can be lifted. On the other hand, Dunwoody
showed in [Dun72] that the following element
                                    p1 ´ a ` a2 qb ¨ a5 rN, N s
cannot be lifted to a normal generator of xxa5 yy “ N Ÿ F pa, bq. The proof uses the
Magnus property for free groups, Theorem 2.2.8, to show that there is no lift and the
fact that p1´a`a2 qb is a non-trivial unit in ZG to show that p1´a`a2 qb¨a5 rN, N s
is a generator.
     Generalisations of both the relation lifting and relation gap problems can be
considered for relation modules over arbitrary rings R. In this case, the R-relation
module of G “ F {N is the left RG-module
                                            R bZ Nab .
The main theorem of [Lin24b] applies to R-relation modules with R an arbitrary
domain. In this slightly more general setting, it is no longer true that every gen-
erator r P R bZ Nab may be lifted to a normal generator of N . However, there
will always be some element w P N and a unit u P Rˆ such that xxwyy “ N and
r “ u b wrN, N s.
Conjecture 2.4.8. Let G “ F {N be a torsion-free group such that Q bZ Nab is
cyclic as a QG-module, then N is normally generated by a single element.
Remark 2.4.9. There exist groups with torsion which are not one-relator groups,
but which have a presentation with cyclic Q-relation module. Such an example is
given in [Lin24b].
    2.4.3. L2 -Betti numbers and the strong Atiyah conjecture for one-
relator groups. Let G be a group and denote by ℓ2 pGq the space of square sum-
mable functions G Ñ C. In other words, ℓ2 pGq is the space of formal sums
                          #                                 +
                            ÿ         ˇ         ÿ
                   2
                  ℓ pGq “      cg ¨ g ˇ cg P C,    }cg } ă 8 .
                                      ˇ
                                    gPG                    gPG

with square summable support. The group von Neumann algebra is the algebra of
bounded G-equivariant operators from ℓ2 pGq to itself
                                      N pGq :“ Bpℓ2 pGqqG .
106                               2. RECENT PROGRESS


The ring of affiliated operators UpGq is the Ore localisation of N pGq with respect
to the set of non-zero divisors. Then one way to define the nth L2 -Betti number of
G is:
                           bp2q              ZG
                            n “ dimU pGq Torn pUpGq, Zq
where dimU pGq is the von Neumann dimension, see Lück’s book [Lüc02, Definition
8.30] for details. The L2 -Betti numbers of one-relator groups were computed by
Dicks–Linnell [DL07].
   Theorem 2.4.10. Let G “ F {xxwn yy be a one-relator group with w not a proper
power and n ě 1. Then
                                #
                                  1
                        p2q             if G – Z{nZ
                       b0 pGq “ n
                                  0     otherwise
                            p2q                    1
                           b1 pGq “ 1 ´ rkpF q `
                                                   n
                            p2q
                           b2 pGq “ 0
    The strong Atiyah conjecture predicts that the von Neumann dimension of the
kernel of operators ℓ2 pGqn Ñ ℓ2 pGqm induced by right multiplication by m ˆ n
                                   1
matrices over CG should lie in lcmpGq Z, where lcmpGq denotes the lowest common
multiple of the orders of finite subgroups of G. Another equivalent formulation
of the strong Atiyah conjecture can be stated in terms of L2 -Betti numbers, see
[Lüc02, Chapter 10]. For torsion-free groups, the strong Atiyah conjecture over a
subfield K Ă C is equivalent to the division closure of KG in UpGq being a division
ring. See [LS12, Proposition 1.2] for this fact.
    Jaikin-Zapirain–López-Álvarez confirmed the strong Atiyah conjecture for one-
relator groups in [JZLA20]. In fact, they prove something much stronger.
    Theorem 2.4.11. If is a G is a locally indicable group, then G satisfies the
strong Atiyah conjecture over any subfield K Ă C.
   Combining Theorem 2.4.11 with a result of Kevin Schreve [Sch14], Jaikin-
Zapirain–López-Álvarez obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 2.4.12. If G is a one-relator group, then G satisfies the strong Atiyah
conjecture.
    2.4.4. Embedding the group ring of a torsion-free one-relator group
into a division ring. Recall that a division ring is a ring in which each non-
zero element is a unit. Lewin–Lewin proved in [LL78] that the group ring of a
torsion-free one-relator group embeds into a division ring.
    Theorem 2.4.13. If G “ F {xxwyy is a torsion-free one-relator group and k is
a division ring, then kG ãÑ D for some division ring D.
    Theorem 2.4.13 provided the first proof of Kaplansky’s zero divisor conjecture
for torsion-free one-relator groups. Kaplansky’s zero divisor conjecture is also a
consequence of local indicability, proved later by Brodskii and Howie.
    The proof of Theorem 2.4.13 uses the Magnus hierarchy and various ring con-
structions to explicitly and inductively construct the division ring D. These con-
structions include Ore localisation, skew polynomial ring constructions, Cohn’s uni-
versal matrix inverting construction and coproducts of rings. The background and
details on these notions are covered in detail in Cohn’s book [Coh06].
                         2.4. GROUP ALGEBRA PROPERTIES                             107


    One of the main difficulties in Lewin–Lewin’s construction was ensuring that
at each stage in the hierarchy, the division rings were pH, Gq-free for all Magnus
subgroups H of the one-relator group G. Let k be a division ring, G a group and
kG ãÑ D an embedding into a division ring. If N ď H ď G are subgroups and
DN ď D denotes the division closure of kN in D, then D is pN, Hq-free if the
multiplication map
                                 DN bkN kH Ñ D
given by d b h ÞÑ dh is injective.
                               À Note that if T Ă H is a right transversal for N ,
then we have DN bkN kH – tPT DN bt as a left kN -module.
     There is another way to embed a group ring of a torsion-free one-relator group
into a division ring which we shall now explain. Firstly, we define two types of
division ring embeddings which play a particularly important role. Let kG ãÑ D
be an epic division ring embedding. Recall that kG ãÑ D is epic of D coincides
with the division closure of kG. The embedding is Hughes-free if it is pN, Hq-free
for every finitely generated subgroup H ď G and every normal subgroup N Ÿ H
with H{N – Z. A well-known theorem of Hughes [Hug70] states that a locally
indicable group admits at most one Hughes-free embedding into a division ring,
up to isomorphism. The embedding is Linnell if it is pN, Gq-free for any subgroup
N ď G. When the division closure of CG in the ring of affiliated operators UpGq is
a division ring, this division ring embedding is Linnell. Furthermore, if G is locally
indicable, then by Hughes’ theorem, its Linnell division ring in UpGq will also be
Hughes-free. In particular, the division ring embedding one obtains for KG, with
G a torsion-free one-relator group and K Ă C a subfield, from Theorem 2.4.11 is
Linnell.
     Let G be a right orderable group, let ď be a right G-invariant total order and
let k be a division ring. Denote by
                             #                                        +
                                    ÿ        ˇ
                kppG, ďqq “ r “       rg ¨ g ˇ suppprq is well-ordered
                                             ˇ
                                 gPG

the space of Mal’cev–Neumann series. A powerful theorem of Malcev and Neumann
[Mal48, Neu49] shows that if ď is a bi-ordering of G, then kppG, ďqq actually
has the structure of a division ring called the Mal’cev–Neumann completion. In
particular, if G is a free group, then it admits a bi-ordering and so it embeds
in its Mal’cev–Nuemann completion. This is in fact the base case of the Lewin–
Lewin division ring construction. Lewin showed in [Lew74] that in this case the
embedding of kG into its division closure in its Mal’cev Neumann completion is
Hughes-free (in fact, also Linnell).
     When ď is not a bi-ordering, kppG, ďqq does not have a natural ring structure.
In this case one should look at the endomorphism ring of kppG, ďqq, denoted by
EndpkppG, ďqqq. The group ring kG acts naturally on the right, and so kG embeds
in EndpkppG, ďqqq. It turns out that the endomorphism ring EndpkppG, ďqqq is a
division ring in the case that G is locally indicable and ď is a Conradian right
order. Note that admitting a Conradian right order is equivalent to being locally
indicable, a fact which is a consequence of a result of Brodskii [Bro84], explained
in [RR02]. The following is obtained by combining a result of Jaikin-Zapirain–
López-Álvarez [JZLA20, Corollary 1.4] with a result of Gräter [Grä20a, Theorem
8.1 & Corollary 8.3]. See also [JZL23, Theorem 2.5] and the preceding discussion.
108                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


     Theorem 2.4.14. Let G be a locally indicable group, ď a Conradian right order
on G and let K be a field of characteristic zero. Then the ring EndpKppG, ďqqq is a
division ring. Moreover, the division closure of KG in EndpKppG, ďqqq is a Linnell
ring.
Corollary 2.4.15. If G is a torsion-free one-relator group and K is a field of
characteristic zero, then KG embeds into a Linnell division ring DKG . Moreover,
DKG is the unique epic Linnell division KG-ring.
    By a result of Fisher–Sánchez-Peralta [FSP24], the Lewin–Lewin division ring
construction coincides with the division ring from Theorem 2.4.14 for KG where
K is a field of characteristic zero and G a torsion-free one-relator group.
   2.4.5. Coherence of the group ring. Recall that a presentation of a (left)
R-module M is an exact sequence
                           F1        F0         M          0
where F0 and F1 are free (left) R-modules.
Definition 2.4.16. A ring R is (left) coherent if all of its finitely generated (left)
ideals are finitely presented.
     Coherence of rings was introduced by Bourbaki in the 1960’s. In general, it
is important to distinguish between left and right modules as there are examples
of rings which are left coherent but not right coherent. See, for example, [La772,
Example (e), p. 139]. However, for group rings over a commutative ring, the two
notions coincide. One of the main results in [JZL23] is the following.
     Theorem 2.4.17. If G is a one-relator group and K is a field of characteristic
0, then KrGs is coherent.
     A right R-module M is said to have weak dimension at most k if TorR k`1 pM, N q “
0 for all left R-modules N . Say M has weak dimension k if it has weak dimension
at most k, but not at most k ´ 1. The proof of Theorem 2.4.17 makes use of the
following criterion for when a finitely generated R-module is finitely presented. See
[JZL23, Proposition 3.1].
Proposition 2.4.18. Let R be a ring of global dimension at most two and let
R ãÑ D be an embedding into a division ring. If M is a finitely generated right
R-module, then
               M is finitely presented ðñ dimD TorR
                                                  1 pM, Dq ă 8.
In particular, if D has weak dimension at most one, then R is coherent.
     To see that the last claim in Proposition 2.4.18 follows from the first, note that
if I ď R is an ideal, then
                             TorR             R
                                1 pI, Dq “ Tor2 pR{I, Dq

and so if D has weak dimension at most one, then TorR  1 pI, Dq “ 0.
    The idea to prove Theorem 2.4.17 is to use Proposition 2.4.18 on the group
ring of a one-relator group. There are two cases to consider: when G is torsion-free
and when G has torsion.
    Suppose that G is a torsion-free one-relator group and K is a field. As we saw
in Section 2.4.1, KrGs has global dimension at most two and so it suffices to show
                             2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                            109


that D has weak dimension at most one. Let M be a left KrGs-module. From
Section 2.4.1 we have the following resolution
                            À
 0        KG bK M              sPS KG bK M     KG bK M        M        0.

which comes from the standard resolution of K as a trivial KrGs-module. By
Theorem 2.4.14, there exists a division ring embedding KrGs ãÑ D, turning D into
a right KrGs-module. Applying D bKrGs ´ we obtain a complex
                    d2   À                  d1               d0
         D bK M            sPS D bK M            D bK M           M      0.

By definition:
                                KrGs
                             Tor2      pD, M q “ kerpd2 q.
The delicate part of the proof of Theorem 2.4.17 is now to show that D bK M
is a torsion-free KrGs module, and show that this implies that kerpd2 q “ 0, see
[JZL23, Lemma 5.1 & Theorem 5.3]. In order to carry out this step, one needs to
know that the division ring D into which KrGs embeds is Hughes-free. Since such a
division ring is only known to exist when K has characteristic 0 by Theorem 2.4.14,
Theorem 2.4.17 requires this hypothesis. However, the proof carries over directly
if one were to show that a Hughes-free division ring exists for KrGs with G a
torsion-free one-relator group and K an arbitrary field.
     If G is a one-relator group with torsion, the ring KrGs does not have global
dimension at most two. Dawid Kielak and the first author showed in [KL24] that
one-relator groups with torsion have a finite index subgroup that is free-by-cyclic,
see Section 2.5.5. Let F ¸ψ Z be the finite index free-by-cyclic subgroup of G.
Now KrF s embeds into its Mal’cev–Neumann completion, giving us a division ring
embedding KrF s ãÑ D. Since KrF ¸ψ Zs – pKrF sqrt˘1 , ψs, localising Drt˘1 , ψs,
                                         ‰˘ s Ñ KrF s to D, yields a division ring
where ψ denotes the extension` of“ ψ : KrF
                                     ˘1
embedding KrF ¸ψ Zs ãÑ Ore D t , ψ . Then general properties of the twisted
                                                              ` “       ‰˘
Laurent polynomial ring and Ore localisation implies that Ore D t˘1 , ψ has weak
dimension one and so Proposition 2.4.18 can also be applied in this case. Since the
coherence property passes between finite codimensional ideals, the group ring KrGs
is also coherent.
     We conclude this section by remarking that the proof of group ring coherence
does not carry over to RrGs when R is not a field as the global dimension of RrGs
is no longer at most two. Even the case R “ Z is open and interesting.

                           2.5. Subgroup properties
    2.5.1. Stackings and non-positive immersions. Dani Wise introduced the
notions of non-positive immersions and negative immersions in [Wis03, Wis04]
as tools to understand better the subgroup structure of certain groups with an eye
towards solving Baumslag’s conjecture on the coherence of one-relator groups.
    The independent proofs that torsion-free one-relator groups have presentation
complexes with non-positive immersions by Helfer–Wise [HW16] and Louder–
Wilton [LW17], led to a sequence of beautiful developments in understanding the
subgroups of one-relator groups which we shall explain in the next few sections.
Definition 2.5.1. A 2-complex X has non-positive immersions if for every immer-
sion Y í X with Y compact and connected, either π1 pY q “ 1 or χpY q ď 0.
110                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


Remark 2.5.2. Other variations of the non-positive immersions property replace
the condition in Theorem 2.5.5 that Y be simply connected with the condition
that Y be contractible or collapsible. Yet another variation, weak non-positive
immersions, requires that χpY q ď 1 for all immersions Y í X with Y compact
and connected.
    When Dani Wise introduced the notion of non-positive immersions in [Wis03],
he conjectured that all one-relator complexes X “ pΛ, λq with degpλq “ 1 have non-
positive immersions. Wise had reduced his conjecture to a conjecture about free
groups which he called the w-cycles conjecture: if F is a free group, w P F is not a
proper power and H ď F is any finitely generated free group, then
                              ÿ
                                  rkpW f X Hq ď rkpHq
                            W fH

with equality only if H ď xxwyy. This can also be interpreted as a rank 1 version of
the (strengthened) Hanna Neumann inequality. In [LW17] Louder–Wilton solved
the w-cycles conjecture. Their proof uses the idea of a stacking.
Definition 2.5.3. Let λ : S í Γ be an immersion of a disjoint union of copies of S 1
into a graph Γ. A stacking of λ is an embedding λ
                                                r : S ãÑ Γ ˆ R such that π ˝ λ
                                                                             r“λ
where π : Γ ˆ R Ñ Γ is the projection map.
     Now fix an immersion λ as in Definition 2.5.3 and a stacking λ. r Denote by
ι : Γ ˆ R Ñ R the projection to R. Define the top of the stacking to be
         T “ tx P S | @y ‰ x    pλpxq “ λpyq ùñ ιpλpxqq
                                                  r     ą ιpλpyqqqu
                                                            r       ĂS
whereas the bottom is the subset
         B “ tx P S | @y ‰ x    pλpxq “ λpyq ùñ ιpλpxqq
                                                  r     ă ιpλpyqqqu
                                                            r       ĂS
The stacking is good if the top and the bottom intersect each component of S non-
trivially. Louder–Wilton then show that good stackings always exist for immersions
λ : S 1 í Λ, where degpλq “ 1. Their argument makes use of the existence of
maximal Z-tower liftings of λ, a fact due to Howie [How82]. The topological
one-relator hierarchy described in Section 2.2.2 yields, in fact, an explicit maximal
tower lifting of λ. Alternatively, as Wise points out in [Wis20], one can use a
result of Farrell [Far76], the right orderability of torsion-free one-relator groups
and Weinbaum’s theorem [Wei72].
     A key insight of Louder–Wilton is that good stackings can be used to compute
Euler characteristics. This led to the following result, whch is a combination of
[LW17, Lemma 12 & 16]. Recall that the core of a graph Γ, denoted by CorepΓq,
is the union of the images of all immersed cycles S 1 í Γ.
Proposition 2.5.4. Let Λ be a graph and let λ : S í Λ be an immersion of a
disjoint union of cycles S 1 . Suppose that λ admits a good stacking (for example,
if S “ S 1 and degpλq “ 1). Let Λ1 í Λ be a graph immersion and consider the
following diagram
                                                    λ1
                               CorepS ˆΛ Λ1 q            Λ1
                                      σ
                                                λ
                                     S                   Λ
                            2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                              111


arising from the pullback diagram. Then either there is some edge e Ă Λ1 such that
λ1´1 peq is a single edge, or we have
                                ´χpImpλ1 qq ě degpσq.
    The w-cycles conjecture follows immediately from Proposition 2.5.4. We ex-
plain in some detail how to obtain the non-positive immersions property from
Proposition 2.5.4.
   Theorem 2.5.5. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex with degpλq “ 1, then
X has non-positive immersions.
    Proof. Let Z “ pΓ, γq be a 2-complex and let Z í X be an immersion. If
there is a 1-cell e Ă Γ such that γ ´1 peq contains a single 1-cell, then by removing
e and the 2-cell whose boundary cycle traverses e, we obtain a subcomplex of Z
which is homotopy equivalent to Z. Thus, we may assume that no such 1-cell exists.
Consider the following commutative diagram
                                             γ
                            SΓ ì
                            ì




                                       S 1 ˆΛ Γ ì        Γ
                                                        ì
                                         ì




                                σ


                                         S1 ì λ          Λ
where γ : SΓ í Γ is the attaching map for the 2-cells in Z and where the fact that
SΓ ãÑ S 1 ˆΛ Γ is injective follows from the fact that Z í X is an immersion. We
may apply Proposition 2.5.4 to the immersion Γ í Λ to conclude that
                     ´χpΓq ě ´χpγpSΓ qq ě degpσq “ |π0 pSΓ q|.
Since
                              χpZq “ χpΓq ´ |π0 pSΓ q|
the proof is complete.                                                             □

Remark 2.5.6. The proof actually shows something stronger: if Z í X is an
immersion of a compact and connected 2-complex, then either χpZq ď 0 or Z
collapses through free faces to a point (collapsing non-positive immersions).
     Other proofs of Theorem 2.5.5 are also worth mentioning. Helfer–Wise prove
Theorem 2.5.5 at the same time as Louder–Wilton in [HW16], using the notion
of (bi)-slim structures. In [BCGW24] Bamberger–Carrier–Gaster–Wise showed
that the existence of a good stacking for an immersion λ : S í Λ is equivalent to
the existence of a bi-slim structure on X “ pΛ, λq. Since the existence of a slim
structure is strictly more general, the proof in [HW16] applies to a somewhat larger
class of 2-complexes. For example, they show that reducible 2-complexes without
proper powers (in the sense of Howie [How82]) have slim structures and so have
non-positive immersions. A third proof was provided by Howie–Short in [HS23]
using orderability and diagrams. This last proof could be applied in a more general
‘relative’ setting. A similar result was independently obtained by Millard in his
thesis [Mil21] using ‘relative’ stackings. Finally, a completely different proof was
given in [JZL23], using homological algebra.
112                            2. RECENT PROGRESS


    Not many general properties of 2-complexes with non-positive immersions are
known. Wise conjectured in [Wis03] that if X has non-positive immersions, then
π1 pXq is coherent. That is, every finitely generated subgroup of π1 pXq is finitely
presented. Although this conjecture remains open, in Section 2.5.4 we will see that
significant progress has been made. Properties that are known to hold for all 2-
complexes with non-positive immersions are the following, due to Wise [Wis22]
(see [JZL23, Proposition 2.7]).
     Theorem 2.5.7. If X is a 2-complex with non-positive immersions and π1 pXq ‰
1, then:
       ‚ π1 pXq is locally indicable.
       ‚ X is aspherical.
    Note that these properties were known to hold for (presentation complexes of)
torsion-free one-relator groups, see Section 2.2.2.
     2.5.2. (Uniform) Negative immersions. In [Wis04], Dani Wise intro-
duced a strengthening of non-positive immersions which he called negative im-
mersions. After Louder–Wilton introduced stackings in [LW17], they then wrote
[LW22] in which they used stackings to characterise precisely when a one-relator
complex has negative immersions. However, the definition Louder–Wilton used was
slightly different, although morally very similar, to that of Wise. The advantage of
the Louder–Wilton definiton is that it is invariant under Nielsen equivalence. Since
we shall be covering the results of Louder–Wilton, we shall be working with their
definition here.
     Before stating the definition of negative immersions, we shall need to explain
what it means for a 2-complex to be reducible or irreducible. For this we follow
[LW24]. There the notion of branched immersions is also used. However, we stick
to regular immersions.
     Let X be a 2-complex. We say X is visibly reducible if one of the following
holds:
      (1) X contains a vertex of degree at most one.
      (2) X contains a locally separating vertex.
      (3) X contains a free face.
Morally, X is visibly reducible if there is an obvious way to simplfy it: remove
hanging trees (corresponding to (1)), decompose X as a wedge of two subcomplexes
(corresponding to (2)) or collapse a 2-cell through an edge (corresponding to (3)).
A combinatorial map of 2-complexes ϕ : Y Ñ X is an essential equivalence if the
following two conditions hold:
      (1) ϕp1q : Y p1q Ñ X p1q is a homotopy equivalence that factors as a sequence
          of folds (in the sense of Stallings [Sta83])
      (2) ϕ is a homeomorphism on the interiors of 2-cells.
Definition 2.5.8. A 2-complex X is reducible if there exists an essential equiva-
lence Y Ñ X such that Y is visibly reducible, irreducible otherwise.
Definition 2.5.9. A 2-complex X has negative immersions if for every immersion
Y í X with Y compact and connected, either χpY q ă 0 or Y is reducible.
    One of the main theorems of [LW22] characterises when a one-relator complex
has negative immersions in terms of the subgroup structure of the fundamental
group. Recall that a group is k-free if every k-generated subgroup is free.
                            2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                              113


    Theorem 2.5.10. If X is a one-relator complex, then X has negative immer-
sions if and only if π1 pXq is 2-free.
    Louder–Wilton later introduced a stronger uniform variant of negative immer-
sions in [LW24].
Definition 2.5.11. A 2-complex X has uniform negative immersions if there exists
some ϵ ą 0 such that for every immersion Y í X with Y compact, connected and
irreducible, we have
                                  χpY q
                                               ď ´ϵ.
                              #t2-cells in Y u
Remark 2.5.12. Wise’s definition of negative immersions is more akin to Defini-
tion 2.5.11, except that reducible is replaced with ‘no free faces and not a point’.
In [LW24, Section 3.4] it is shown that these two notions are distinct even for
one-relator complexes.
     The main advantage of the uniform negative immersions property over the
negative immersions property is that it allows for much stronger results about
subgroups. This was exploited in [LW24] in which Louder–Wilton showed that
2-free one-relator groups are coherent. We will cover this result and other further
corollaries in Section 2.5.4. The following is [LW24, Theorem C].
   Theorem 2.5.13. If X is a one-relator complex with negative immersions, then
X has uniform negative immersions.
     The proof of Theorem 2.5.13 is a beautiful application of linear programming
techniques. The authors encode certain types of maps from 2-complexes to a 2-
complex X in a linear system of equations and inequalities, showing that the maps
which maximise “curvature” are rational vertices in a convex polytope. Since these
rational vertices can be realised by some map Ymax Ñ X, the “curvature” of Ymax
provides the ϵ needed to verify that X has uniform negative immersions. The
reader is invited to consult [Wil24a] in which Wilton formally defines these curva-
ture invariants for all 2-complexes, explores their properties and proposes several
interesting directions for further research.
     So far, we have only considered one-relator complexes X “ pΛ, λq with degpλq “
1 and so the reader might be wondering what can one say about the case degpλq ą 1.
In [LW17], Louder–Wilton show that such one-relator complexes have the property
of not-too-positive immersions. Stronger properties were obtained in [LW20] and
[LW24]. We state [LW24, Theorem 5.1] below which combines Proposition 2.5.4
with a result of Fisher–Karrass–Solitar [FKS72] stating that a one-relator group
with torsion is virtually torsion-free. A similar result can be found in [Wis22] (see
also [Wis20]).
    Theorem 2.5.14. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex with degpλq ą 1, then
there is a finite sheeted cover Y í X and an inclusion ι : Z ãÑ Y inducing an
isomorphism on π1 such that Z has uniform negative immersions.
    In order to get around passing to a finite index subgroup, a one-relator group
with torsion can be considered as the fundamental group of a one-relator orbicom-
plex with a single non-trivial cone point in the centre of the 2-cell. Louder–Wilton
show in [LW20] that such complexes have uniform negative immersions.
114                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


    2.5.3. Primitivity rank and w-subgroups. Recall that an element w in
a free group F is primitive if it is part of a free basis for F . Equivalently, if
F – F 1 ˚ xwy for some F 1 ď F . Call w imprimitive if w is not primitive.
    Primitivity rank was introduced by Puder in [Pud14]. The definition plays a
key role in Louder–Wilton’s results in [LW22].
Definition 2.5.15. If F is a free group and w P F is an element, its primitivity
rank πpwq is the following quantity:
      πpwq “ min trkpHq | w P H ď F, w is imprimitive in Hu P N Y t`8u,
where πp1q “ 0 and πpwq “ `8 if w is primitive.
    The first connection Louder–Wilton discovered between properties of a one-
relator group and the primitivity rank of its defining relation is the following.
    Theorem 2.5.16. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group, then G is k-free if
and only if k ă πpwq. In particular:
     (1) G is torsion-free if and only if πpwq ě 2.
     (2) The one-relator presentation complex for G has uniform negative immer-
         sions if and only if πpwq ě 3.
    Several k-freeness results had been previously established for cyclically pinched,
cyclically conjugated and related one-relator groups, for instance, by Baumslag in
[Bau62b], Rosenberger in [Ros82] and Fine–Gaglione–Rosenberger–Spellman in
[FGRS95]. These are all encompassed by Louder–Wilton’s results.
    If w P F is an element, one might wonder what the subgroups that arise in
Definition 2.5.15 tell us about the subgroup structure of F {xxwyy. This leads us to
the notion of w-subgroups.
Definition 2.5.17. If F is a free group and w P F is an element, the w-subgroups
of F are the subgroups H ď F satisfying the following:
       ‚ w P H and πpwq “ rkpHq.
       ‚ H is maximal for inclusion amongst subgroups satisfying the above.
     The following is due to Puder [Pud14, Appendix A]. See also [LW22, Lemma
6.4].
Lemma 2.5.18. For any given w P F , there are finitely many w-subgroups and
there is an algorithm to compute them, and hence to compute πpwq.
     The upshot of the above and Theorem 2.5.16 is that there is an algorithm
to decide when a one-relator group is k-free for some k ě 1 and hence when its
presentation complex has (uniform) negative immersions.
     We briefly sketch the algorithm, due to Puder [Pud14]. Let λ : S 1 í Λ be
an immersion realising the inclusion xwy ãÑ F . Enumerate all graph immersions
γ : Γ í Λ that λ surjectively factors through:
                                               γ
                                S1        Γ ì       Λ
Using Whitehead’s algorithm [Whi36], determine in which graphs Γ the cycle S 1 ↠
Γ represents a primitive element of π1 pΓq and throw all of these away. Additionally,
throw away all graphs Γ such that there is already a graph immersion Γ1 í Λ in our
list that Γ í Λ factors through and such that χpΓ1 q ě χpΓq. Finally, throw away
all graphs Γ whose Euler characteristic do not attain the maximal value amongst
                            2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                             115


the graphs remaining. The graph immersions Γ í Λ left over each correspond to
w-subgroups of F “ π1 pΛq (under the π1 -map at the basepoint) and the primitivity
rank can be computed as πpwq “ 1 ´ χpΓq.
    In [LW22] it is shown that if H ď F is a w-subgroup, then H is malnormal
and the homomorphism
                                H{xxwyy Ñ F {xxwyy
is injective [LW22, Lemma 6.3 & Theorem 6.17]. The image subgroups H{xxwyy ď
F {xxwyy are then also called w-subgroups of the one-relator group. Theorem 2.5.16
tells us about subgroups of rank at most πpwq ´ 1, it turns out that one can also
say something about the subgroups of rank πpwq, see [LW22, Theorem 1.5].
   Theorem 2.5.19. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group, then every subgroup
H ď G with rkpHq “ πpwq is either free or conjugate into a w-subgroup of G.
     If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex, there are natural one-relator complexes
Q í X immersing into X which represent the w-subgroups. These are obtained by
taking the unique core graph immersion Γ í Λ which represents a w-subgroup of
π1 pΛq and attaching a 2-cell along the unique lift of λ. The following is [Lin22b,
Theorem 3.3.16].
    Theorem 2.5.20. If X “ pΛ, λq is a one-relator complex and Q í X represents
a w-subgroup, then there is a one-relator tower
                         Q “ XN í . . . í X1 í X0 “ X.
    This has the corollary that one can decide whether a given element of a one-
relator group lies inside a w-subgroup.
    When πpwq “ 2, Louder–Wilton show that there is only one w-subgroup.
Lemma 2.5.21. If w P F is an element with πpwq “ 2, then there is precisely one
w-subgroup H ď F .
    In light of Theorem 2.5.19 and Lemma 2.5.21, we ask the following question.
Question 2.5.22. If F is a free group and w P F is an element with πpwq ě 3, is
it true that there is a unique w-subgroup?
    In [CH23], Cashen–Hoffman used a computer to verify various conjectures
about one-relator groups with relator length that is not too long. In particular,
they answer Question 2.5.22 positively for all words w P F4 of length at most 16
and with πpwq “ 3. Note that if πpwq “ rkpF q, then w trivially has a unique
w-subgroup, namely F . The primitivity rank may also have a relation with the
stable commutator length, see [LW24, Conjecture 1.7]. This was also explored
computationally by Cashen–Hoffman.
    Moldavanskiı̆ asked the following question in the case πpwq “ 1 [KM18, 11.63].
We believe it should be true for any primitivity rank.
Question 2.5.23. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group and K is a w-subgroup.
Is it true that if H ď G is a subgroup such that H X xxKyy “ 1, then H is free?
    If Question 2.5.22 turns out to have a negative answer, then Question 2.5.23
should be modified appropriately.
116                           2. RECENT PROGRESS


    If K is a finite field of characteristic p, Ernst-West–Puder–Seidel define in
[EWPS24] the p-primitivity rank of an element w P F in terms of ideals in the
group ring KrF s of the free group with coefficients in K:
       πp pwq “ min trkpIq | w ´ 1 P I ň KrF s, w ´ 1 is imprimitive in Iu.
They proved that πq pwq ď πpwq for all q and conjectured that πq pwq “ πpwq. One
could also conjecture whether an analog of Theorem 2.5.16 holds for group rings of
free groups. Say a ring R is k-free if all ideals of rank at most k in R are free.
Question 2.5.24. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group and K is a finite field of
characteristic p, is it true that KrGs is k-free for k ă πq pwq?
    Question 2.5.24 is true when πq pwq “ 2 for the following reason. We remarked
that πq pwq ď πpwq and so G “ F {xxwyy is torsion-free. Hence, if πq pwq “ 2, then
G is locally indicable and so KrF s has no-zero divisors by Theorem 2.4.13. Since
cyclic ideals of KrGs being free is the same thing as KrGs being a domain, the
claim follows.
    If true, Question 2.5.24 is likely to be very difficult to prove. Some related
work was done by Avramidi in [Avr22] who proved that the group ring of the
fundamental group of a surface of sufficiently high genus is 2-free. A possibly
simpler and also interesting variation of Question 2.5.24 could be the question as
to whether KrGs is 2-free when G “ F {xxwyy with πpwq ě 3.

    2.5.4. Coherence. We saw in Section 2.4.5 the coherence property for rings,
in this section we cover the analogous notion for groups.
Definition 2.5.25. A group G is coherent if all finitely generated subgroups of G
are finitely presented.
    Although the coherence property for groups had been studied before, the term
appears to have first been used for groups by Serre in [New74]. The first explicit
example of a finitely presented incoherent group was provided by Baumslag–Boone–
Neuman in [BBN59]. The example they gave was F2 ˆ BSp1, 2q.
    Some of the first classes of groups shown to be coherent were the classes of
cyclically pinched and cyclically conjugated one-relator groups, a result due to
Karrass–Solitar [KS70, KS71b]. A group is cyclically pinched if it has a presen-
tation of the form:
                   xA, B | upAq “ wpBqy – F pAq     ˚       F pBq.
                                                  xuy“xwy

That is, if it is the amalgamated free product of two free groups over a cyclic
subgroup. The cyclically conjugated one-relator group are defined analogously, but
with HNN-extensions. A group is cyclically conjugated if it has a presentation of
the form:
                    @                       D
                     A, t | t´1 upAqt “ wpAq – F pAq ˚xuyt “xwy .
Karrass–Solitar mention in [KS70] that their coherence result solved a conjecture
of Baumslag’s. Later, Baumslag conjectured that in fact all one-relator groups
should be coherent in [Bau74b].
    A push to solve this conjecture by Dani Wise, and later Lars Louder and Henry
Wilton, sparked a lot of progress in understanding the subgroup structure of one-
relator groups. We will discuss all this progress in detail in this section. First
                               2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                                   117


we mention the most general, but weakest, result which was proven by Andrei
Jaikin-Zapirain and the first author in [JZL23].
       Theorem 2.5.26. If G is a one-relator group, then G is coherent.
    In general, how might one prove a finitely generated group H is finitely pre-
sented? Starting with a finitely generated free group G0 and a surjection G0 ↠ H,
we might try and choose elements r1 , r2 , . . . P G0 such that xxr1 , r2 , . . .yy “ kerpG0 ↠
Hq. This gives us a diagram of epimorphisms
(38)                  G0 ↠ G1 ↠ . . . ↠ Gn Ñ Gn`1 ↠ . . . ↠ H
where each Gi “ G0 {xxr1 , . . . , ri yy is finitely presented and so that
                                        lim Gi “ H.
                                       iÑ8

Then H will be finitely presented if and only if for some k the epimorphism Gk Ñ H
is an isomorphism. When H is a subgroup of a group with sufficiently nice proper-
ties, then it might be possible to define a ‘complexity’ on the candidate presentation,
choose relations ri in a clever way so that this complexity goes down, eventually
reaching something of minimal complexity which yields an actual presentation. This
is the main idea in the proof of coherence for instance for three-manifold groups
[Sco73a] or mapping tori of free groups [FH99].
     The ‘sufficiently nice’ properties we need for coherence results will be the uni-
form negative immersions and non-positive immersions properties. As such, we
need a version of Eq. (38) for immersions. The following is due to Louder–Wilton
[LW24] and makes fundamental use of a generalisation of Scott’s Lemma [Sco73b],
due to Delzant (see [Swa04]).
Lemma 2.5.27. Let X be a compact 2-complex and let H ď π1 pXq be a finitely
generated subgroup. There is a sequence of π1 -surjective immersions of compact
connected 2-complexes:
                            Z0 í Z1 í . . . í Zk í . . . í X
such that
                                      lim π1 pZi q – H.
                                     iÑ8
Moreover, if H is non-cyclic and freely indecomposable, then after possibly replacing
H by a conjugate, each Zi can be taken to be irreducible.
     In the next two sections, we shall use Lemma 2.5.27 to understand subgroups
of π1 pXq for X a finite 2-complex with uniform negative immersions or non-positive
immersions.
     2.5.4.1. Strong coherence and uniform negative immersions. If we plug into
Lemma 2.5.27 a 2-complex with uniform negative immersions and a non-cyclic
freely indecomposable subgroup H ď π1 pXq, then there is an ϵ ą 0 such that
                                      χpZi q
                                                    ď ´ϵ.
                                  #t2-cells in Zi u
Rearranging the inequality and using the fact that χpZi q ě 1 ´ b1 pZi q ě 1 ´ b1 pZ0 q,
we may obtain a uniform bound on the number of 2-cells:
                                                   b1 pZ0 q ´ 1
                             #t2-cells in Zi u ď                .
                                                        ϵ
118                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


Since each Zi is irreducible, every 0-cell and every 1-cell in Zi is traversed by the
attaching map of some 2-cell, implying a uniform bound on the number of cells in Zi .
Hence, all but finitely many of the immersions Zi í X are the same. Being careful
with the direct limit, this implies that H is finitely presented. To obtain coherence
of π1 pXq, one needs to combine this fact with Grushko’s theorem. With a more
careful analysis, Louder–Wilton establish a much stronger theorem on subgroups of
one-relator groups with uniform negative immersions, [LW24, Theorems A & B].
     Theorem 2.5.28. Let G be a 2-free one-relator group. Or more generally, let
G “ π1 pXq with X a finite 2-complex with uniform negative immersions. Then G
is coherent and the following properties hold:
      (1) For any integer n, there are only finitely many conjugacy classes of finitely
          generated one-ended subgroups H ď G with b1 pHq ď n.
      (2) Every finitely generated one-ended subgroup H ď G is co-hopfian, in the
          sense that H is not isomorphic to any proper subgroup of itself.
      (3) Every finitely generated non-cyclic subgroup H ď G is large, in the sense
          that it contains a finite index subgroup that surjects a rank two free group.
     By Theorem 2.5.14, Theorem 2.5.28 applies to a finite index subgroup of a one-
relator group with torsion. In particular, Item 1 from the above hold for one-relator
groups with torsion. The proof that one-relator groups with torsion are coherent
was obtained previously by Louder–Wilton in [LW20] and, independently, by Wise
in [Wis22].
     We remark that coherence, Item 1 and Item 2 are properties shared by (one-
ended) locally quasi-convex hyperbolic groups, see work of Sela [Sel97, Theorem
4.4] and Kapovich–Weidmann [KW04, Corollary 1.5]. In fact Wilton has con-
jectured that all finite 2-complexes with uniform negative immersions have locally
quasi-convex hyperbolic fundamental group in [Wil24a, Conjecture 12.9].
     2.5.4.2. Homological coherence and non-positive immersions. The same strat-
egy employed in Section 2.5.4.1 does not work for non-positive immersions. Indeed,
except for possibly the coherence, none of the conclusions from Theorem 2.5.28
hold for finite 2-complexes with non-positive immersions. In order to get around
this, we will need to consider a weaker property than coherence.
     A finitely generated group G “ F {N has type FP2 pZq if any one of the following
equivalent conditions hold:
      (1) Its relation module Nab is finitely generated as a ZG-module.
      (2) The augmentation ideal IZG ď ZG is finitely presented.
      (3) The trivial ZG-module Z admits a projective resolution P˚ Ñ Z with Pi
           finitely generated for i “ 0, 1, 2.
      (4) There is a surjective homomorphism ϕ : H Ñ G from a finitely presented
           group H such that H1 pkerpϕq, Zq “ 0.
Definition 2.5.29. A group G is said to be homologically coherent if all of its
finitely generated subgroups have type FP2 pZq.
    These definitions naturally extend to arbitrary rings R and to dimensions other
than 2. Note that homological coherence of a group G follows from coherence of
the group ring ZG by the second definition of FP2 pZq.
    A priori, it seems that homological coherence should be a weaker property than
coherence. Indeed, there are well known examples of groups that have type FP2 pZq
                             2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                                119


but are not finitely presented by work of Bestvina–Brady [BB97]. There are also
examples which distinguish FP2 pZq from FP2 pKq where K is any field by Bieri–
Strebel [BS80]. However, it turns out that within a very large class of groups the
two notions coincide. See [JZL23, Theorem 4.5], stated below.
    Theorem 2.5.30. Let CG be the smallest class of groups containing all coher-
ent groups and that is closed under subgroups, finite extensions, amalgamated free
products, HNN-extensions and directed unions. Then within CG, the homologically
coherent groups coincide with the coherent groups.
    Just as in the case of group rings from Section 2.4.5, homological coherence of
a group can be shown via a criterion which depends on an embedding of the group
ring into a division ring. The following is [JZL23, Corollary 3.4].
Proposition 2.5.31. Let R be a commutative ring and let G be finitely generated
group with cdR pGq ď 2. If RrGs ãÑ D is an embedding into a division ring, then
                   G has type FP2 pRq ðñ dimD H2 pG, Dq ă 8.
In particular, if D has weak dimension at most one, then G is homologically coher-
ent.
    Now let us plug into Lemma 2.5.27 a 2-complex X with non-positive immersions
and a finitely generated non-cyclic and freely indecomposable subgroup H ď π1 pXq.
We have a sequence of immersions
                          Z0 í Z1 í . . . í Zk í . . . í X
such that the following properties hold:
     (1) The homomorphisms π1 pZi q Ñ π1 pZi`1 q Ñ H ď π1 pXq are surjective for
         all i.
     (2) limiÑ8 π1 pZi q “ H.
     (3) Zi is compact for all i.
     (4) χpZi q ď 0 and Zi is aspherical for all i (see Theorem 2.5.7).
                               ´      ¯
                                  p1q
In particular, letting F “ π1 Z0        and Ni “ kerpF Ñ π1 pZi qq, we obtain a dual
sequence
                         N0 ãÑ N1 ãÑ . . . ãÑ Nk ãÑ . . . ãÑ F
with the following dual properties:
     (1) The homomorphisms Ni Ñ Ni`1 Ñ kerpF Ñ Hq ď F are injective for all
         i.             Ť
     (2) limiÑ8 Ni “ iPN Ni “ kerpF Ñ Hq “ N .
     (3) The relation module pNi qab for π1 pZi q “ F {Ni is a finitely generated (left)
         Zrπ1 pZi qs-module for all i.
     (4) If D is a division ring which is also a right ZrHs-module, then
                      dimD pD bZrF {Ni s pNi qab q ´ rkpF q ` 1 ď 0
          for all i.
This last inequality comes from the fact that each Zi is aspherical and so we have
the following projective resolution of Z as a trivial Zrπ1 pZi qs-module:
                            À
     0        pNi qab          sPS Zrπ1 pZi qs      Zrπ1 pZi qs       Z     0.
where here S Ă F is a free basis. See Section 2.4.1.
120                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


    Since π1 pXq is locally indicable by Theorem 2.5.7, we may use Theorem 2.4.14
to obtain a division ring embedding QrHs ãÑ D. When X is a one-relator complex,
we may instead use the Lewin–Lewin division ring from Theorem 2.4.13. We have
                                         `                  ˘
         dimD pD bZH Nab q ď sup dimD D bZrπ1 pZi qs pNi qab ď rkpF q ´ 1.
                                iPN
Since H2 pH, Dq is a D-submodule of the finite dimensional D-module D bQH Nab ,
it is itself finite dimensional. Hence, we obtain the following theorem by Proposi-
tion 2.5.31. This is [JZL23, Theorem 1.2].
    Theorem 2.5.32. If X is a 2-complex with non-positive immersions, then
π1 pXq is homologically coherent.
    The coherence of torsion-free one-relator groups now follows by applying The-
orems 2.5.5, 2.5.30 and 2.5.32.
    It remains an open question of Wise as to whether all 2-complexes with non-
positive immersions are coherent, see [Wis20, Conjecture 12.11]. It is also open as
to whether the rational group ring of the fundamental group of a 2-complex with
non-positive immersions is coherent, see [JZL23, Conjecture 6].
    2.5.4.3. Effective coherence. A coherent group G is effectively coherent if there
is an algorithm which, given as input a finite subset S Ă G, computes a finite
presentation for the subgroup xSy ď G. For now, the following is wide open.
Problem 2.5.33. Prove that one-relator groups are effectively coherent.
     Cyclically pinched and cyclically conjugated one-relator groups are known to
be effectively coherent by work of Kapovich–Myasnikov–Weidmann [KWM05].
They show that graphs of effectively coherent groups with virtually polycyclic edge
groups, and some extra conditions, are effectively coherent. Unfortunately, the same
techniques do not work when applied to graphs of groups with free edge groups.
New ideas will be needed for one-relator groups.
     The proof that one-relator groups are coherent is very non-constructive and
so unfortunately does not shed light on further structure of finitely generated sub-
groups of one-relator groups. Thus, in order to approach Problem 2.5.33, it will be
necessary to understand the subgroup structure of one-relator groups more explic-
itly. Even the case of one-relator groups F {xxwyy with πpwq ě 3 is open and was
explicitly proposed by Louder–Wilton in [LW24].
     2.5.5. Virtual algebraic fibring and generalisations. Recall from Sec-
tion 2.3.3 that a group G algebraically fibres if there is a finitely generated normal
subgroup N ŸG such that G{N – Z. We say a group G virtually algebraically fibres
if it has a finite index subgroup H ď G which algebraically fibred. We saw with
Brown’s criterion that we may characterise precisely when a one-relator group alge-
braically fibres. Determining when it is virtually algebraically fibred is significantly
more difficult.
     Dawid Kielak obtained a powerful criterion in [Kie20] for when a group with
the RFRS property virtually algebraically fibres. A group G is RFRS if it admits a
sequence
      Ş of finite index subgroups Ni Ÿ G such that Ni`1 ď kerpNi Ñ H1 pNi , Qqq
and     Ni “ 1. The main class of examples of RFRS groups are right angled
Artin groups and all their subgroups. In particular, fundamental groups of special
cube complexes are RFRS. Kielak proved that an infinite RFRS group G virtually
                                     p2q
algebraically fibres if and only if b1 pGq “ 0.
                             2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                               121


    An immediate consequence of Kielak’s result and Dicks–Linnell’s computation
of the L2 -Betti numbers of one-relator groups is that If G is a virtually RFRS
torsion-free two-generator one-relator group, then G is virtually algebraically fibred.
Since one-relator groups are coherent, the fibre subgroup will be a finitely presented
subgroup. Using a result of Fel’dman [Fel71, Theorem 2.4], we may conclude that
the fibre subgroup drops in cohomological dimension and so is a free group by a
result of Stallings [Sta68]. These results together imply the following statement.
     Theorem 2.5.34. If G is a torsion-free two-generator one-relator group that is
virtually RFRS, then G is virtually {finitely generated free}-by-cyclic.
     Note that by [Lüc02, Theorem 7.2], a virtually algebraically fibred group G
      p2q
has b1 pGq “ 0. Hence, if G is a one-relator group that virtually algebraically
fibres, then G must be two-generator and be torsion-free by Theorem 2.4.10.
     An interesting variation of the virtual algebraic fibration problem which has no
                 p2q
restriction on b1 is the following. Given a group G with cdpGq “ n, when does
G admit a finite index subgroup which embeds as a subgroup of a group H that
algebraically fibres over a group N with cdpN q “ n ´ 1? For one-relator groups this
amounts to asking when they admit finite index subgroups that embed in {finitely
generated free}-by-cyclic groups. Under strong geometric hypotheses, Kielak and
the first author proved a criterion in [KL24] for when a one-relator group admits
a positive answer to this question, solving a problem of Baumslag from [Bau86].
    Theorem 2.5.35. Let G be a one-relator group. If G is hyperbolic and virtually
special, then G has a finite index subgroup H that is a subgroup of a {finitely
generated free}-by-cyclic group.
     The class of {finitely generated free}-by-cyclic groups form an extensively stud-
ied class of groups with a deep and rich theory, connecting dynamics, geometry and
algebra. Such groups lie within the slightly more general class of free-by-cyclic
groups, where here the free part is not necessarily finitely generated. In this gen-
erality, less is known although most results for {finitely generated free}-by-cyclic
groups can be upgraded to the more general case. Weakening the assumptions from
Theorem 2.5.35, Fisher proved in [Fis24] that any virtually RFRS one-relator group
is virtually free-by-cyclic.
    Theorem 2.5.36. Let G be a one-relator group. If G is virtually RFRS, then
G is virtually free-by-cyclic.
     Replacing the hypothesis that G be a one-relator group with the hypothesis
       p2q
that b2 pGq “ 0 and cdQ pGq ď 2, Theorem 2.5.35 and Theorem 2.5.36 remain
valid. There are also similar statements for groups of arbitrary finite cohomological
dimension in [KL24, Fis24].
     Chong–Wise show in [CW24] that a finitely generated ascending HNN-extension
of a free group is a subgroup of an ascending HNN-extension of a finitely generated
free group. The slight mismatch between the conclusions of Theorem 2.5.35 and
Theorem 2.5.36 would be resolved if a similar statement was proven for free-by-
cyclic groups (see [CW24, Conjecture 1.2]):
Conjecture 2.5.37 (Chong–Wise). If G is a finitely generated free-by-cyclic group,
then G is a subgroup of a {finitely generated free}-by-cyclic group.
122                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


     We do not know to what extent Theorem 2.5.36 characterises which one-relator
groups are virtually free-by-cyclic. Button showed in [But19, Corollary 8] that
there are residually finite one-relator groups which are not virtually free-by-cyclic
(not even virtually an ascending HNN-extension of a free group). Wise made the
following conjecture in [Wis20, Conjecture 17.8].
Conjecture 2.5.38 (Wise). If G is a hyperbolic one-relator group, then G is vir-
tually free-by-cyclic.
    2.5.6. Mel’nikov’s conjecture, finite index subgroups and infinite in-
dex subgroups. A well-known conjecture in the theory of one-relator groups is
due to Mel’nikov, first stated in the 1980 edition of the Kourovka notebook [KM18,
Problem 7.36]: if G is a residually finite group in which all finite index subgroups are
one-relator, then G is either free or the fundamental group of a closed surface. The
entry in the Kourovka notebook notes that a counterexample was quickly provided
by Churkin: the Baumslag–Solitar groups BSp1, nq each have all their finite index
subgroups isomorphic to BSp1, mq for various values of m. However, the following
modification is still open.
Conjecture 2.5.39 (Mel’nikov). If G is a residually finite group in which all finite
index subgroups are one-relator, then G is either free, isomorphic to BSp1, nq for
some n or the fundamental group of a closed surface.
     A group satisfying the assumptions of Conjecture 2.5.39 is known as a Mel’nikov
group. Some progress on Conjecture 2.5.39 has been made. For instance, Curran
studied finite index subgroups of one-relator groups with surface-like presentations
in [Cur89], characterising when they are actually surface groups. Ciobanu–Fine–
Rosenberger confirm Conjecture 2.5.39 for all cyclically and conjugacy pinched
one-relator groups in [CFR13]. Gardam–Kielak–Logan showed in [GKL23] that
2-generator Mel’nikov groups satisfy the conclusion of Conjecture 2.5.39. Jaikin-
Zapirain–Morales showed in [JZM24b] that Mel’nikov groups generated by at least
three elements are 2-free, so in particular they have (uniform) negative immersions
by Theorem 2.5.16. Finally, we mention that the pro-p version of Mel’nikov’s origi-
nal conjecture has been known to hold for a long time by work of Dummit–Labute
[DL83], where the pro-p analogue of surface groups are known as Demušhkin
groups.
     Several variations of Mel’nikov’s conjecture have also been posed. For instance,
Fine–Rosenberger–Wienke asked [KM18, Problem 20.22] whether a one-relator
group in which every infinite index subgroup is free is either free or the fundamental
group of a closed surface. This was also confirmed for two-generator one-relator
groups in [GKL23]. Wilton later confirmed this variation for all one-relator groups,
see [Wil24b, Theorem D].
    Theorem 2.5.40. If G is an infinite one-relator group that is not free or a
surface group, then G contains an infinite index non-free subgroup.
    When G is a one-relator group generated by at least three elements, Wilton
actually shows that there is a finitely generated non-free subgroup of infinite in-
dex. When G is also hyperbolic and cubulated (for instance when G is 2-free, see
Section 2.6.3), this subgroup is also quasi-convex. Whether this stronger prop-
erty holds also for two-generator one-relator groups is an open question of Wilton’s
[Wil24b, Question 5.4].
                             2.5. SUBGROUP PROPERTIES                              123


Question 2.5.41 (Wilton). If G is a two-generator one-relator group which is not
free and is not isomorphic to BSp1, nq for any n, does G contain a finitely generated
non-free subgroup of infinite index?
    A related and well-known conjecture is Gromov’s surface subgroup conjecture
which predicts that every one-ended hyperbolic group contains a surface subgroup.
Wilton made a significant contribution to this conjecture in [Wil18] when he con-
firmed the surface subgroup conjecture for graphs of free groups with cyclic edge
groups. Many special cases were established previously by several authors, the
reader is directed to consult Wilton’s article for details. The following is a special
case of Wilton’s theorem.
    Theorem 2.5.42. If G is a non-free cyclically pinched or cyclically conjugated
one-relator group, then either G contains a BSp1, nq subgroup for some n, or G is
hyperbolic and contains a quasi-convex surface subgroup.
    Whether an analogous statement holds for all one-relator groups is wide open,
although Calegari–Walker showed that random one-relator groups do contain sur-
face subgroups [CW15, Theorem 5.2.4].
    2.5.7. SQ-universality, virtual Betti numbers and largeness. A group
G is SQ-universal if every countable group can be embedded in a quotient of G.
Peter Neumann made the following conjecture in [Neu73].
Conjecture 2.5.43 (P. Neumann). A one-relator group is either solvable or SQ-
universal.
     Note that a solvable one-relator group is either cyclic or isomorphic to BSp1, nq
for some n ‰ 0, see work of Čebotar1 [Che71, Theorem 3].
     Sacerdote–Schupp [SS74a] established a criterion for an HNN-extension to be
SQ-universal (which is almost identical to the Minasyan–Osin criterion for acylin-
drical hyperbolicity from [MO15]) and used it to show that any one-relator group
generated by at least three elements is SQ-universal. Currently, the most general
result regarding SQ-universality of one-relator groups is due to Button–Kropholler
[BK16]. One of their statements is conditional on a conjecture which was resolved
by Mutanguha in [Mut21], so below we state the unconditional statement.
    Theorem 2.5.44. If G is a one-relator group, then either G is SQ-universal or
G is residually finite and b1 pHq “ 1 for all finite index subgroups H ď G.
    The virtual nth Betti number of a group G is
            vbn pGq “ sup tbn pHq | H is a finite index subgroup of Gu.
By Theorem 2.5.44, Neumann’s conjecture reduces to the case of residually finite
one-relator groups G with vb1 pGq “ 1.
Conjecture 2.5.45. A residually finite one-relator group with vb1 pGq “ 1 is either
infinite cyclic or BSp1, nq for some n ‰ 0.
     In [BK16] the authors show that any such group that is not SQ-universal must
split as a strict ascending HNN-extensions of a finitely generated free group and
must also contain some BSp1, nq for n ě 2.
Problem 2.5.46. Characterise one-relator groups G with vbi pGq ă 8 for i “ 1, 2.
124                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


      Fruchter–Morales characterise when a cyclically pinched and cyclically conju-
gated one-relator group G has vb2 pGq ă 8 in [FM24]: either G is free or the
fundamental group of a closed surface.
      A property related to SQ-universality is that of largeness. A group G is large
if it admits a finite index subgroup which surjects onto the free group of rank two.
Edjvet–Pride pose the problem of determining which torsion-free two-generator one-
relator groups are large [EP84, Problem 9]. Baumslag–Pride had shown previously
in [BP78, BP79] that all non-elementary one-relator groups with torsion and all
one-relator groups generated by at least three elements are large. In fact, something
much stronger is true for a one-relator group F {xxwyy when πpwq ‰ 2: all finitely
generated non-elementary subgroups are large by the results in Section 2.5.4.1.
      A large group is SQ-universal, but the converse is not necessarily true. For
example, BSp2, 3q is an SQ-universal group that is not large (see [EP84]). It is not
clear whether there is a natural conjectural picture for which one-relator groups
are large as the property appears far more subtle than SQ-universality. We direct
the reader to the work of Jack Button for many partial results, see for instance
[But10, But11].

                           2.6. Geometric properties
     Geometric group theory is the study of groups via their actions by isometries on
metric spaces. CATp0q cube complexes and hyperbolic spaces are two rich classes
of spaces that have taken centre stage in geometric group theory since Gromov’s
famous essay [Gro87]. If a one-relator group G acts in some non-trivial way on
one of these spaces, then a wealth of new tools become available to study G and
often this leads to significant constraints on its structure. In this section we shall
go into depth on what is known about geometric actions of one-relator groups.
     Metric spaces will always be assumed to be proper and geodesic and our actions
will be geometric, unless stated otherwise. Recall that a geometric action is one
that is by isometries and is properly discontinuous and cocompact.
     2.6.1. Hyperbolic one-relator groups. A group G is hyperbolic if it acts
geometrically on a hyperbolic metric space. Introduced by Gromov in [Gro87],
their structure is now well-understood enough that their automorphism groups have
been completely computed and their isomorphism problem has been solved, two
things which are currently far from true for one-relator groups. A simple obstruction
for a group to be hyperbolic is the presence of Baumslag–Solitar subgroups BSp1, nq.
A famous conjecture of Gersten’s predicts that this is the only obstruction for one-
relator groups.
Conjecture 2.6.1 (Gersten’s conjecture). If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group
containing no Baumslag–Solitar subgroups BSp1, nq for any n ‰ 0, then G is hy-
perbolic.
   In this section we cover recent progress on Conjecture 2.6.1, mostly based on
work from [Lin22a, Lin24a].
Remark 2.6.2. A more general version of Gersten’s conjecture was open until
recently, when Italiano–Martelli–Migliorini showed in [IMM23] that there exist
groups G of type F , containing no Baumslag–Solitar subgroups, but that are not
hyperbolic. Their examples have cohomological dimension four and arise from a
fibration of a hyperbolic 5-manifold over S 1 .
                             2.6. GEOMETRIC PROPERTIES                                125


    It is still open as to whether there exist finitely presented groups of coho-
mological dimension two without Baumslag–Solitar subgroups that are not hyper-
bolic. Groups of cohomological dimension two are quite special: Gersten proved
that finitely presented subgroups of finitely presented hyperbolic groups of coho-
mological dimension two are themselves hyperbolic [Ger96]. Combining [Ger96,
Corollary 7.8] with the coherence of one-relator groups, we have the following.
    Theorem 2.6.3. If G is a hyperbolic one-relator group, then every finitely
generated subgroup of G is hyperbolic.
    An early geometric result for one-relator groups is known as Newman’s spelling
theorem [New68a], see Section 1.6.1. A corollary of Newman’s result is that a one-
relator group with torsion G “ F {xxwn yy is hyperbolic. Below is a slight strength-
ening of Newman’s result, and a generalisation of the Freiheitssatz, which was
obtained by Schupp in [Sch76b]. Here when we say a word u mentions a letter s,
we mean that s or s´1 appears in u.
     Theorem 2.6.4. Let n ě 1 be a positive integer, let F pSq be a free group,
w P F pSq a cyclically reduced word that is not a proper power and consider the one-
relator group G “ F pSq{xxwn yy. Let A Ă S be a subset of the generators, v P F pSq
a freely reduced word and suppose that w and v mention a letter in S ´ A.
     If v, as an element of G, is contained in the Magnus subgroup xAy ď G, then
v contains a subword un´1 u0 where u is a cyclic conjugate of w or w´1 and u0 is
a prefix of u which mentions each letter from S ´ A that appears in w.
     Setting A “ H, Newman’s theorem shows that the presentation of a one-relator
group with torsion is actually a Dehn presentation (after symmetrising) and so the
uniform word problem and conjugacy problem can both be solved very quickly in
practice. More generally, Newman’s result shows that we can also solve membership
in xAy using Dehn’s algorithm. In particular, this implies that Magnus subgroups
are actually convex in the sense that the shortest words over the generating set S
that represent elements in a Magnus subgroup xAy, must actually be words over A.
Schupp’s strengthening yields the same consequences when applied to torsion-free
one-relator groups whose relator contains appearances of letters that are sufficiently
far apart. For instance, it applies to surface relators, relators of the form an bn cn dn
and many more.
     Although in general hyperbolic one-relator group might not have a presentation
with the properties from Theorem 2.6.4, it is known that Magnus subgroups are
always at least quasi-convex. That is, geodesics in a hyperbolic one-relator group
between two elements in a Magnus subgroup always remain uniformly close to
elements in the Magnus subgroup. This is proved in [Lin24a], building on work
from [Lin22a]. Note that for hyperbolic groups, quasi-convexity is equivalent to
being undistorted.
    Theorem 2.6.5. Magnus subgroups of hyperbolic one-relator groups are quasi-
convex.
    A hyperbolic one-relator group may have many distorted (free) subgroups, see
[Kap99] for an explicit example.
    The Bestvina–Feighn combination theorem [BF92] is an important tool that
can be used to show when a HNN-extension of a hyperbolic group is again hyper-
bolic. The combination theorem states that if G “ H˚ψ is a HNN-extension with H
126                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


hyperbolic, both associated subgroups quasi-convex in H and such that the HNN-
extension has a property called flaring annuli, then G is hyperbolic. Conversely,
Gersten showed in [Ger98, Theorem 6.4 & Corollary 6.7] that if H is hyperbolic,
both associated subgroups are quasi-convex in H and G is hyperbolic, then the
HNN-extension has flaring annuli.
     By the above discussion, if G – H˚ψ is a one-relator splitting, either H is not
hyperbolic in which case G is not hyperbolic by Theorem 2.6.3, or H is hyperbolic,
both associated subgroups are quasi-convex by Theorem 2.6.5 and so G is hyperbolic
if and only if annuli flare in H˚ψ . As such, if one can understand annuli in one-
relator splittings, then in principal one understands when a one-relator group is
hyperbolic or not. Unfortunately, flaring annuli turns out to be a tricky condition
to check. See the article of Kapovich [Kap99] for an explicit use of the combination
theorem to show that a specific one-relator group is hyperbolic.
     On the other hand, if G acts acylindrically on its Bass–Serre tree, then G
automatically has no flaring annuli. Hence, combining this with Theorem 2.3.5
and an inductive argument on one-relator hierarchies, in [Lin22a] it was shown
that 2-free one-relator groups are hyperbolic. In [Lin24a], a slightly more general
statement was established.
    Theorem 2.6.6. Let G “ F {xxwyy be a one-relator group. If two-generator
one-relator subgroups of G are hyperbolic, then G is hyperbolic.
    A more refined statement than Theorem 2.6.6 reducing Gersten’s conjecture to
two specific families of two-generator one-relator groups was proven in [Lin24a].
We describe these families in the next section. Combining Newman’s theorem and
Theorem 2.6.6 with Theorem 2.5.16, we have a clean condition for hyperbolicity.
Corollary 2.6.7. If G “ F {xxwyy with πpwq ‰ 2, then G is hyperbolic.
    If G “ F {xxwyy with πpwq “ 2, recall that by Theorem 2.5.19 there is a two-
generator subgroup H ď F containing w such that every non-free two-generator
subgroup of G is conjugate into P “ H{xxwyy ď G, the w-subgroup. Thus, in order
to apply Theorem 2.6.6 to such a one-relator group, one only needs to check that
P is hyperbolic. Louder–Wilton conjectured that in fact G should be hyperbolic
relative to P in [LW22, Conjecture 1.9], this remains open.
Conjecture 2.6.8 (Louder–Wilton). If G “ F {xxwyy with πpwq “ 2, then G is
hyperbolic relative to its w-subgroup P ď G.
    A well-known problem asks whether hyperbolic groups are residually finite.
This is not known for hyperbolic one-relator groups.
Question 2.6.9. Are hyperbolic one-relator groups residually finite?
     We close this section with some remarks on small cancellation conditions for
one-relator groups. Pride showed that one-relator groups F {xxwn yy with torsion
satisfy the small cancellation condition Cp2nq [Pri83]. However, it is possible that
they do not satisfy Cp2n ` 1q and may not even satisfy T p4q when n “ 2. More
refined small cancellation conditions were developed by Ivanov–Schupp and applied
to characterise hyperbolicity of certain families of one-relator groups, not necessarily
with torsion, in [IS98]. Blufstein–Minian introduce a small cancellation condition
T 1 in [BM22] and use it to prove even more one-relator groups are hyperbolic.
Cashen–Hoffmann [CH23] implemented several hyperbolicity tests for one-relator
                            2.6. GEOMETRIC PROPERTIES                             127




                  Figure 8. The 2{3-Christoffel word is a2 bab.


groups, including the small cancellation conditions mentioned above, and produced
a database of one-relator groups of relator length up to 17, verifying hyperbolicity
when possible. They found many one-relator groups whose hyperbolicity could not
be confirmed with any known small cancellation conditions. Finally, Ol’shanskiĭ
proved in [Ol’92] that one-relator groups are (exponentially) generically C 1 p1{6q
and hence hyperbolic.
     2.6.1.1. Primitive extension groups. In order to describe our two families of
one-relator groups, we shall need to introduce Christoffel words, so called as they
were first studied by Christoffel in [Chr73].
     Let F “ F pa, bq be the free group of rank two and let p{q P Qě0 Y t`8u. Let
Γ Ă R2 be the Cayley graph for Z2 with generating set ta, bu, the images of a, b
under the abelianisation map F Ñ Z2 . The generator a is the vertex p1, 0q while
the generator b is the vertex p0, 1q. Now let L Ă R2 be the line passing through
the origin with slope p{q. Now let I Ñ Γ be the path connecting p0, 0q with the
first integral point on L, not going above L and such that the region enclosed by
L and the image of this path contains no integral points in its interior. Then the
p{q-Christoffel word, which we denote by
                                     prp{q pa, bq
is the word over ta, bu traced out by this path. See Fig. 8 for an illustration.
     The notation for the Christoffel words comes from the fact that they are all
primitive elements of F pa, bq. Nielsen showed that the abelianisation map F Ñ Z2
induces a bijection between conjugacy classes of primitive elements in F and prim-
itive elements in Z2 [Nie17]. Osborne–Zieschang showed in [OZ81] that the
Christoffel words and their inverses provide a complete set of conjugacy class repre-
sentatives for the primitive elements of F . This means that if w P F is a primitive
128                                   2. RECENT PROGRESS


element, then w is conjugate to some prp{q pa, bq˘1 . Moreover, p{q is precisely the
exponent sum of b in w divided by the exponent sum of a in w.
    The two types of primitive extension groups are the two-generator one-relator
groups with presentations:
(39)                            Ep{q px, yq “ xa, b | prp{q px, yqy
(40)                          Fp{q px, y, zq “ xa, b | prp{q pxy, zqy
where
               Ai,j “ xb´i abi , b´i´1 abi`1 , . . . , b´j abj y   where i ă j P N
                  x P A0,k´1 ´ A1,k´1
                  y P A1,k ´ A1,k´1
                  z P A1,k´1 ´ 1
and txxy, xyyu is a malnormal family in case (39) and xzy is malnormal in case (40).
There are actually a couple of extra conditions on the words x, y, z in [Lin24a],
but these are just to ensure that there is no other way to express the relator as a
primitive word over words which violate the malnormality conditions. The upshot
of these extra conditions is that when we go down one step in the hierarchy for
Ep{q or Fp{q we reach a 2-free one-relator group, see [Lin24a, Theorem 3.7].
    Note that since prp{q p´, ´q is a primitive word, this implies that in Ep{q px, yq
we have xx, yy – Z and in Fp{q pxy, zq we have xxy, zy – Z.
    The motivation behind introducing these groups is the main theorem from
[Lin24a] which reduces the problem of determining which one-relator groups are
hyperbolic to determining which primitive extension groups are hyperbolic.
     Theorem 2.6.10. A one-relator group G “ F {xxwyy is hyperbolic if and only
if all its primitive extension subgroups are hyperbolic. In particular, Gersten’s con-
jecture is true if it is true for primitive extension groups.
       Let us mention some examples of primitive extension groups.
         ‚ If p, q ą 0 are coprime integers, then we have
                                BSpp, ˘qq – Ep{q pa, b´1 a˘1 bq.
            We can see this as follows. We have
              Ep{q pa, b´1 a˘1 bq – xa0 , a1 , b | b´1 a0 b “ a1 , prp{q pa0 , a˘1
                                                                                1 qy.

           We have F pa0 , a1 q{xxprp{q pa0 , a˘1
                                               1 qyy – Z and so Ep{q pa, b
                                                                          ´1 ˘1
                                                                            a bq splits
           as a HNN-extension over Z where the associated isomorphism is given by
           pZ Ñ ˘qZ.
         ‚ Any one-relator group G – F {xxwyy with non-empty BNS-invariant is a
           primitive extension group. This is explained more in detail in [Lin24a,
           Example 5.5]. More precisely, if G has non-empty BNS-invariant, then
           G – Ep{1 pa, yq for some p, y.
               Note that such groups have been shown by Mutanguha [Mut21] to
           be hyperbolic if and only if they contain no Baumslag–Solitar subgroups.
    The presentations (39) and (40) may seem a little mysterious, but there are
very explicit graphs of groups decompositions which express their structure better.
                              2.6. GEOMETRIC PROPERTIES                                          129


    The primitive extension groups Ep{q px, yq have the following graph of groups
decomposition:
                                            A0,k´1 “A1,k




  A0,k´1                                    A1,k´1 ˚ xty                                      A1,k
            A1,k´1 ˚xxy“A1,k´1 ˚xtp y                           A1,k´1 ˚xtq y“A1,k´1 ˚xyy

where the top isomorphism is given by shifting b´i abi Ñ b´i´1 abi`1 for each 0 ď
i ă k and the lower isomorphisms are given by the identity on A1,k´1 and by x Ñ tp
and y Ñ tq .
    The primitive extension groups Fp{q pxy, zq have the following graph of groups
decomposition:
                                            A0,k´1 “A1,k




      A0,k´1                                     H                                     A1,k
                  A1,k´1 ˚xxy“A1,k´1 ˚xxy                  A1,k´1 ˚xyy“A1,k´1 ˚xyy

where H splits as:
                                xzy“xtp y              xtq y“xxyy
                     A1,k´1                     xty                    xx, yy

Note that we have x´1 zx “ yzy ´1 in H. Moreover, since xy is primitive in the free
group xx, yy, we see that we have
                               ˆ                ˙
                           H – A1,k´1    ˚ p xty ˚ Z
                                                xzy“xt y

In light of Theorem 2.6.10 and its proof, understanding the geometry of primi-
tive extension groups appears to be an important goal in order to understand the
geometry of all one-relator groups.
Problem 2.6.11. Characterise non flaring annuli in the sense of [BF92] of prim-
itive extension groups with respect to the above graph of groups structures.
    2.6.2. CATp0q and cubulable one-relator groups. A group G is a CATp0q
group if it acts geometrically on a CATp0q space. Roughly speaking, a metric space
is CATp0q if its geodesic triangles are not fatter than Euclidean triangles with the
same edge lengths. We refer the reader to [BH99] for a more formal definition
and an in depth treatment of the theory. A group is a CATp0q group if it acts
geometrically on a CATp0q space.
    A class of CATp0q spaces which are easy to construct and have particularly
nice combinatorial properties are CATp0q cube complexes. A cube complex is a
combinatorial complex built out of Euclidean cubes which are glued to each other
isometrically along faces. A group is cubulable if it acts properly and cocompactly
on a CATp0q cube complex. A cube complex is non-positively curved if the link of
every vertex, which is a simplicial complex, is flag. In other words, if the link of
each vertex has no missing faces. The universal cover of a non-positively curved
130                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


cube complex is CATp0q by Gromov’s well-known link condition. The reader is
directed to [Wis21] for details.
     The question of which one-relator groups are CATp0q appears to be more sub-
tle than the hyperbolicity question. A CATp0q group cannot contain unbalanced
Baumslag–Solitar subgroups BSpm, nq where m ‰ ˘n. But a CATp0q group can
contain balanced BSpm, ˘mq subgroups. Gardam–Woodhouse considered the fol-
lowing family of one-relator groups in [GW19]:

                    Rp,q “ xx, t | t´1 x´2q tx2p´1 t´1 x´2q tx2p`1 y

They showed that R1,1 contains as an index two subgroup the {fg free}-by-cyclic
group that Gersten showed was not CATp0q in [Ger94]. In particular, R1,1 does
not contain any unbalanced Baumslag–Solitar subgroups, but is not CATp0q. The
groups Rp,q have some further interesting properties we believe are worth noting.

     Theorem 2.6.12. If p, q ą 0 are positive integers, the groups Rp,q have the
following properties:
      (1) Rp,q does not contain any unbalanced Baumslag–Solitar subgroups.
      (2) Rp,q is residually finite if and only if q | 2p.
      (3) If p ă q, then Rp,q is CATp0q.
      (4) If p “ q, then Rp,q is virtually {fg free}-by-cyclic and is not CATp0q.
      (5) If p ą q, then Rp,q has Dehn function » n2 log2 p2p{qq and does not act
          freely on any CATp0q cube complex.

    The first and the third fact are due to Gardam who introduced these groups in
[Gar17, Theorem G]. The second fact is due to Button [But19, Corollary 7]. The
fourth fact follows from a slight generalisation of Gardam–Woodhouses argument
for R1,1 . The claimed finite index subgroup is the kernel of the map Rp,p Ñ Z{2pZ
given by x Ñ 1 and t Ñ 0. Then the statement for when p ą q is [GW19, Theorem
A]. Gardam–Wodhouse deduce this last fact by showing that Rp,q contains as an
index two subgroup a snowflake group, see work of Brady–Bridson [BB00]. Note
that admitting a free action on a CATp0q space is much weaker than admitting a
geometric action.
    Other examples of CATp0q one-relator groups with interesting properties are:
       ‚ Hsu–Wise showed in [HW10] that graphs of free groups with cyclic edge
         groups are CATp0q (cubulable in fact) if and only if they do not con-
         tain unbalanced Baumslag–Solitar subgroups. In particular, all cyclically
         pinched one-relator groups are CATp0q and a cyclically conjugated one-
         relator group xA, t | t´1 ut “ vy is CATp0q if and only if there is no
         w P F pAq such that u and v are conjugate to wm , wn respectively with
         m ‰ ˘n.
       ‚ Infinite one-relator groups with non-trivial centre are CATp0q. Murasugi
         showed in [Mur64] that they are all {fg free}-by-cyclic. Pietrowski showed
         [Pie74] that they all split as graphs of infinite cyclic groups. Since {fg
         free}-by-cyclic groups cannot contain unbalanced Baumslag–Solitar sub-
         groups, Hsu–Wise’s result [HW10] implies the claim.
       ‚ Lauer–Wise showed in [LW13] that any finitely generated one-relator
         group F {xxwn yy acts properly on a CATp0q cube complex if n ě 2 and
         acts cocompactly if n ě 4.
                            2.6. GEOMETRIC PROPERTIES                              131


       ‚ Hydra groups
                           Hk “ xa, t | rr. . . ra, ts, . . .s, tsy
                                                    l jh n
                                                           k
          introduced by Dison–Riley in [DR13] are CATp0q, biautomatic and {fg
          free}-by-cyclic groups which contain free subgroups with distortion func-
          tion » Ak , where Ak is the k th Ackermann function, defined recursively
                                         pnq
          by A1 pnq “ 2n, Ak`1 pnq “ Ak p1q.
        ‚ Brady–Crisp [BC07] proved that the one-relator group xa, b | aba2 “
          b2 y – F3 ¸ Z is CATp´1q (and hence is hyperbolic), but its CATp0q
          dimension is two, whereas its CATp´1q dimension is three.
     In the next section we shall see that any one-relator group F {xxwyy with πpwq ě
3 is virtually cocompactly cubulated. The following conjecture should provide more
cubulated one-relator groups.
Conjecture 2.6.13. Let G “ F {xxwyy be a one-relator group with πpwq “ 2 and
such that the w-subgroup P ď G is virtually (cocompactly) cubulated. Then G is
virtually (cocompactly) cubulated.
     2.6.3. Virtually compact special one-relator groups. A class of non-
positively curved cube complexes known as special cube complexes have played a
particularly important role in several significant developments in geometric group
theory. Special cube complexes were introduced by Haglund–Wise in [HW08]. If X
is a compact special cube complex, Haglund–Wise showed that π1 pXq embeds into
a right angled Artin group, π1 pXq is residually finite and linear and, if hyperbolic,
all its quasi-convex subgroups are separable.
     In his monograph, Dani Wise [Wis21] developed criteria for when a group is
virtually special in terms of hierarchies.
Definition 2.6.14. Define the class VQH of groups with a virtual quasi-convex
hierarchy as the smallest class of groups containing the trivial group and such that
the following hold:
      (1) If A, B P VQH, then G “ A ˚C B P VQH if C is quasi-isometrically
          embedded in G.
      (2) If A P VQH, then G “ A˚C P VQH if C is quasi-isometrically embedded
          in G.
      (3) If A ď VQH and A ď G with rG : As ă 8, then G P VQH.
    One of the main results in [Wis21] determines when a hyperbolic group is
virtually compact special.
     Theorem 2.6.15 (Wise). A hyperbolic group G lies in VQH if and only if it
is virtually compact special.
     Wise used his quasi-convex hierarchy machinery in [Wis21], combined with
Newman’s spelling theorem [New68a], to prove that one-relator groups with tor-
sion are virtually compact special. The first author then proved in [Lin22a] that
2-free one-relator groups are hyperbolic and that all their one-relator hierarchies
are quasi-convex. The proof involved a careful analysis of the action of a one-relator
group on its Bass–Serre tree, leading to Theorem 2.3.5, proving that certain Mag-
nus subgroups are quasi-convex and using a criterion for quasi-convexity in graphs
of hyperbolic groups due to Kapovich [Kap01].
132                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


    Theorem 2.6.16. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group with πpwq ‰ 2, then
every Magnus hierarchy for G is a quasi-convex hierarchy. Hence, G has a finite
index subgroup that is the fundamental group of a compact special cube complex.
    Theorem 2.6.16 provides an answer to Question 2.6.9 for a large class of one-
relator groups.
Corollary 2.6.17. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group with πpwq ‰ 2, then G
is residually finite, linear and quasi-convex subgroups are separable.
    We conclude with a conjecture. This should be compared with a conjecture of
Wise [Wis04, Conjecture 14.2] and a conjecture of Wilton [Wil24a, Conjecture
12.9].
Conjecture 2.6.18. If G “ F {xxwyy is a cubulated one-relator group, then every
finitely generated subgroup of G is undistorted if and only if πpwq ‰ 2 or πpwq “ 2
and the w-subgroup P ď G is virtually Fn ˆ Z for some n ě 1.

                            2.7. Residual properties
    2.7.1. Residually solvable and rationally solvable one-relator groups.
Recall that Gpiq “ rGpi´1q , Gpi´1q s denotes the ith term of the derived series of G
and that the ith term of the rational derived series is the subgroup
                           ! ˇ       ”                ı        )
                     piq                pi´1q   pi´1q
                    GQ :“ g ˇ g k P GQ , GQ             , k ‰ 0 Ĳ G.
                                     Ş
A group G is residually solvable if iPN Gpiq “ 1 and it is residually rationally solv-
       Ş       piq
able if iPN GQ “ 1. The transcendental (rational) derived series is the extension
of the (rational) derived series to arbitrary ordinals.
    A one-relator group is positive if its relator is a positive word over the genera-
tors. A classical result due to Baumslag [Bau71b] states that a positive one-relator
group is residually solvable. In [Lin24c], residually rationally solvable one-relator
groups were characterised in terms of their relator, generalising Baumslag’s result.
Additionally, if G is a one-relator group and H 2 pGq “ 0, it was shown that the ra-
tional derived series and the usual derived series of G coincide using work of Strebel
[Str74], yielding a characterisation of residual solvability amongst such one-relator
groups. We now explain this characterisation and its consequences.
    The usual example of a one-relator group which is not residually (rationally)
solvable is the Baumslag–Gersten group
                         BGp1, nq “ xa, t | rat , as “ an´1 y.
Since the relator expresses a power of a as a commutator of a and a conjugate of
a, we see that xxayy is rationally perfect in BGp1, nq for n ě 2. In other words,
                                                                            p1q
H1 pxxayy, Qq “ 0. When n “ 2, we also have H1 pxxayy, Zq “ 0. Hence, GQ “
 p2q
GQ “ xxayy for each n ě 2 and Gp1q “ Gp2q “ xxayy for n “ 2. The main theorem
in [Lin24c] shows that this phenomenon is not far off from the general case.
    Theorem 2.7.1. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group, then there is some
r P F and some n ě 1 such that w P rn rxxryy, xxryys and
                                pω`1q      pωq
                              GQ        “ GQ “ xxryyG .
Furthermore, if H 2 pGq “ 0, then n “ 1 and Gpω`1q “ Gpωq “ xxryyG .
                             2.7. RESIDUAL PROPERTIES                               133


    With the notation of Theorem 2.7.1, G is residually (rationally) solvable if and
only if r “G 1 and so r is conjugate to w or w´1 by Theorem 2.2.8.
                                                                     pωq
Corollary 2.7.2. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group, then G{GQ is a residually
rationally solvable one-relator group.
    In particular, Theorem 2.7.1 characterises precisely when the only rationally
solvable quotients of a one-relator group F {xxwyy have a certain derived length:
        ‚ If all rationally solvable quotients of F {xxwyy have rational derived length
          1, then F {xxryy would have to be abelian. This means that either rkpF q “ 1
          or rkpF q “ 2 and r is primitive.
        ‚ If all rationally solvable quotients of F {xxwyy have rational derived length
          at most 2 (but not all 1), then F {xxryy would have to be non-abelian
          and metabelian. Since the Baumslag–Solitar groups BSp1, nq with n ‰
          0, 1 are the only non-abelian metabelian one-relator groups, this means
          that F {xxryy – BSp1, nq for some n ‰ 0, 1. Moreover, by a result of
          Brunner [Bru74, Theorem 2.4], r must lie in the same AutpF q-orbit of
          pb´1 aba´n q˘1 .
        ‚ If F {xxwyy admits rationally solvable quotients of rational derived length
          3 but not 2, then F {xxwyy admits rationally solvable quotients of arbitrary
          rational derived length.
    Another corollary obtained in [Lin24c] is that it is algorithmically decidable
whether a one-relator group is residually rationally solvable; one can compute the
element r from Theorem 2.7.1 and decide whether it is trivial in G.
    It is not known whether the derived series of a one-relator group in general has
length at most ω, but in [Lin24c] it is conjectured that this is the case.
Conjecture 2.7.3. Let G “ F {xxwyy be a one-relator group. There is a word r P F
such that w P rrxxryy, xxryys and
                              Gpω`1q “ Gpωq “ xxryyG .
In particular, the maximal residually solvable quotient of G is the one-relator group
F {xxryy.
    A related class of groups is that of amenable groups. Like solvable groups,
amenable groups also cannot contain non-abelian free subgroups. Unlike solvable
groups, amenable groups do not form a variety and so finding a non-residually
amenable group appears to be quite difficult. Arzhantseva has asked the following
general question, see [KM18, Problem 18.6].
Question 2.7.4 (Arzhantseva). Is every one-relator group residually amenable?
     It is not known whether the non residually solvable Baumslag–Gersten group
BGp1, 2q is residually amenable. If the answer to Question 2.7.4 is negative, then
it is likely to be negative for BGp1, 2q.
     2.7.2. Residually nilpotent and parafree one-relator groups. Recall
                                  th
that Gi “ rGi´1 , Gs denotes
                          Ş the i term of the lower central series of G and that G
is residually nilpotent if iPN Gi “ 1. In contrast with the (rational) derived series,
it is known that the lower central series of a one-relator group can have length ω 2
by work of Mikhailov [Mik16]. Thus, a solution to the following problem is likely
to be more subtle than the case of residually solvable one-relator groups.
134                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


Problem 2.7.5. Characterise when a one-relator group is residually nilpotent.
     Azarov proved in [Aza98, Theorem 1] that a cyclically pinched one-relator
group
                                  G “ F1 ˚xuy“xvy F2
is residually nilpotent if and only if either u or v is not a proper power in the free
group F1 or F2 respectively. Outside of this result, only sporadic families are known
to be residually nilpotent.
     A group G is parafree if it is residually nilpotent and if there is a free group F
such that
                            G{Gi – F {Fi        for all i P N
Baumslag provided the first non-free examples of such groups in [Bau64]. The
example he provided was the one-relator group xa, b, c | a5 b3 c2 y. Baumslag then
initiated the systematic study of parafree groups in a series of two papers [Bau67b,
Bau69a]. In [Bau69a], Baumslag proved that a parafree group must be 2-free.
The reader is directed to Baumslag’s survey [Bau05] for further background on
parafree groups and many one-relator examples. Using Theorem 2.6.16, the first
author showed in [Lin22a] that parafree one-relator groups are hyperbolic and
virtually special.
     A major open problem in group theory is Remeslennikov’s conjecture: if G
is a residually finite group with the same finite quotients as a free group, is G
necessarily free? A positive answer is known within several classes of groups, but
no systematic approach has been taken for the class of one-relator groups. Recently,
Jaikin-Zapirain [JZ23] has shown that a residually finite group with the same finite
quotients as a free group must be parafree. In light of this, understanding when a
one-relator group is parafree becomes very interesting.
     Magnus showed in [Mag39] that an n-generator group with the same lower
central series quotients as a free group of rank n is actually a free group of rank n.
Combining this with a result of Stallings [Sta65a], we see that a one-relator group
G that is residually nilpotent is parafree if and only if H 2 pGq “ 0. Hence, solving
Problem 2.7.5 would also yield a characterisation of parafree one-relator groups.
     In particular, combining Azarov’s result with these remarks, a cyclically pinched
one-relator group G “ F1 ˚u“v F2 is parafree if and only if u or v is not a proper
power and H1 pG, Zq “ Zb1 pF1 q`b1 pF2 q´1 . This was greatly generalised by Jaikin-
Zapirain–Morales in [JZM24a] who characterised when a graph of parafree groups
with cyclic edge groups is also parafree.
     2.7.3. Residual finiteness and profinite completions. If G is a group, the
profinite completion of G, denoted by Ĝ, is the inverse limit of the inverse system
of finite quotients G{N of G. The group G is residually finite precisely when the
canonical map G Ñ Ĝ is injective. A classical result of Dixon–Formanek–Poland–
Ribes [DFPR82] states that the profinite completions of two finitely generated
groups G and H are isomorphic (as topological groups) precisely when the set of
finite quotients of G and H coincide.
     A group G is profinitely rigid (within a class of groups) if for any residually
finite group H (within that class of groups), an isomorphism Ĥ – Ĝ implies that
H – G. The profinite genus of a group G is the set of residually finite groups H
such that Ĥ – Ĝ. With this language, Remeslenikov’s conjecture can be stated as
predicting that free groups are profinitely rigid.
                             2.7. RESIDUAL PROPERTIES                               135


     The study of profinite invariants and profinite rigidity of groups is an active
area of research. However, within the class of one-relator groups, very little is
known. Moldavanskiı̆–Sibyakova [MS95] showed that the Baumslag–Solitar groups
BSp1, nq are profinitely rigid amongst one-relator groups and Jaikin-Zapirain–Morales
showed in [JZM24b] that closed surface groups are profinitely rigid amongst one-
relator groups. Experimental work was also carried out in [LL94, BCH04] where
it was shown that certain families of parafree one-relator groups had different sets
of finite quotients.

Problem 2.7.6. Find more examples of residually finite one-relator groups that
are profinitely rigid amongst one-relator groups.

    Baumslag posed the question of distinguishing cyclically pinched one-relator
groups [Bau74b, Problem 1] by their finite quotients after having shown that they
are all residually finite in [Bau63b]. This appears to still be open and is likely to
be a source of examples for Problem 2.7.6.

Question 2.7.7. Are there residually finite one-relator groups with the same finite
quotients that are not isomorphic? Are there finitely many residually finite one-
relator groups with the same finite quotients?

    Baumslag showed in [Bau74a] that even within the class of virtually cyclic
groups, there exist (two-relator) groups which are not profinitely rigid so one cannot
be too optimistic regarding Question 2.7.7.
    By Theorem 2.6.16, a one-relator group G “ F {xxwyy is residually finite if
πpwq ‰ 2. This would be a natural family of one-relator groups to attempt to
answer Question 2.7.7 given how much extra structure is known to hold in these
cases. In particular, since parafree one-relator groups F {xxwyy are 2-free and hence
have πpwq ě 3, it suffices to look at these one-relator groups for Remeslenikov’s
conjecture. Wilton showed in [Wil18] that any cyclically pinched or cyclically
conjugated one-relator group F {xxwyy with πpwq ě 3 does not have the same finite
quotients as a free group.
    The first examples of pairs of finitely presented residually finite groups H, G and
a homomorphism H Ñ G that is not an isomorphism, but induces an isomorphism
on profinite completions Ĥ Ñ Ĝ were discovered by Bridson–Grunewald in [BG04],
after finitely generated ones had been discovered by Platonov–Tavgen’ [PT90].
Such examples should not exist amongst one-relator groups.

Problem 2.7.8. Prove that if G is a residually finite one-relator group and H ď G
is a finitely generated subgroup, then the induced map Ĥ Ñ Ĝ is an isomorphism
only if H “ G.

     One could also wonder whether it is worth studying profinite completions of
non-residually finite groups. However, Baumslag–Miller–Troeger showed in [BMT07]
that, given any one-relator group G, one can construct another one-relator group
H that is not residually finite but has profinite completion isomorphic to G. In
fact, the isomorphism they construct is induced by a surjection H Ñ G. The first
example of such a surjection was the abelianisation map BGp1, 2q Ñ Z, proven by
Baumslag in [Bau69b].
136                            2. RECENT PROGRESS


                          2.8. Algorithmic properties
    2.8.1. The word problem. Although the word problem for all one-relator
groups was solved almost a century ago, the complexity of the word problem has not
seen much improvement from Magnus’ original solution. One way of measuring the
complexity of the word problem of a group G is via its Dehn function δG . An upper
bound on the Dehn function of one-relator groups was obtained by Bernasconi in
[Ber94].
      Theorem 2.8.1. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group, then
                                 δG pnq À A2|w| pnq,

where Ak denotes the k th Ackermann function, defined recursively by A1 pnq “
                pnq
2n, Ak`1 pnq “ Ak p1q.
                                                pnq
     Note that A2 pnq “ 2n and A3 pnq “ exp2 p1q already grows faster than any
finite tower of exponentials. Gersten states in [Ger93] that it is an open question
as to whether for each k, there exists a one-relator group G with δG pnq Á Ak pnq.
We conjecture that no such one-relator groups exist for all k and they perhaps do
not even exist for k “ 3.
     A candidate one-relator group for having the worst possible Dehn function is
the Baumslag–Gersten group
                                       A        t
                                                      E
                            BGp1, 2q “ a, t | aa “ a2 .

which splits as a HNN-extension of the Baumslag–Solitar group BSp1, 2q where
one generator is conjugated to the other. Platonov determined the precise Dehn
function of the Baumslag–Gersten group [Pla04] after Gersten established lower
bounds in [Ger92] and Bernasconi established upper bounds in [Ber94].
      Theorem 2.8.2. If G “ BGp1, 2q is the Baumslag–Gersten group, then

                              δG pnq „ expplog2 pnqq p1q.
     One can attempt to find one-relator groups with worse Dehn functions by per-
forming iterated HNN-extensions to BGp1, 2q, conjugating one generator to the
other, and hoping this yields a growth in Dehn function comparable to that of
BGp1, 2q from BSp1, 2q. Interestingly, Bernasconi also showed that A3 pnq is an up-
per bound for the Dehn function of such groups. Other one-relator groups with
interesting Dehn functions were already discussed in Section 2.6.2.
     Another way of measuring the complexity of the word problem is via the time
function of an algorithm to solve it. The Dehn function of a group provides an
upper bound for the time function of a non-deterministic Turing machine solving
its word problem. This roughly means that we can verify that an input word is
trivial in time bounded above by the Dehn function. In general it is much more
difficult to prove lower bounds on the time complexity of the word problem than
on the Dehn function. Indeed, the following question, which appears as [BMS02,
Question (OR3)], is open.
Question 2.8.3 (A. Myasnikov). Is the word problem in every one-relator group
decidable in polynomial time?
                          2.8. ALGORITHMIC PROPERTIES                            137


    Myasnikov–Ushakov–Won [MUW11] proved the following upper bounds for
the complexity of the word problem of the Baumslag–Gersten group, lending cre-
dence to a positive answer to Question 2.8.3. Their proof used new integer com-
pression data structures known as power circuits.
   Theorem 2.8.4. There is an algorithm which solves the word problem for the
Baumslag–Gersten group BGp1, 2q in polynomial time.
     Diekert–Laun–Ushakov [DLU12] refined the complexity estimates to obtain a
cubic time solution to the word problem in BGp1, 2q and Laun extended this to
apply to any BGp1, nq for n ě 2 [Lau14, Theorem 3.1]. For BGp2, 3q the situation
is more complicated and no time bounds are known (other than those offered by
Magnus’ algorithm), but would be interesting (see [MUW11, Problem 1.8]).
     One obstacle to understanding the complexity of the word problem in one-
relator groups is that there is no general method to obtain a simple finite set of
rewriting rules over the generators to solve the word problem. In [MUW11],
the authors find a particularly nice rewriting system solving the word problem for
BGp1, 2q using the Magnus–Moldavanskiı̆ hierarchy for BGp1, 2q which expresses
it as a double HNN-extension of Z. In general, the Magnus hierarchy is more
intricate. It would be of considerable interest to develop rewriting systems with
nice properties for all one-relator groups, see Problem 1.8.5.
    2.8.2. The conjugacy, membership and normal root problems. Out-
side of a few special cases, the conjugacy problem for one-relator groups has re-
mained largely untouched. Excluding hyperbolic one-relator groups, it is known to
be decidable in cyclically pinched and conjugated one-relator groups (which includes
Baumslag–Solitar groups) by Lipschutz [Lip66] and Larsen [Lar77] respectively,
the Baumslag–Gersten group by Beese [Bee12] and for one-relator groups G with
non-empty BNS-invariant Σ1 pGq by work of Logan [Log23].
    One particular special case of the conjugacy problem which should be more
approachable in general is to determine when an element is conjugate into a Magnus
subgroup.
Problem 2.8.5. If G is a one-relator and A ď G is a Magnus subgroup, find an
algorithm which decides whether an element g P G is conjugate into A.
    Another problem whose solution should be useful for understanding the con-
jugacy problem better would be an effective version of Collins’ Theorem 2.3.2 on
intersections of conjugates of Magnus subgroups. As remarked previously, Theo-
rem 2.3.1 already has an effective version proved by Howie.
Problem 2.8.6. If G “ F pSq{xxwyy is a one-relator group and A, B ď G are
Magnus subgroups generated by subsets of S, determine the double cosets AgB ‰
AB such that Ag X B ‰ 1.
     The membership problem for finitely generated subgroups of one-relator groups
is another problem which is wide open.
Question 2.8.7. Is the subgroup membership problem decidable for one-relator
groups?
    It was shown by Gray [Gra20b, Theorem B] that there are one-relator groups
with undecidable submonoid membership problem. As such, one cannot hope to
go too far with regards to membership problems.
138                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


Problem 2.8.8 (Lyndon). If G “ F pSq{xxwyy is a one-relator group and A, B ď G
are Magnus subgroups generated by subsets of S, find an algorithm which decides
membership in a double coset AgB.
     Lyndon posed this problem for g “ 1 [Lyn62, Problem 3.6], which Newman
solved for one-relator groups with torsion in [New68a, Corollary 3]. The extended
word problem for a group G with presentation xS | Ry is the problem of determining
membership in subgroups generated by subsets of the generators S. Lyndon’s
motivation for this problem came from trying to solve the extended membership
problem in groups with staggered presentations, following Magnus’ ideas for the
extended word problem for one-relator groups.
     The normal root problem was first studied by Magnus in [Mag30]. If F is a
free group and w P F , then an element r P F is a normal root of w if w P xxryy.
Problem 2.8.9 (Normal Root Problem). Let F be a free group and let w P F .
Determine the normal roots of w.
     In [Mag32], Magnus determined the normal roots of the commutator ra, bs.
Some further work on the root problem was carried out by Steinberg in [Ste86] who
characterised normal roots of ak bl when k, l are primes. Remeslennikov conjectured
that if r is a (cyclically reduced) normal root of w and |r| ą |w|, then w is conjugate
to rr, f s or rr´1 , f s for some f P F , see [BMS02, Problem F16]. However, this was
then disproved by McCool in [McC01]. One can also ask a more specific version
of the Normal Root Problem.
Question 2.8.10. If F is a free group, does there exist an infinite sequence of
words w0 , w1 , . . . P F such that xxwi yy ň xxwi`1 yy for all i P N?
    This question is of particular interest because an answer determines whether
or not one-relator groups are closed in the space of marked groups.

     2.8.3. The isomorphism problem, Nielsen generating sets and T -
systems. Despite almost a century of progress since Magnus solved the word prob-
lem for one-relator groups, the conjugacy and isomorphism problem remain very
far from being solved in general.
     Currently the most general result in this direction is that the isomorphism
problem for one-relator groups F {xxwyy with πpwq ‰ 2 is decidable amongst one-
relator groups. This is because they are hyperbolic and one can appeal to deep
work of Sela [Sel95] (in the torsion-free case) and Dahmani–Groves [DG11] (in
the torsion case).
    Theorem 2.8.11. If G “ F {xxwyy is a one-relator group with πpwq ‰ 2, then
the problem of deciding whether another one-relator group is isomorphic to G is
decidable.
   One way to understand the isomorphisms between one-relator groups is by
understanding their generating sets.
Definition 2.8.12. Two sets X1 , X2 Ă G “ F {N are Nielsen equivalent if there
is an automorphism ψ P AutpF q such that ψpX1 q “ X2 . They are in the same
T -system if there is an automorphism ϕ P AutpGq such that ϕpX1 q is Nielsen
equivalent to X2 .
                            2.8. ALGORITHMIC PROPERTIES                              139


     Let F be a free group with free generating set S Ă F . Given two normal
subgroups N1 , N2 Ÿ F and an isomorphism θ : F {N1 Ñ F {N2 , if the two generating
sets S2 and θpS1 q lie in the same T -system, where here Si denotes the image of S
in F {Ni , then there is an automorphism ψ P AutpF q such that ψpN1 q “ N2 .
     When F {N1 and F {N2 are one-relator presentations, we may say something
much stronger. If N1 “ xxwyy and N2 “ xxryy, the Magnus property for free groups
(see Theorem 2.2.8) implies that if S2 and θpS1 q lie in the T -system, then there is an
automorphism ψ P AutpF q such that ψpwq “ r˘1 . Hence, one-relator groups G “
F {xxwyy with a single T -system of (one-relator) generating set admit a particularly
simple solution to the isomorphism problem amongst one-relator groups: given
another one-relator presentation H “ F {xxryy, to determine whether G – H, we
only need to check whether w and r˘1 lie in the same AutpF q-orbit which can be
done in polynomial time using Whitehead’s algorithm [RVW07] (see [Whi36] for
Whitehead’s original algorithm).
     The isomorphism problem for two-generator one-relator groups with torsion was
solved first by Pride [Pri77a] who showed that if G “ F {xxwn yy is a two-generator
one-relator group with n ě 2, then G has only one T -system of generating pair,
see Theorem 1.6.12. Note that G “ xa, b | a5 y has more than one Nielsen class of
generating set since ta2 , bu also generates G. However, the automorphism given by
b Ñ b and a Ñ a2 shows that ta, bu and ta2 , bu lie in the same T -system.
     Although now it is known that the isomorphism problem is decidable for all
one-relator groups with torsion, one still might wonder whether Pride’s T -system
result can be extended to obtain a more intrinsic solution to the word problem.
This question was explicitly raised by Pride in [Pri75].

Question 2.8.13 (Pride). If G “ F {xxwn yy is a one-relator group n ě 2, is it true
that G has one T -system of generating set of minimal cardinality?

    Making explicit the connection between the work of Louder–Wilton on two-
complexes X with uniform negative immersions and Nielsen equivalence classes of
generating sets for π1 pXq would be a worthwhile task. In particular, their work
should imply at least that one-relator complexes X with negative immersions have
fundamental group with finitely many Nielsen classes of generating sets of any
given finite cardinality. Furthermore, we suspect that Pride’s Question 2.8.13 can
be answered positively also for this setting.

Question 2.8.14. If X be a one-relator complex with negative immersion, is it
true that G “ π1 pXq has one T -system of generating set of minimal cardinality?

    Question 2.8.14 is known to have a positive answer for closed surfaces: if G is
the fundamental group of a closed surface, Lars Louder showed in [Lou15] that G
has precisely one Nielsen class of generating set of any finite cardinality, improving
on previous work of Zieschang [Zie70].
    See also [BMS02, Problem (OR13)] for a more general phrasing of Question
2.8.14.
    During the 70’s, a significant number of contributions were made towards un-
derstanding the generating sets of one-relator groups. We summarise below some
of the main results in this direction. The reader is directed to Section 1.8.2 for
more details.
140                             2. RECENT PROGRESS


       ‚ The first known examples of one-relator groups with more than one Nielsen
         class of one-relator generating sets were the torus knot groups xa, b | am “
         bn y. This was proved by McCool–Pietrowski [MP73].
       ‚ Delzant [Del91] showed that torsion-free two-generator hyperbolic groups
         have finitely many Nielsen classes of generating pairs (a result announced
         by Gromov [Gro87]), although even C 1 p1{6q two-generator one-relator
         groups can gave more than one Nielsen generating pair by work of Pride
         [Pri76].
       ‚ If G – BSp1, nq for any n ‰ 0, Brunner showed that G has only one
         T -system of generating pair [Bru74, Theorem 2.4] and thus every two-
         generator presentation of G is a one-relator presentation. In the same
         article, Brunner also showed that BSp2, 3q has infinitely many T -systems
         of generating pairs which are not associated with one-relator presentations
         and at least two T -systems of generating pairs which are associated with
         one-relator presentations.
       ‚ Brunner provided an example in [Bru76] of a two-generator one-relator
         group with infinitely many Nielsen equivalence classes of generating pairs
         associated with one-relator presentations. The group was the Baumslag–
         Gersten group and the one-relator presentations associated with the gen-
         erating pairs were:
                                 A             n        n
                                                               E
                     BGp1, 2q – a, t | t´1 a´2 tat´1 a2 t “ a2
         where n is any natural number. It can be checked that each relator has
         minimal length in its AutpF pa, tqq-orbit and so the associated generating
         sets                                                t
                      tt´1 a´n tat´1 an t, tu Ă F pa, tq{xxaa a´2 yy
         are also in distinct T -systems.
       ‚ Non-cyclic one-relator groups with centre may have many T -systems of
         generating pairs (they are all generated by two elements). However,
         Pietrowski [Pie74] showed that their isomorphism problem is decidable
         amongst all one-relator groups. Indeed, Baumslag–Taylor proved that
         it is decidable whether a given one-relator group has centre in [BT68].
         Pietrowski then showed that any non-cyclic one-relator group with cen-
         tre splits as a graph of infinite cyclic groups in an essentially unique way
         [Pie74] which then yields a solution to the isomorphism problem using
         Tietze transformations.
       ‚ Rosenberger solved the isomorphism problem for cyclically pinched one-
         relator groups in [Ros94b] by an in depth analysis of the Nielsen classes
         of generating sets. Some partial results were also obtained for cyclically
         conjugated one-relator groups by Fine–Röhl–Rosenberger [FRR93].
       ‚ A generic one-relator group has precisely one Nielsen class of (minimal
         size) generating set by work of Kapovich–Schupp [KS05].
Although it appears that the isomorphism problem might be easily solvable amongst
one-relator groups G “ F {xxwyy with πpwq ‰ 2, the above results for two-generator
one-relator groups show that the general case presents several additional difficulties
we do not yet know how to overcome.
                                   Bibliography

[AC65]     J. J. Andrews and M. L. Curtis, Free groups and handlebodies, Proc. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 16 (1965), 192–195.
[Adi55]    S. I. Adian, Algorithmic unsolvability of problems of recognition of certain properties
           of groups, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.) 103 (1955), 533–535.
[AKT01]    R. B. J. T. Allenby, Goansu Kim, and C. Y. Tang, Residual finiteness of outer auto-
           morphism groups of certain pinched 1-relator groups, J. Algebra 246 (2001), no. 2,
           849–858.
[AL55]     Maurice Auslander and R. C. Lyndon, Commutator subgroups of free groups, Amer.
           J. Math. 77 (1955), 929–931.
[All81]    R. B. J. T. Allenby, The potency of cyclically pinched one-relator groups, Arch. Math.
           (Basel) 36 (1981), no. 3, 204–210.
[Ani86]    David J. Anick, On the homology of associative algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
           296 (1986), no. 2, 641–659.
[Ans71]    Michael Anshel, The endomorphisms of certain one-relator groups and the generalized
           Hopfian problem, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 77 (1971), 348–350.
[Ans72]            , Non-Hopfian groups with fully invariant kernels. I, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
           170 (1972), 231–237.
[Ans73]            , Non-Hopfian groups with fully invariant kernels. II, J. Algebra 24 (1973),
           473–485.
[Ans76a]           , The conjugacy problem for HNN groups and the word problem for commu-
           tative semigroups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 61 (1976), no. 2, 223–224.
[Ans76b]           , Conjugate powers in HNN groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 54 (1976), 19–23.
[Ans76c]           , Decision problems for HNN groups and vector addition systems, Math. Com-
           put. 30 (1976), no. 133, 154–156.
[Ans78]            , Vector groups and the equality problem for vector addition systems, Math.
           Comp. 32 (1978), no. 142, 614–616.
[AP90]     Roger C. Alperin and Brian L. Peterson, Growth functions for residually torsion-free
           nilpotent groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 109 (1990), no. 3, 585–587.
[App84]    Kenneth I. Appel, Roger C. Lyndon: a biographical and personal note, Contributions
           to group theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984,
           pp. 1–10.
[ARV92]    S. Andreadakis, E. Raptis, and D. Varsos, Hopficity of certain HNN-extensions,
           Comm. Algebra 20 (1992), no. 5, 1511–1533.
[AS74]     Michael Anshel and Peter Stebe, The solvability of the conjugacy problem for certain
           HNN groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 80 (1974), 266–270.
[AT81a]    R. B. J. T. Allenby and C. Y. Tang, The residual finiteness of some one-relator groups
           with torsion, J. Algebra 71 (1981), no. 1, 132–140.
[AT81b]            , Residually finite one-relator groups with torsion, Arch. Math. (Basel) 37
           (1981), no. 2, 97–105.
[AT86]             , Conjugacy separability of certain 1-relator groups with torsion, J. Algebra
           103 (1986), no. 2, 619–637.
[Avr22]    Grigori Avramidi, Division in group rings of surface groups, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2)
           106 (2022), no. 2, 982–1007. MR 4477209
[Aza98]    D. N. Azarov, On the residual nilpotence of free products of free groups with cyclic
           amalgamation, Mat. Zametki 64 (1998), no. 1, 3–8. MR 1694022
[Aza16]            , The scientific and pedagogical activity of D. I. Moldavanskii, Proceedings of
           “Algorithmic Problems in Algebra and Computability Theory”. Conference dedicated

                                              141
142                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


           to the 75th birthday of D. I. Moldavanskii), Ivanovo, 2015, Ivanovo State University,
           2016, In Russian, pp. 3–10.
[Bae44]    Reinhold Baer, Groups without proper isomorphic quotient groups, Bull. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 50 (1944), 267–278.
[Bag76a]   G. H. Bagherzadeh, Commutativity in groups with bipolar structure, J. London Math.
           Soc. (2) 13 (1976), no. 3, 443–453.
[Bag76b]           , Commutativity in one-relator groups, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 13 (1976),
           no. 3, 459–471.
[Bau]
[Bau62a]   Gilbert Baumslag, A non-hopfian group, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 68 (1962), 196–198.
[Bau62b]            , On generalised free products, Math. Z. 78 (1962), 423–438. MR 140562
[Bau63a]            , Automorphism groups of residually finite groups, J. London Math. Soc. 38
           (1963), 117–118.
[Bau63b]            , On the residual finiteness of generalised free products of nilpotent groups,
           Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 106 (1963), 193–209. MR 144949
[Bau64]             , Groups with one defining relator, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 4 (1964), 385–392.
           MR 172909
[Bau65a]   Benjamin Baumslag, Residually free groups and related topics, 1965, Thesis (Ph.D.)–
           University of London.
[Bau65b]   Gilbert Baumslag, Residual nilpotence and relations in free groups, J. Algebra 2
           (1965), 271–282.
[Bau66]    Benjamin Baumslag, Intersections of finitely generated subgroups in free products, J.
           London Math. Soc. 41 (1966), 673–679.
[Bau67a]   Gilbert Baumslag, Finitely presented groups, Proc. Internat. Conf. Theory of Groups
           (Canberra, 1965), Gordon and Breach, New York-London-Paris, 1967, pp. 37–50.
[Bau67b]            , Groups with the same lower central sequence as a relatively free group. I.
           The groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 129 (1967), 308–321. MR 217157
[Bau67c]            , Residually finite one-relator groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 73 (1967), 618–
           620. MR 212078
[Bau68]    Benjamin Baumslag, Generalized free products whose two-generator subgroups are
           free, J. London Math. Soc. 43 (1968), 601–606.
[Bau69a]   Gilbert Baumslag, Groups with the same lower central sequence as a relatively free
           group. II. Properties, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 142 (1969), 507–538. MR 245653
[Bau69b]            , A non-cyclic one-relator group all of whose finite quotients are cyclic, J.
           Austral. Math. Soc. 10 (1969), 497–498. MR 0254127
[Bau71a]            , Finitely generated cyclic extensions of free groups are residually finite, Bull.
           Austral. Math. Soc. 5 (1971), 87–94.
[Bau71b]            , Positive one-relator groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 156 (1971), 165–183.
           MR 274562
[Bau74a]            , Residually finite groups with the same finite images, Compositio Math. 29
           (1974), 249–252. MR 357615
[Bau74b]            , Some problems on one-relator groups, Proceedings of the Second Interna-
           tional Conference on the Theory of Groups (Australian Nat. Univ., Canberra, 1973),
           1974, pp. 75–81. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 372. MR 0364463
[Bau83]             , Free subgroups of certain one-relator groups defined by positive words, Math.
           Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 93 (1983), no. 2, 247–251.
[Bau86]             , A survey of groups with a single defining relation, Proceedings of groups—
           St. Andrews 1985, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 121, Cambridge Univ.
           Press, Cambridge, 1986, pp. 30–58. MR 896500
[Bau94]             , Musings on Magnus, The mathematical legacy of Wilhelm Magnus: groups,
           geometry and special functions (Brooklyn, NY, 1992), Contemp. Math., vol. 169,
           Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1994, pp. 99–106.
[Bau99]             , Finitely generated residually torsion-free nilpotent groups. I, J. Austral.
           Math. Soc. Ser. A 67 (1999), no. 3, 289–317.
[Bau05]             , Parafree groups, Infinite groups: geometric, combinatorial and dynamical
           aspects, Progr. Math., vol. 248, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2005, pp. 1–14. MR 2195450
[BB97]     Mladen Bestvina and Noel Brady, Morse theory and finiteness properties of groups,
           Invent. Math. 129 (1997), no. 3, 445–470. MR 1465330
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                         143


[BB00]   N. Brady and M. R. Bridson, There is only one gap in the isoperimetric spectrum,
         Geom. Funct. Anal. 10 (2000), no. 5, 1053–1070. MR 1800063
[BB63]   J. Belk and C. Bleak, Embedding hyperbolic groups into finitely presented infinite
         simple groups.
[BBN59]  Gilbert Baumslag, W. W. Boone, and B. H. Neumann, Some unsolvable problems
         about elements and subgroups of groups, Math. Scand. 7 (1959), 191–201. MR 163948
[BC07]   Noel Brady and John Crisp, CATp0q and CATp´1q dimensions of torsion free hyper-
         bolic groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 82 (2007), no. 1, 61–85. MR 2296058
[BCGW24] Jacob Bamberger, David Carrier, Jonah Gaster, and Daniel T. Wise, Good stackings,
         bislim structures, and invariant staggerings, Michigan Math. J. 74 (2024), no. 3,
         659–672. MR 4767509
[BCH04]  Gilbert Baumslag, Sean Cleary, and George Havas, Experimenting with infinite
         groups. I, Experiment. Math. 13 (2004), no. 4, 495–502. MR 2118274
[BDTU17] V. N. Bezverkhnii, I. V. Dobrynina, Yu. E. Trubitsyn, and A. E. Ustyan, M. D.
         Greendlinger – the founder of the Tula algebraic school (on the 85th anniversary of
         the professor), vol. 18, 2017, In Russian, pp. pp. 160–166.
[Bee12]  Janis Beese, Das konjugationsproblem in der baumslag-gersten-gruppe, Ph.D. thesis,
         Diploma thesis, Fakultät Mathematik, Universität Stuttgart, 2012. In German, 2012.
[Ber94]  Aldo A. Bernasconi, On HNN-extensions and the complexity of the word problem
         for one-relator groups, ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1994, Thesis (Ph.D.)–The
         University of Utah. MR 2691093
[Bez86]  I. S. Bezverkhnyaya, Generalization of a result of A. I. Mal’tsev, Algorithmic problems
         in the theory of groups and semigroups (Russian), Tulsk. Gos. Ped. Inst., Tula, 1986,
         pp. 22–25, 126.
[BF92]   M. Bestvina and M. Feighn, A combination theorem for negatively curved groups, J.
         Differential Geom. 35 (1992), no. 1, 85–101. MR 1152226
[BFR19]  Gilbert Baumslag, Benjamin Fine, and Gerhard Rosenberger, One-relator groups: an
         overview, Groups St Andrews 2017 in Birmingham, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note
         Ser., vol. 455, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2019, pp. 119–157. MR 3931411
[BG67]   G. Baumslag and K. W. Gruenberg, Some reflections on cohomological dimension
         and freeness, J. Algebra 6 (1967), 394–409.
[BG04]   Martin R. Bridson and Fritz J. Grunewald, Grothendieck’s problems concerning profi-
         nite completions and representations of groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 160 (2004), no. 1,
         359–373. MR 2119723
[BH66]   S. Bachmuth and I. Hughes, Applications of a theorem of Magnus, Arch. Math. (Basel)
         17 (1966), 380–382.
[BH72]   R. G. Burns and V. W. D. Hale, A note on group rings of certain torsion-free groups,
         Canad. Math. Bull. 15 (1972), 441–445. MR 310046
[BH74]   William W. Boone and Graham Higman, An algebraic characterization of groups with
         soluble word problem, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 18 (1974), 41–53.
[BH75]           , An algebraic characterization of groups with soluble order problem, Logic
         Colloquium ’73 (Bristol, 1973), Stud. Logic Found. Math., Vol. 80, North-Holland,
         Amsterdam-Oxford, 1975, pp. 53–54.
[BH99]   Martin R. Bridson and André Haefliger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature,
         Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathe-
         matical Sciences], vol. 319, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. MR 1744486
[Bie76]  Robert Bieri, Normal subgroups in duality groups and in groups of cohomological
         dimension 2, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 7 (1976), no. 1, 35–51.
[BK98]   V. V. Benyash-Krivets, On the decomposition of the free product of cyclic groups with
         one relation into an amalgamated free product, Mat. Sb. 189 (1998), no. 8, 13–26.
         MR 1669636
[BK16]   J. O. Button and R. P. Kropholler, Nonhyperbolic free-by-cyclic and one-relator
         groups, New York J. Math. 22 (2016), 755–774. MR 3548122
[BKS87]  R. G. Burns, A. Karrass, and D. Solitar, A note on groups with separable finitely
         generated subgroups, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 36 (1987), no. 1, 153–160.
[BKZ04]  Oleg Bogopolski, Elena Kudryavtseva, and Heiner Zieschang, Simple curves on sur-
         faces and an analog of a theorem of Magnus for surface groups, Math. Z. 247 (2004),
         no. 3, 595–609.
144                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[BL36]   Reinhold Baer and Friedrich Levi, Freie Produkte und ihre Untergruppen, Compositio
         Math. 3 (1936), 391–398.
[BL79]   Benjamin Baumslag and Frank Levin, A class of one-relator groups with torsion,
         Arch. Math. (Basel) 33 (1979), no. 3, 209–215.
[Bla65]  Norman Blackburn, Conjugacy in nilpotent groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1965),
         143–148.
[BM86]   G. Baumslag and C. F. Miller, III, A remark on the subgroups of finitely generated
         groups with one defining relation, Illinois J. Math. 30 (1986), no. 2, 255–257.
[BM06]   A. V. Borshchev and D. I. Moldavanskiı̆, On the isomorphism of some groups with
         one defining relation, Mat. Zametki 79 (2006), no. 1, 34–44.
[BM22]   Martı́n Axel Blufstein and Elı́as Gabriel Minian, Strictly systolic angled complexes
         and hyperbolicity of one-relator groups, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 22 (2022), no. 3, 1159–
         1175. MR 4474781
[BMR99] Gilbert Baumslag, Alexei Myasnikov, and Vladimir Remeslennikov, Malnormality is
         decidable in free groups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 9 (1999), no. 6, 687–692.
[BMR07a] Alexandre V. Borovik, Alexei G. Myasnikov, and Vladimir N. Remeslennikov, The
         conjugacy problem in amalgamated products. I. Regular elements and black holes,
         Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 17 (2007), no. 7, 1299–1333.
[BMR07b]         , Generic complexity of the conjugacy problem in HNN-extensions and al-
         gorithmic stratification of Miller’s groups, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 17 (2007),
         no. 5-6, 963–997.
[BMS02]  Gilbert Baumslag, Alexei G. Myasnikov, and Vladimir Shpilrain, Open problems in
         combinatorial group theory. Second edition, Combinatorial and geometric group the-
         ory (New York, 2000/Hoboken, NJ, 2001), Contemp. Math., vol. 296, Amer. Math.
         Soc., Providence, RI, 2002, pp. 1–38. MR 1921705
[BMT07] Gilbert Baumslag, Charles F. Miller, III, and Douglas Troeger, Reflections on the
         residual finiteness of one-relator groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 1 (2007), no. 3, 209–
         219. MR 2314044
[BN51]   Svend Bundgaard and Jakob Nielsen, On normal subgroups with finite index in F -
         groups, Mat. Tidsskr. B 1951 (1951), 56–58.
[BNS87]  Robert Bieri, Walter D. Neumann, and Ralph Strebel, A geometric invariant of dis-
         crete groups, Invent. Math. 90 (1987), no. 3, 451–477. MR 914846
[BO84]   G. Bauer and F. Otto, Finite complete rewriting systems and the complexity of the
         word problem, Acta Inform. 21 (1984), no. 5, 521–540.
[BO93]   Ronald V. Book and Friedrich Otto, String-rewriting systems, Texts and Monographs
         in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993.
[Bog05]  Oleg Bogopolski, A surface groups analogue of a theorem of Magnus, Geometric meth-
         ods in group theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 372, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
         2005, pp. 59–69.
[Bok67]  L. A. Bokut, On the Novikov groups, Algebra i Logika Sem. 6 (1967), no. 1, 25–38.
[Boo55]  William W. Boone, Certain simple, unsolvable problems of group theory. III, Nederl.
         Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 58 (1955), 252–256 = Indag. Math. 17, 252–256 (1955).
[Boo57]          , Certain simple, unsolvable problems of group theory. V, VI, Indag. Math.
         19 (1957), 22–27, 227–232, Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 60.
[Boo58]          , An analysis of Turing’s “The word problem in semi-groups with cancella-
         tion”, Ann. of Math. (2) 67 (1958), 195–202.
[Boo59]          , The word problem, Ann. of Math. (2) 70 (1959), 207–265.
[Bor69]  V. V. Borisov, Simple examples of groups with unsolvable word problem, Mat. Zametki
         6 (1969), 521–532.
[BP78]   Benjamin Baumslag and Stephen J. Pride, Groups with two more generators than
         relators, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 17 (1978), no. 3, 425–426. MR 491967
[BP79]           , Groups with one more generator than relators, Math. Z. 167 (1979), no. 3,
         279–281. MR 539110
[BR74]   V. N. Bezverkhnii and E. V. Rollov, Subgroups of a free product of groups, Mod-
         ern algebra, No. 1 (Russian), Leningrad. Gosudarstv. Ped. Inst. im. A. I. Gercena,
         Leningrad, 1974, pp. 16–31.
[Bri56]  J. L. Britton, Solution of the word problem for certain types of groups. I, Proc. Glas-
         gow Math. Assoc. 3 (1956), 45–54.
                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          145


[Bri57]           , Solution of the word problem for certain types of groups. II, Proc. Glasgow
          Math. Assoc. 3 (1957), 68–90.
[Bri58]           , The word problem for groups, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 8 (1958), 493–506.
[Bri63]   John L. Britton, The word problem, Ann. of Math. (2) 77 (1963), 16–32.
[Bro80]   S. D. Brodskiı̆, Equations over groups and groups with one defining relation, Uspekhi
          Mat. Nauk 35 (1980), no. 4(214), 183.
[Bro84]           , Equations over groups, and groups with one defining relation, Sibirsk. Mat.
          Zh. 25 (1984), no. 2, 84–103. MR 741011
[Bro87]   Kenneth S. Brown, Trees, valuations, and the Bieri-Neumann-Strebel invariant, In-
          vent. Math. 90 (1987), no. 3, 479–504. MR 914847
[Bro94]           , Cohomology of groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 87, Springer-
          Verlag, New York, 1994, Corrected reprint of the 1982 original. MR 1324339
[Bru74]   A. M. Brunner, Transitivity-systems of certain one-relator groups, Proceedings of the
          Second International Conference on the Theory of Groups (Australian Nat. Univ.,
          Canberra, 1973), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. Vol. 372, Springer, Berlin-New York,
          1974, pp. 131–140. MR 357619
[Bru76]           , A group with an infinite number of Nielsen inequivalent one-relator presen-
          tations, J. Algebra 42 (1976), no. 1, 81–84. MR 419617
[Bru80]           , On a class of one-relator groups, Canadian J. Math. 32 (1980), no. 2, 414–
          420.
[BS62]    Gilbert Baumslag and Donald Solitar, Some two-generator one-relator non-Hopfian
          groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 68 (1962), 199–201.
[BS64]    Gilbert Baumslag and Arthur Steinberg, Residual nilpotence and relations in free
          groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 70 (1964), 283–284.
[BS76a]   G. Baumslag and R. Strebel, Some finitely generated, infinitely related metabelian
          groups with trivial multiplicator, J. Algebra 40 (1976), no. 1, 46–62.
[BS76b]   Gilbert Baumslag and Urs Stammbach, A non-free parafree group all of whose count-
          able subgroups are free, Math. Z. 148 (1976), no. 1, 63–65.
[BS78]    Robert Bieri and Ralph Strebel, Almost finitely presented soluble groups, Comment.
          Math. Helv. 53 (1978), no. 2, 258–278. MR 498863
[BS80]            , Valuations and finitely presented metabelian groups, Proc. London Math.
          Soc. (3) 41 (1980), no. 3, 439–464. MR 591649
[BS83]    R. G. Burns and Donald Solitar, The indices of torsion-free subgroups of Fuchsian
          groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 89 (1983), no. 3, 414–418.
[BS89]    Martin D. Burrow and Arthur Steinberg, On a result of G. Baumslag, Compositio
          Math. 71 (1989), no. 3, 241–245.
[BS90]    Gilbert Baumslag and Peter B. Shalen, Amalgamated products and finitely presented
          groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 65 (1990), no. 2, 243–254. MR 1057242
[BS05]    Alexander Borisov and Mark Sapir, Polynomial maps over finite fields and residual
          finiteness of mapping tori of group endomorphisms, Invent. Math. 160 (2005), no. 2,
          341–356. MR 2138070
[BS08]    Oleg Bogopolski and Konstantin Sviridov, A Magnus theorem for some one-relator
          groups, The Zieschang Gedenkschrift, Geom. Topol. Monogr., vol. 14, Geom. Topol.
          Publ., Coventry, 2008, pp. 63–73.
[BT68]    Gilbert Baumslag and Tekla Taylor, The centre of groups with one defining relator,
          Math. Ann. 175 (1968), 315–319. MR 222144
[BT78]    Benjamin Baumslag and Marvin Tretkoff, Residually finite HNN extensions, Comm.
          Algebra 6 (1978), no. 2, 179–194.
[BT08]    Gilbert Baumslag and Douglas Troeger, Virtually free-by-cyclic one-relator groups. I,
          Aspects of infinite groups, Algebra Discrete Math., vol. 1, World Sci. Publ., Hacken-
          sack, NJ, 2008, pp. 9–25.
[Bur72]   R. G. Burns, On the finitely generated subgroups of an amalgamated product of two
          groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 169 (1972), 293–306.
[Bur74]           , A proof of the Freiheitssatz and the Cohen-Lyndon theorem for one-relator
          groups, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 7 (1974), 508–514.
[But10]   Jack O. Button, Largeness of LERF and 1-relator groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 4
          (2010), no. 4, 709–738. MR 2727660
146                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[But11]    J. O. Button, Proving finitely presented groups are large by computer, Exp. Math. 20
           (2011), no. 2, 153–168. MR 2821387
[But19]            , Tubular groups, 1-relator groups and nonpositive curvature, Internat. J. Al-
           gebra Comput. 29 (2019), no. 8, 1367–1381. MR 4022769
[BW49]     Reinhold Baer and Christine Williams, Splitting criteria and extension types, Bull.
           Amer. Math. Soc. 55 (1949), 729–743.
[Cay78a]   Arthur Cayley, Desiderata and Suggestions: No. 1. The Theory of Groups, Amer. J.
           Math. 1 (1878), no. 1, 50–52.
[Cay78b]           , Desiderata and Suggestions: No. 2. The Theory of Groups: Graphical Rep-
           resentation, Amer. J. Math. 1 (1878), no. 2, 174–176.
[CFR13]    L. Ciobanu, B. Fine, and G. Rosenberger, The surface group conjecture: cyclically
           pinched and conjugacy pinched one-relator groups, Results Math. 64 (2013), no. 1-2,
           175–184. MR 3095136
[CH23]     Christopher H. Cashen and Charlotte Hoffmann, Short, highly imprimitive words yield
           hyperbolic one-relator groups, Exp. Math. 32 (2023), no. 4, 631–640. MR 4669284
[Cha68]    Bruce Chandler, The representation of a generalized free product in an associative
           ring, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 21 (1968), 271–288.
[Cha83]    T. C. Chau, A note concerning Fox’s paper on Fenchel’s conjecture, Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 88 (1983), no. 4, 584–586.
[Che54]    Kuo-Tsai Chen, A group ring method for finitely generated groups, Trans. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 76 (1954), 275–287.
[Che71]    A. A. Chebotar, Subgroups of groups with one defining relation that do not contain
           free subgroups of rank 2, Algebra i Logika 10 (1971), 570–586. MR 313404
[Che75]            , Those subgroups of groups with a single relation that have normal subgroups
           satisfying an identity, Sibirsk. Mat. Ž. 16 (1975), 139–148, 197.
[Che78]            , Subgroups of groups with a defining relation that are representable in the
           form of a direct product, Izv. Vyssh. Uchebn. Zaved. Mat. (1978), no. 8, 109–118.
[Che21]    Haimiao Chen, Solving the isomorphism problems for two families of parafree groups,
           J. Algebra 585 (2021), 616–636.
[Chi76]    Ian M. Chiswell, Euler characteristics of groups, Math. Z. 147 (1976), no. 1, 1–11.
[Chr73]    Elwin Bruno Christoffel, Observatio Arithmetica, Annali di Matematica Pura ed Ap-
           plicata (1867-1897) 6 (1873), no. 1, 148–152.
[CL63]     D. E. Cohen and R. C. Lyndon, Free bases for normal subgroups of free groups, Trans.
           Amer. Math. Soc. 108 (1963), 526–537. MR 170930
[CL83]     Donald J. Collins and Frank Levin, Automorphisms and Hopficity of certain
           Baumslag-Solitar groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 40 (1983), no. 5, 385–400.
[CM77]     Donald J. Collins and Charles F. Miller, III, The conjugacy problem and subgroups
           of finite index, Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 34 (1977), no. 3, 535–556.
[CM82]     Bruce Chandler and Wilhelm Magnus, The history of combinatorial group theory,
           Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, vol. 9, Springer-Verlag,
           New York, 1982, A case study in the history of ideas.
[CM99]     Donald J. Collins and Charles F. Miller, III, The word problem in groups of cohomo-
           logical dimension 2, Groups St. Andrews 1997 in Bath, I, London Math. Soc. Lecture
           Note Ser., vol. 260, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1999, pp. 211–218.
[Coc54]    W. H. Cockcroft, On two-dimensional aspherical complexes, Proc. London Math. Soc.
           (3) 4 (1954), 375–384. MR 63042
[Coh06]    P. M. Cohn, Free ideal rings and localization in general rings, New Mathematical
           Monographs, vol. 3, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006. MR 2246388
[Col69a]   Donald J. Collins, On embedding groups and the conjugacy problem, J. London Math.
           Soc. (2) 1 (1969), 674–682.
[Col69b]           , On recognizing Hopf groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 20 (1969), 235–240.
[Col69c]           , Recursively enumerable degrees and the conjugacy problem, Acta Math. 122
           (1969), 115–160.
[Col69d]           , Word and conjugacy problems in groups with only a few defining relations,
           Z. Math. Logik Grundlagen Math. 15 (1969), 305–324.
[Col72]            , On a group embedding theorem of V. V. Borisov, Bull. London Math. Soc.
           4 (1972), 145–147.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                        147


[Col78a]          , Presentations of the amalgamated free product of two infinite cycles, Math.
          Ann. 237 (1978), no. 3, 233–241.
[Col78b]          , Some one-relator Hopfian groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 235 (1978), 363–
          374.
[Col85]   D. J. Collins, Obituary: William Werner Boone, Bull. London Math. Soc. 17 (1985),
          no. 2, 168–174.
[Col04]           , Intersections of Magnus subgroups of one-relator groups, Groups: topologi-
          cal, combinatorial and arithmetic aspects, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol.
          311, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2004, pp. 255–296. MR 2073350
[Col08]   Donald J. Collins, Intersections of conjugates of Magnus subgroups of one-relator
          groups, The Zieschang Gedenkschrift, Geom. Topol. Monogr., vol. 14, Geom. Topol.
          Publ., Coventry, 2008, pp. 135–171. MR 2484702
[Cor65]   A. L. S. Corner, Three examples of hopficity in torsion-free abelian groups, Acta
          Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar. 16 (1965), 303–310.
[CRK` 86] C. M. Campbell, E. F. Robertson, T. Kawamata, I. Miyamoto, and P. D. Williams,
          Deficiency zero presentations for certain perfect groups, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh
          Sect. A 103 (1986), no. 1-2, 63–71.
[Cur89]   Peter M. Curran, Subgroups of finite index in certain classes of finitely presented
          groups, J. Algebra 122 (1989), no. 1, 118–129. MR 994940
[CW15]    Danny Calegari and Alden Walker, Random groups contain surface subgroups, J.
          Amer. Math. Soc. 28 (2015), no. 2, 383–419. MR 3300698
[CW24]    Hip Kuen Chong and Daniel T. Wise, Embedding partial hnn extensions in ascending
          hnn extensions, 2024.
[Deh10]   M. Dehn, Über die Topologie des dreidimensionalen Raumes., Math. Ann. 69 (1910),
          137–168.
[Deh11]           , Über unendliche diskontinuierliche Gruppen, Math. Ann. 71 (1911), no. 1,
          116–144. MR 1511645
[Deh12]           , Transformation der Kurven auf zweiseitigen Flächen, Math. Ann. 72 (1912),
          no. 3, 413–421. MR 1511705
[Deh14]           , Die beiden Kleeblattschlingen, Math. Ann. 75 (1914), no. 3, 402–413.
[Deh43a]  Max Dehn, Mathematics, 400 B. C.–300 B. C, Amer. Math. Monthly 50 (1943),
          411–414.
[Deh43b]          , Mathematics, 600 B.C.–400 B. C, Amer. Math. Monthly 50 (1943), 357–360.
[Deh44a]          , Mathematics, 200 B. C.–600 A. D, Amer. Math. Monthly 51 (1944).
[Deh44b]          , Mathematics, 300 B. C.–200 B. C, Amer. Math. Monthly 51 (1944), 25–31.
[Deh87]           , Papers on group theory and topology, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987,
          Translated from the German and with introductions and an appendix by John Still-
          well, With an appendix by Otto Schreier.
[Del91]   Thomas Delzant, Sous-groupes à deux générateurs des groupes hyperboliques, Group
          theory from a geometrical viewpoint (Trieste, 1990), World Sci. Publ., River Edge,
          NJ, 1991, pp. 177–189. MR 1170366
[DFPR82] John D. Dixon, Edward W. Formanek, John C. Poland, and Luis Ribes, Profinite
          completions and isomorphic finite quotients, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 23 (1982), no. 3,
          227–231. MR 644274
[DG11]    François Dahmani and Vincent Guirardel, The isomorphism problem for all hyperbolic
          groups, Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (2011), no. 2, 223–300. MR 2795509
[DL83]    D. Dummit and J. Labute, On a new characterization of Demuskin groups, Invent.
          Math. 73 (1983), no. 3, 413–418. MR 718938
[DL07]    Warren Dicks and Peter A. Linnell, L2 -Betti numbers of one-relator groups, Math.
          Ann. 337 (2007), no. 4, 855–874. MR 2285740
[DLU12]   Volker Diekert, Jürn Laun, and Alexander Ushakov, Efficient algorithms for highly
          compressed data: the word problem in Higman’s group is in P, Internat. J. Algebra
          Comput. 22 (2012), no. 8, 1240008, 19. MR 3010822
[Don40]   Kh. A. Doniyakhi, Linear representation of the free product of cyclic groups,
          Leningrad State Univ. Annals [Uchenye Zapiski] Math. Ser. 10 (1940), 158–165.
[DP73]    M. J. Dunwoody and A. Pietrowski, Presentations of the trefoil group, Canad. Math.
          Bull. 16 (1973), 517–520.
148                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[DR13]   Will Dison and Timothy R. Riley, Hydra groups, Comment. Math. Helv. 88 (2013),
         no. 3, 507–540. MR 3093501
[Dri67]  Brigid Driscoll, Algorithmic solutions of the conjugacy problem in some generalized
         free products, 1967, Thesis (Ph.D.)–City University of New York.
[DS05]   Cornelia Druţu and Mark Sapir, Non-linear residually finite groups, J. Algebra 284
         (2005), no. 1, 174–178.
[DT06]   Nathan M. Dunfield and Dylan P. Thurston, A random tunnel number one 3-manifold
         does not fiber over the circle, Geom. Topol. 10 (2006), 2431–2499. MR 2284062
[Dug82]  Mark J. Dugopolski, A new solution to the word problem in the fundamental groups
         of alternating knots and links, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 272 (1982), no. 1, 375–382.
[Dun72]  M. J. Dunwoody, Relation modules, Bull. London Math. Soc. 4 (1972), 151–155.
         MR 327915
[DV96]   Warren Dicks and Enric Ventura, The group fixed by a family of injective endomor-
         phisms of a free group, Contemporary Mathematics, vol. 195, American Mathematical
         Society, Providence, RI, 1996. MR 1385923
[Dyc82a] W. Dyck, Gruppentheoretische Studien. Habilitationsschrift., 1882.
[Dyc82b] Walther Dyck, Gruppentheoretische Studien, Math. Ann. 20 (1882), no. 1, 1–44.
[Dyc83]          , Gruppentheoretische Studien. II. Ueber die Zusammensetzung einer Gruppe
         discreter Operationen, über ihre Primitivität und Transitivität, Math. Ann. 22 (1883),
         no. 1, 70–108.
[Dye68]  Joan Landman Dyer, On the residual finiteness of generalized free products, Trans.
         Amer. Math. Soc. 133 (1968), 131–143.
[Dye80]  Joan L. Dyer, Separating conjugates in amalgamated free products and HNN exten-
         sions, J. Austral. Math. Soc. Ser. A 29 (1980), no. 1, 35–51.
[Dys64]  Verena Huber Dyson, The word problem and residually finite groups, Notices Amer.
         Math. Soc. 11 (1964), no. 11 (November), 743, Abstract 616-7.
[Dys74]          , A family of groups with nice word problems, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 17 (1974),
         414–425.
[Edj89]  M. Edjvet, A Magnus theorem for free products of locally indicable groups, Glasgow
         Math. J. 31 (1989), no. 3, 383–387.
[Edw81]  Harold M. Edwards, Read the Masters!, Mathematics Tomorrow (Lynn Arthur Steen,
         ed.), Springer, New York, 1981, pp. 105–110.
[Ego81]  V. Egorov, The residual finiteness of certain one-relator groups, Algebraic systems,
         Ivanov. Gos. Univ., Ivanovo, 1981, pp. 100–121.
[EMOT53] Arthur Erdélyi, Wilhelm Magnus, Fritz Oberhettinger, and Francesco G. Tricomi,
         Higher transcendental functions. Vols. I, II, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York-
         Toronto-London, 1953, Based, in part, on notes left by Harry Bateman.
[EP84]   M. Edjvet and Stephen J. Pride, The concept of “largeness” in group theory. II,
         Groups—Korea 1983 (Kyoungju, 1983), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1098, Springer,
         Berlin, 1984, pp. 29–54. MR 781355
[Eva73]  Benny Evans, A class of πc groups closed under cyclic amalgamations, Bull. Amer.
         Math. Soc. 79 (1973), 200–201.
[EWPS24] Danielle Ernst-West, Doron Puder, and Matan Seidel, Word measures on GLn(q)
         and free group algebras, Algebra Number Theory 18 (2024), no. 11, 2047–2090.
         MR 4812230
[Far76]  F. Thomas Farrell, Right-orderable deck transformation groups, Rocky Mountain J.
         Math. 6 (1976), no. 3, 441–447. MR 418078
[Fel71]  G. L. Fel’dman, The homological dimension of group algebras of solvable groups, Izv.
         Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 35 (1971), 1225–1236. MR 296168
[Fel19]  Carsten Feldkamp, A Magnus theorem for some amalgamated products, Comm. Al-
         gebra 47 (2019), no. 12, 5348–5360.
[FGNB24] Islam Foniqi, Robert D. Gray, and Carl-Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda, Membership problems
         for positive one-relator groups and one-relation monoids, Can. J. of Math. (2024), To
         appear.
[FGRS95] Benjamin Fine, Anthony M. Gaglione, Gerhard Rosenberger, and Dennis Spellman,
         n-free groups and questions about universally free groups, Groups ’93 Galway/St.
         Andrews, Vol. 1 (Galway, 1993), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 211,
         Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1995, pp. 191–204. MR 1342791
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                         149


[FH99]   Mark Feighn and Michael Handel, Mapping tori of free group automorphisms are
         coherent, Ann. of Math. (2) 149 (1999), no. 3, 1061–1077. MR 1709311
[Fis76]  J. Fischer, Counterexamples to two problems on one-relator groups, Canad. Math.
         Bull. 19 (1976), no. 3, 363–364.
[Fis77]  Jerrold Fischer, Torsion-free subgroups of finite index in one-relator groups, Comm.
         Algebra 5 (1977), no. 11, 1211–1222.
[Fis24]  Sam P Fisher, On the cohomological dimension of kernels of maps to 𭟋, 2024.
[FKS72]  J. Fischer, A. Karrass, and D. Solitar, On one-relator groups having elements of finite
         order, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 33 (1972), 297–301. MR 311780
[FM24]   Jonathan Fruchter and Ismael Morales, Virtual homology of limit groups and profinite
         rigidity of direct products, 2024, arXiv:2209.14925.
[Fox52]  Ralph H. Fox, On Fenchel’s conjecture about F -groups, Mat. Tidsskr. B 1952 (1952),
         61–65.
[Fox54]           , Free differential calculus. II. The isomorphism problem of groups, Ann. of
         Math. (2) 59 (1954), 196–210.
[FP99]   Benjamin Fine and Ada Peluso, Amalgam decompositions for one-relator groups, J.
         Pure Appl. Algebra 141 (1999), no. 1, 1–11. MR 1705970
[FR40a]  D. I. Fuchs-Rabinovich, On a certain representation of a free group, Leningrad State
         Univ. Annals [Uchenye Zapiski] Math. Ser. 10 (1940), 154–157.
[FR40b]           , On the determinators of an operator of the free group, Rec. Math (Mat.
         Sbornik) 7 (1940), 197–206.
[Fre61]  Karen Norma Frederick, The Hopfian property for fundamental groups, 1961, Thesis
         (Ph.D.)–New York University.
[Fre63]  Karen N. Frederick, The Hopfian property for a class of fundamental groups, Comm.
         Pure Appl. Math. 16 (1963), 1–8.
[Fro01]  G. Frobenius, Über auflösbare Gruppen. IV., Berl. Ber. 1901 (1901), 1216–1230 (Ger-
         man).
[FRR93]  Benjamin Fine, Frank Röhl, and Gerhard Rosenberger, On HNN-groups whose three-
         generator subgroups are free, Infinite groups and group rings (Tuscaloosa, AL, 1992),
         Ser. Algebra, vol. 1, World Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, 1993, pp. 13–36. MR 1377954
[FRS95]  Benjamin Fine, Gerhard Rosenberger, and Michael Stille, Nielsen transformations
         and applications: a survey, Groups—Korea ’94 (Pusan), de Gruyter, Berlin, 1995,
         pp. 69–105.
[FSP24]  Sam P. Fisher and Pablo Sánchez-Peralta, Division rings for group algebras of virtu-
         ally compact special groups, 2024, arXiv:2303.08165.
[FT20]   Stefan Friedl and Stephan Tillmann, Two-generator one-relator groups and marked
         polytopes, Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble) 70 (2020), no. 2, 831–879. MR 4105952
[Gar17]  Giles Gardam, Encoding and detecting properties in finitely presented groups, Dphil
         thesis thesis, University of Oxford, 2017.
[Ger92]  S. M. Gersten, Dehn functions and l1 -norms of finite presentations, Algorithms and
         classification in combinatorial group theory (Berkeley, CA, 1989), Math. Sci. Res.
         Inst. Publ., vol. 23, Springer, New York, 1992, pp. 195–224. MR 1230635
[Ger93]  Steve M. Gersten, Isoperimetric and isodiametric functions of finite presentations,
         Geometric group theory, Vol. 1 (Sussex, 1991), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser.,
         vol. 181, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993, pp. 79–96. MR 1238517
[Ger94]  S. M. Gersten, The automorphism group of a free group is not a CATp0q group, Proc.
         Amer. Math. Soc. 121 (1994), no. 4, 999–1002. MR 1195719
[Ger96]           , Subgroups of word hyperbolic groups in dimension 2, J. London Math. Soc.
         (2) 54 (1996), no. 2, 261–283. MR 1405055
[Ger98]           , Cohomological lower bounds for isoperimetric functions on groups, Topology
         37 (1998), no. 5, 1031–1072. MR 1650363
[GHMR00] N. D. Gilbert, J. Howie, V. Metaftsis, and E. Raptis, Tree actions of automorphism
         groups, J. Group Theory 3 (2000), no. 2, 213–223.
[Gie12]  Hugo Gieseking, Analytische Untersuchungen über topologische Gruppen, 1912, The-
         sis (Ph.D.)–Münster.
[Gil79]  Dion Gildenhuys, Classification of soluble groups of cohomological dimension two,
         Math. Z. 166 (1979), no. 1, 21–25.
150                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[GK75]      A. V. Gorjaga and A. S. Kirkinskiı̆, The decidability of the conjugacy problem cannot
            be transferred to finite extensions of groups, Algebra i Logika 14 (1975), no. 4, 393–
            406.
[GKL23]     Giles Gardam, Dawid Kielak, and Alan D. Logan, The surface group conjectures for
            groups with two generators, Math. Res. Lett. 30 (2023), no. 1, 109–123. MR 4608550
[GKL24]     Giles Gardam, Dawid Kielak, and Alan D. Logan, JSJ decompositions and polytopes
            for two-generator one-relator groups, 2024, arXiv:2101.02193.
[GL70]      Ju. M. Gorčakov and V. M. Levčuk, The approximation of free groups, Algebra i
            Logika 9 (1970), 415–421.
[GL17]      Vincent Guirardel and Gilbert Levitt, JSJ decompositions of groups, Astérisque
            (2017), no. 395, vii+165. MR 3758992
[Grä20a]   Joachim Gräter, Free division rings of fractions of crossed products of groups with
            Conradian left-orders, Forum Math. 32 (2020), no. 3, 739–772. MR 4095506
[Gra20b]    Robert D. Gray, Undecidability of the word problem for one-relator inverse monoids
            via right-angled Artin subgroups of one-relator groups, Invent. Math. 219 (2020),
            no. 3, 987–1008. MR 4055182
[Gre60a]    Leon Greenberg, Discrete groups of motions, Canadian J. Math. 12 (1960), 415–426.
[Gre60b]    Martin Greendlinger, Dehn’s algorithm for the word problem, 1960, Thesis (Ph.D.)–
            New York University.
[Gre60c]            , Dehn’s algorithm for the word problem, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 13 (1960),
            67–83.
[Gre60d]            , On Dehn’s algorithms for the conjugacy and word problems, with applica-
            tions, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 13 (1960), 641–677.
[Gre61]             , An analogue of a theorem of Magnus, Arch. Math. 12 (1961), 94–96.
[Gre70]     M. D. Greendlinger, Conjugacy of subgroups of free groups, Sibirsk. Mat. Ž. 11 (1970),
            1178–1180, 1199.
[Gri]       M. D. Grindlinger, On Magnus’s generalized word problem, Sibirsk. Mat. Ž.
[Gro74]     Edna K. Grossman, On the residual finiteness of certain mapping class groups, J.
            London Math. Soc. (2) 9 (1974), 160–164.
[Gro85]     Grzegorz Gromadzki, Homology of one-relator groups with twisted coefficients, Publ.
            Sec. Mat. Univ. Autònoma Barcelona 29 (1985), no. 2-3, 17–37.
[Gro87]     M. Gromov, Hyperbolic groups, Essays in group theory, Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ.,
            vol. 8, Springer, New York, 1987, pp. 75–263. MR 919829
[Gro90]     J. R. J. Groves, Rewriting systems and homology of groups, Groups—Canberra 1989,
            Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1456, Springer, Berlin, 1990, pp. 114–141.
[Gru62]     Karl Gruenberg, The residual nilpotence of certain presentations of finite groups,
            Arch. Math. (Basel) 13 (1962), 408–417.
[Gru70]     Karl W. Gruenberg, Cohomological topics in group theory, Lecture Notes in Mathe-
            matics, Vol. 143, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1970.
[Gur72]     G. A. Gurevich, On the conjugacy problem for groups with one defining relation,
            Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 207 (1972), 18–20.
[Gur73]             , On the conjugacy problem for groups with a single defining relation, Trudy
            Mat. Inst. Steklov. 133 (1973), 109–120, 275.
[GW19]      Giles Gardam and Daniel J. Woodhouse, The geometry of one-relator groups satisfy-
            ing a polynomial isoperimetric inequality, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 147 (2019), no. 1,
            125–129. MR 3876736
[HA38]      D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann, Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik, Die
            Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften in Einzeldarstellungen mit beson-
            derer Berücksichtigung der Anwendungsgebiete, Band XXVII, Springer-Verlag,
            Berlin-Göttingen-Heidelberg, 1938, 2d ed.
[Hal97]     George Bruce Halsted, Biography: Alexander Vasilievitch Vasiliev, Amer. Math.
            Monthly 4 (1897), no. 11, 265–267.
[Hal34]     P. Hall, A Contribution to the Theory of Groups of Prime-Power Order, Proc. London
            Math. Soc. (2) 36 (1934), 29–95.
[Hal50]     Marshall Hall, Jr., A topology for free groups and related groups, Ann. of Math. (2)
            52 (1950), 127–139.
[Hal54]     P. Hall, The splitting properties of relatively free groups, Proc. London Math. Soc.
            (3) 4 (1954), 343–356.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            151


[Hal61]            , The Frattini subgroups of finitely generated groups, Proc. London Math. Soc.
           (3) 11 (1961), 327–352.
[Ham56]    Sir William Rowan Hamilton, Memorandum respecting a new system of roots of unity,
           The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science
           12 (1856), no. 81, 446–446.
[Har15]    Jens Harlander, On the relation gap and relation lifting problem, Groups St Andrews
           2013, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 422, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cam-
           bridge, 2015, pp. 278–285. MR 3495661
[HF94]     K. J. Horadam and G. E. Farr, The conjugacy problem for HNN extensions with
           infinite cyclic associated groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 120 (1994), no. 4, 1009–
           1015.
[Hig40]    Graham. Higman, The units of group-rings, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 46 (1940),
           231–248.
[Hig51]    Graham Higman, A finitely related group with an isomorphic proper factor group, J.
           London Math. Soc. 26 (1951), 59–61.
[Hir46]    K. A. Hirsch, On infinite soluble groups. III, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 49 (1946),
           184–194.
[Hir69]    R. Hirshon, Some theorems on hopficity, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 141 (1969), 229–
           244.
[Hir75]    Ronald Hirshon, The intersection of the subgroups of finite index in some finitely
           presented groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 53 (1975), no. 1, 32–36.
[HK20]     Fabian Henneke and Dawid Kielak, The agrarian polytope of two-generator one-
           relator groups, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 102 (2020), no. 2, 722–748. MR 4171432
[HKS71]    A. Howard M. Hoare, Abraham Karrass, and Donald Solitar, Subgroups of finite index
           of Fuchsian groups, Math. Z. 120 (1971), 289–298.
[HKS72]            , Subgroups of infinite index in Fuchsian groups, Math. Z. 125 (1972), 59–69.
[HL74]     P. J. Higgins and R. C. Lyndon, Equivalence of elements under automorphisms of a
           free group, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 8 (1974), 254–258.
[HLM85]    Cynthia Hog, Martin Lustig, and Wolfgang Metzler, Presentation classes, 3-manifolds
           and free products, Geometry and topology (College Park, Md., 1983/84), Lecture
           Notes in Math., vol. 1167, Springer, Berlin, 1985, pp. 154–167.
[HNN49]    Graham Higman, B. H. Neumann, and Hanna Neumann, Embedding theorems for
           groups, J. London Math. Soc. 24 (1949), 247–254.
[Hop31]    Heinz Hopf, Beiträge zur Klassifizierung der Flächenabbildungen, J. Reine Angew.
           Math. 165 (1931), 225–236.
[Hor81a]   K. J. Horadam, The diagonal comultiplication on homology, J. Pure Appl. Algebra
           20 (1981), no. 2, 165–172.
[Hor81b]           , A quick test for nonisomorphism of one-relator groups, Proc. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 81 (1981), no. 2, 195–200.
[Hor82a]           , One-relator groups and the lower central series. I. The splitting isomorphism,
           J. Pure Appl. Algebra 24 (1982), no. 2, 157–169.
[Hor82b]   Kathryn J. Horadam, One-relator groups and the lower central series. II. Invariants
           of one-relator groups, Math. Z. 179 (1982), no. 3, 359–368.
[How54]    A. G. Howson, On the intersection of finitely generated free groups, J. London Math.
           Soc. 29 (1954), 428–434.
[How81]    James Howie, On pairs of 2-complexes and systems of equations over groups, J. Reine
           Angew. Math. 324 (1981), 165–174. MR 614523
[How82]            , On locally indicable groups, Math. Z. 180 (1982), no. 4, 445–461. MR 667000
[How83]            , Some remarks on a problem of J. H. C. Whitehead, Topology 22 (1983),
           no. 4, 475–485.
[How84]            , Cohomology of one-relator products of locally indicable groups, J. London
           Math. Soc. (2) 30 (1984), no. 3, 419–430.
[How85]    Paul E. Howard, Subgroups of a free group and the axiom of choice, J. Symbolic Logic
           50 (1985), no. 2, 458–467.
[How87]    James Howie, How to generalize one-relator group theory, Combinatorial group theory
           and topology (Alta, Utah, 1984), Ann. of Math. Stud., vol. 111, Princeton Univ. Press,
           Princeton, NJ, 1987, pp. 53–78.
152                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[How05]             , Magnus intersections in one-relator products, Michigan Math. J. 53 (2005),
           no. 3, 597–623. MR 2207211
[HS23]     James Howie and Hamish Short, Coherence and one-relator products of locally indi-
           cable groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 17 (2023), no. 3, 1085–1113. MR 4622403
[Hug66]    Ian Hughes, The second cohomology groups of one-relator groups, Comm. Pure Appl.
           Math. 19 (1966), 299–308.
[Hug70]             , Division rings of fractions for group rings, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 23
           (1970), 181–188. MR 263934
[Hur30]    W. Hurewicz, Zu einer Arbeit von O. Schreier., Abh. Math. Semin. Univ. Hamb. 8
           (1930), 307–314.
[Hur80]    R. Daniel Hurwitz, On cyclic subgroups and the conjugacy problem, Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 79 (1980), no. 1, 1–8.
[HW08]     Frédéric Haglund and Daniel T. Wise, Special cube complexes, Geom. Funct. Anal.
           17 (2008), no. 5, 1551–1620. MR 2377497
[HW10]     Tim Hsu and Daniel T. Wise, Cubulating graphs of free groups with cyclic edge groups,
           Amer. J. Math. 132 (2010), no. 5, 1153–1188. MR 2732342
[HW16]     Joseph Helfer and Daniel T. Wise, Counting cycles in labeled graphs: the nonpositive
           immersion property for one-relator groups, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2016), no. 9,
           2813–2827. MR 3519130
[IMM23]    Giovanni Italiano, Bruno Martelli, and Matteo Migliorini, Hyperbolic 5-manifolds that
           fiber over S 1 , Invent. Math. 231 (2023), no. 1, 1–38. MR 4526820
[Imr77]    Wilfried Imrich, On finitely generated subgroups of free groups, Arch. Math. (Basel)
           28 (1977), no. 1, 21–24.
[IS98]     S. V. Ivanov and P. E. Schupp, On the hyperbolicity of small cancellation groups
           and one-relator groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 350 (1998), no. 5, 1851–1894.
           MR 1401522
[Iwa43]    Kenkiti Iwasawa, Einige Sätze über freie Gruppen, Proc. Imp. Acad. Tokyo 19 (1943),
           272–274.
[Jan88]    Matthias Jantzen, Confluent string rewriting, EATCS Monographs on Theoretical
           Computer Science, vol. 14, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988.
[JZ23]     Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain, The finite and solvable genus of finitely generated free and
           surface groups, Res. Math. Sci. 10 (2023), no. 4, Paper No. 44, 24. MR 4651132
[JZL23]    Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Marco Linton, On the coherence of one-relator groups
           and their group algebras, 2023, arxiv:2303.05976.
[JZLA20]   Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Diego López-Álvarez, The strong Atiyah and Lück approx-
           imation conjectures for one-relator groups, Math. Ann. 376 (2020), no. 3-4, 1741–
           1793. MR 4081128
[JZM24a]   Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Ismael Morales, Parafree graphs of groups with cyclic edge
           groups, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 109 (2024), no. 6, Paper No. e12937, 24. MR 4751867
[JZM24b]   Andrei Jaikin-Zapirain and Ismael Morales, Prosolvable rigidity of surface groups,
           2024, arXiv:2312.12293.
[Kap96]    Ilya Kapovich, Quasiconvex subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion, 1996, Thesis
           (Ph.D.)–City University of New York.
[Kap97]             , Amalgamated products and the Howson property, Canad. Math. Bull. 40
           (1997), no. 3, 330–340.
[Kap99]             , Howson property and one-relator groups, Comm. Algebra 27 (1999), no. 3,
           1057–1072. MR 1669108
[Kap01]             , The combination theorem and quasiconvexity, Internat. J. Algebra Comput.
           11 (2001), no. 2, 185–216. MR 1829050
[Kas69]    E. V. Kashintsev, Generalization of a result of Greendlinger, Ivanov. Gos. Ped. Inst.
           Učen. Zap. 61 (1969), no. mat., 152–155.
[Kas85]             , Analogues of a theorem of Magnus for groups with small cancellation and
           the impossibility of strengthening them, Mat. Zametki 38 (1985), no. 4, 494–502, 634.
[Kha81]    O. G. Kharlampovich, A finitely presented solvable group with unsolvable word prob-
           lem, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 45 (1981), no. 4, 852–873, 928.
[Kie20]    Dawid Kielak, Residually finite rationally solvable groups and virtual fibring, J. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 33 (2020), no. 2, 451–486. MR 4073866
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            153


[KK35]     V. Kalashnikov and A. Kurosh, Free products of groups with amalgamated subgroups
           of the centres, C. R. (Dokl.) Acad. Sci. URSS, n. Ser. 1935 (1935), no. 1, 285–286.
[KL24]     Dawid Kielak and Marco Linton, Virtually free-by-cyclic groups, Geom. Funct. Anal.
           34 (2024), no. 5, 1580–1608. MR 4792841
[Kle82]    F. Klein, Über Riemanns Theorie der Algebraischen Funktionen und Ihre Integrale,
           Ges. Math. Abh. III (1882), 499–573.
[Kle15]    Philipp Kleppmann, Nielsen-Schreier and the axiom of choice, MLQ Math. Log. Q.
           61 (2015), no. 6, 458–465.
[KM68]     Robert A. Katz and Wilhelm Magnus, Residual properties of free groups, Comm. Pure
           Appl. Math. 22 (1968), 1–13.
[KM88]     M. A. Kavutskii and D. I. Moldavanskii, On a class of one-relator groups, Algebraic
           and discrete systems (Russian), Ivanov. Gos. Univ., Ivanovo, 1988, pp. 35–48, 134.
           MR 1244585
[KM18]     E. I. Khukhro and V. D. Mazurov (eds.), The Kourovka notebook, Sobolev Institute
           of Mathematics. Russian Academy of Sciences. Siberian Branch, Novosibirsk, 2018,
           Unsolved problems in group theory, Nineteenth edition [ MR0204500], March 2019
           update. MR 3981599
[KM24]     E. I. Khukhro and V. D. Mazurov (eds.), The Kourovka notebook, Sobolev Institute
           of Mathematics. Russian Academy of Sciences. Siberian Branch, Novosibirsk, 2024,
           Unsolved problems in group theory, 20th Edition.
[KMS60]    A. Karrass, W. Magnus, and D. Solitar, Elements of finite order in groups with a
           single defining relation, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 13 (1960), 57–66. MR 124384
[KMT95]    G. Kim, J. McCarron, and C. Y. Tang, Adjoining roots to conjugacy separable groups,
           J. Algebra 176 (1995), no. 2, 327–345.
[Kne29]    H. Kneser, Closed surfaces in three-dimensional manifolds, Jahresber. Dtsch. Math.-
           Ver. 38 (1929), 248–260.
[Kob90]    Yuji Kobayashi, Complete rewriting systems and homology of monoid algebras, J.
           Pure Appl. Algebra 65 (1990), no. 3, 263–275.
[KPS73]    A. Karrass, A. Pietrowski, and D. Solitar, Finite and infinite cyclic extensions of free
           groups, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 458–466.
[KPS74]            , An improved subgroup theorem for HNN groups with some applications,
           Canadian J. Math. 26 (1974), 214–224.
[KPS84a]   Abe Karrass, Alfred Pietrowski, and Donald Solitar, Automorphisms of a free prod-
           uct with an amalgamated subgroup, Contributions to group theory, Contemp. Math.,
           vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984, pp. 328–340.
[KPS84b]           , Some remarks on braid groups, Contributions to group theory, Contemp.
           Math., vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984, pp. 341–352.
[KS69]     Abraham Karrass and Donald Solitar, On groups with one defining relation having
           an abelian normal subgroup, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 23 (1969), 5–10.
[KS70]     A. Karrass and D. Solitar, The subgroups of a free product of two groups with an
           amalgamated subgroup, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 150 (1970), 227–255. MR 260879
[KS71a]            , The free product of two groups with a malnormal amalgamated subgroup,
           Canadian J. Math. 23 (1971), 933–959.
[KS71b]            , Subgroups of HNN groups and groups with one defining relation, Canadian
           J. Math. 23 (1971), 627–643. MR 301102
[KS72]             , On a theorem of Cohen and Lyndon about free bases for normal subgroups,
           Canadian J. Math. 24 (1972), 1086–1091.
[KS73]             , On finitely generated subgroups which are of finite index in generalized free
           products, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 37 (1973), 22–28.
[KS78]             , One relator groups having a finitely presented normal subgroup, Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 69 (1978), no. 2, 219–222.
[KS05]     Ilya Kapovich and Paul Schupp, Genericity, the Arzhantseva-Ol’shanskii method and
           the isomorphism problem for one-relator groups, Math. Ann. 331 (2005), no. 1, 1–19.
           MR 2107437
[Kur34]    Alexander Kurosh, Die Untergruppen der freien Produkte von beliebigen Gruppen,
           Math. Ann. 109 (1934), no. 1, 647–660.
154                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Kuz58]    A. V. Kuznetsov, Algorithms as operations in algebraic systems, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk
           13 (1958), 240–241, In Russian. Part of the Proceedings of the All-Union Colloquium
           on Algebra.
[KW04]     Ilya Kapovich and Richard Weidmann, Freely indecomposable groups acting on hy-
           perbolic spaces, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 14 (2004), no. 2, 115–171. MR 2058318
[KWM05]    Ilya Kapovich, Richard Weidmann, and Alexei Miasnikov, Foldings, graphs of groups
           and the membership problem, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 15 (2005), no. 1, 95–128.
           MR 2130178
[La772]    Lectures on rings and modules, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. Vol. 246, Springer-
           Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1972, Tulane University Ring and Operator Theory Year,
           1970–1971, Vol. I. MR 345765
[Lab67]    John P. Labute, Algèbres de Lie et pro-p-groupes définis par une seule relation, Invent.
           Math. 4 (1967), 142–158.
[Lab70]            , On the descending central series of groups with a single defining relation, J.
           Algebra 14 (1970), 16–23.
[Lab77]            , The lower central series of the group xx, y : xp “ 1y, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
           66 (1977), no. 2, 197–201.
[Lar77]    Leif Larsen, The conjugacy problem and cyclic HNN constructions, J. Austral. Math.
           Soc. Ser. A 23 (1977), no. 4, 385–401. MR 480757
[Lau14]    Jürn Laun, Efficient algorithms for highly compressed data: the word problem in
           generalized Higman groups is in P, Theory Comput. Syst. 55 (2014), no. 4, 742–770.
           MR 3259500
[Leh70]    Joseph Lehner, A property of the triangle groups, J. Res. Nat. Bur. Standards Sect.
           B 74B (1970), 231–233.
[Lev30]    Friedrich Levi, Über die Untergruppen freier Gruppen, Math. Z. 32 (1930), no. 1,
           315–318.
[Lev33]    F. Levi, Über die Untergruppen der freien Gruppen, Math. Zeit. 37 (1933), 90–97.
[Lev91]    J. Levine, Finitely-presented groups with long lower central series, Israel J. Math. 73
           (1991), no. 1, 57–64.
[Lew67]    Tekla Lewin, Finitely generated D-groups, J. Austral. Math. Soc. 7 (1967), 375–409.
[Lew74]    Jacques Lewin, Fields of fractions for group algebras of free groups, Trans. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 192 (1974), 339–346. MR 338055
[Lin22a]   Marco Linton, One-relator hierarchies, 2022, arXiv:20202.11324. To appear in Duke
           Math. J.
[Lin22b]   Marco Linton, One-relator hierarchies, PhD thesis, University of Warwick, 2022.
[Lin24a]   Marco Linton, Hyperbolic one-relator groups, Canadian Journal of Mathematics
           (2024), 1–27.
[Lin24b]   Marco Linton, Lifting relations in right orderable groups, 2024, arXiv:2412.17057.
[Lin24c]           , Residually rationally solvable one-relator groups, 2024, arXiv:2407.09272.
[Lip65]    Seymour Lipschutz, Powers in eighth-groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1965),
           1105–1106.
[Lip66]            , Generalization of Dehn’s result on the conjugacy problem, Proc. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 17 (1966), 759–762.
[Lip68]            , On powers in generalized free products of groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 19
           (1968), 575–576.
[Lip69]            , On the conjugacy problem and Greendlinger’s eighth-groups, Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 23 (1969), 101–106.
[Lip75]            , The conjugacy problem and cyclic amalgamations, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
           81 (1975), 114–116.
[Lis48]    J. B. Listing, Vorstudien zur Topologie, Göttingen : Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht,
           1848, Abgedruckt aus den Göttinger studien. 1847.
[LL78]     Jacques Lewin and Tekla Lewin, An embedding of the group algebra of a torsion-free
           one-relator group in a field, J. Algebra 52 (1978), no. 1, 39–74. MR 485972
[LL94]     Robert H. Lewis and Sal Liriano, Isomorphism classes and derived series of certain
           almost-free groups, Experiment. Math. 3 (1994), no. 3, 255–258. MR 1329373
[Loc34]    L. Locher, Die Untergruppen der freien Gruppen, Comment. Math. Helv. 6 (1934),
           no. 1, 76–82.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          155


[Log99]    E. D. Loginova, Residual finiteness of the free product of two groups with commuting
           subgroups, Sibirsk. Mat. Zh. 40 (1999), no. 2, 395–407, iii.
[Log16]    Alan D. Logan, The outer automorphism groups of two-generator, one-relator groups
           with torsion, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 144 (2016), no. 10, 4135–4150. MR 3531167
[Log23]    Alan D. Logan, The conjugacy problem for ascending hnn-extensions of free groups,
           2023, arXiv:2209.04357.
[Lou15]    Larsen Louder, Nielsen equivalence in closed surface groups, 2015, arXiv:1009.0454.
[Löw15]   Leopold Löwenheim, Über Möglichkeiten im Relativkalkül, Math. Ann. 76 (1915),
           no. 4, 447–470.
[LS77]     Roger C. Lyndon and Paul E. Schupp, Combinatorial group theory, Ergebnisse der
           Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas],
           Band 89, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1977.
[LS01]             , Combinatorial group theory, Classics in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag,
           Berlin, 2001, Reprint of the 1977 edition. MR 1812024
[LS08]     Markus Lohrey and Benjamin Steinberg, The submonoid and rational subset mem-
           bership problems for graph groups, J. Algebra 320 (2008), no. 2, 728–755.
[LS12]     Peter A. Linnell and Thomas Schick, The Atiyah conjecture and Artinian rings, Pure
           Appl. Math. Q. 8 (2012), no. 2, 313–327. MR 2900171
[Lub86]    Alexander Lubotzky, On a problem of Magnus, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 98 (1986),
           no. 4, 583–585.
[Lüc02]   Wolfgang Lück, L2 -invariants: theory and applications to geometry and K-theory,
           Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern
           Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A
           Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics], vol. 44, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002.
           MR 1926649
[LW13]     Joseph Lauer and Daniel T. Wise, Cubulating one-relator groups with torsion, Math.
           Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 155 (2013), no. 3, 411–429. MR 3118410
[LW17]     Larsen Louder and Henry Wilton, Stackings and the W -cycles conjecture, Canad.
           Math. Bull. 60 (2017), no. 3, 604–612. MR 3679733
[LW20]             , One-relator groups with torsion are coherent, Math. Res. Lett. 27 (2020),
           no. 5, 1499–1511. MR 4216595
[LW22]             , Negative immersions for one-relator groups, Duke Math. J. 171 (2022), no. 3,
           547–594. MR 4382976
[LW24]             , Uniform negative immersions and the coherence of one-relator groups, In-
           vent. Math. 236 (2024), no. 2, 673–712. MR 4728240
[Lyn47]    Roger C. Lyndon, The cohomology theory of group extensions, 1947, Thesis (Ph.D.)–
           Harvard University.
[Lyn48]            , The cohomology theory of group extensions, Duke Math. J. 15 (1948), 271–
           292.
[Lyn49]    Roger Lyndon, New proof for a theorem of Eilenberg and MacLane, Ann. of Math.
           (2) 50 (1949), 731–735.
[Lyn50]    Roger C. Lyndon, Cohomology theory of groups with a single defining relation, Ann.
           of Math. (2) 52 (1950), 650–665. MR 47046
[Lyn53]    R. C. Lyndon, On the Fouxe-Rabinovitch series for free groups, Portugal. Math. 12
           (1953), 115–118.
[Lyn62]    Roger C. Lyndon, Dependence and independence in free groups, J. Reine Angew.
           Math. 210 (1962), 148–174. MR 150188
[Lyn66]            , On Dehn’s algorithm, Math. Ann. 166 (1966), 208–228.
[Lyn72]            , On the Freiheitssatz, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 5 (1972), 95–101. MR 294465
[Mac63]    A. M. Macbeath, Packings, free products and residually finite groups, Proc. Cam-
           bridge Philos. Soc. 59 (1963), 555–558.
[Mag30]    Wilhelm Magnus, Über diskontinuierliche Gruppen mit einer definierenden Relation.
           (Der Freiheitssatz), J. Reine Angew. Math. 163 (1930), 141–165. MR 1581238
[Mag31]            , Untersuchungen über einige unendliche diskontinuierliche Gruppen, Math.
           Ann. 105 (1931), no. 1, 52–74.
[Mag32]    W. Magnus, Das Identitätsproblem für Gruppen mit einer definierenden Relation,
           Math. Ann. 106 (1932), no. 1, 295–307. MR 1512760
156                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Mag35]    Wilhelm Magnus, Beziehungen zwischen Gruppen und Idealen in einem speziellen
           Ring, Math. Ann. 111 (1935), no. 1, 259–280.
[Mag39]            , Über freie Faktorgruppen und freie Untergruppen gegebener Gruppen,
           Monatsh. Math. Phys. 47 (1939), no. 1, 307–313. MR 1550819
[Mag69]    W. Magnus, Residually finite groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 75 (1969), 305–316.
[Mag75]    Wilhelm Magnus, Two generator subgroups of PSL p2, Cq, Nachr. Akad. Wiss.
           Göttingen Math.-Phys. Kl. II (1975), no. 7, 81–94.
[Mag78]            , Max Dehn, Math. Intelligencer 1 (1978), no. 3, 132–143.
[Mag84]            , Collected papers, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1984, Edited and with intro-
           ductory material by Gilbert Baumslag and Bruce Chandler.
[Mah71]    V: L. Mahimovski, Directly decomposable groups with one defining relation, Ivanov.
           Gos. Ped. Inst. Uchen. Zap. 106 (1971), 115–122, In Russian.
[Mal40]    A. I. Mal’cev, On isomorphic matrix representations of infinite groups, Rec. Math.
           [Mat. Sbornik] N.S. 8(50) (1940), 405–422.
[Mal48]            , On the embedding of group algebras in division algebras, Doklady Akad. Nauk
           SSSR (N.S.) 60 (1948), 1499–1501. MR 25457
[Mal58]            , Homomorphisms onto finite groups, Uch. Zap. Ivanovskogo Ped. Inst. 18
           (1958), 49–60, In Russian.
[Mal62]            , On the equation zxyx´1 y ´1 z ´1 “ aba´1 b´1 in a free group, Algebra i Logika
           Sem. 1 (1962), no. 5, 45–50.
[Mar47a]   A. A. Markov, The impossibility of certain algorithms in the theory of associative
           systems. II, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR (N.S.) 58 (1947), 353–356.
[Mar47b]           , On the impossibility of certain algorithms in the theory of associative sys-
           tems, C. R. (Doklady) Acad. Sci. URSS (N.S.) 55 (1947), 583–586.
[Mas63]    Bernard Maskit, On a conjecture concerning planar coverings of surfaces, Bull. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 69 (1963), 396–398.
[Mas06]    Joseph D. Masters, Heegaard splittings and 1-relator groups, unpublished paper, 2006.
[Mat67]    Yu. V. Matiyasevich, Simple examples of unsolvable associative calculi, Dokl. Akad.
           Nauk SSSR 173 (1967), 1264–1266.
[McC81]    James McCool, A counterexample to conjectures of Papakyriakopoulos and Swarup,
           Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 81 (1981), no. 2, 193–194.
[McC91]            , A class of one-relator groups with centre, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 44 (1991),
           no. 2, 245–252.
[McC00]            , Free group roots of ak bl and rak , bs, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 10 (2000),
           no. 3, 339–347.
[McC01]            , On a question of Remeslennikov, Glasg. Math. J. 43 (2001), no. 1, 123–124.
           MR 1825727
[McK41]    J. C. C. McKinsey, A solution of the decision problem for the Lewis systems S2 and
           S4, with an application to topology, J. Symbolic Logic 6 (1941), 117–134.
[McK43]            , The decision problem for some classes of sentences without quantifiers, J.
           Symbolic Logic 8 (1943), 61–76.
[Men67]    J. Mennicke, Eine Bemerkung über Fuchssche Gruppen, Invent. Math. 2 (1967), 301–
           305.
[Men68]            , Corrigendum zu: “Eine Bemerkung über Fuchssche Gruppen”, Invent. Math.
           6 (1968), 106.
[Mes68]    Stephen Meskin, On the classification of some one-relator groups, 1968, Thesis
           (Ph.D.)–City University of New York.
[Mes69]            , On some groups with a single defining relator, Math. Ann. 184 (1969), 193–
           196.
[Mes72]            , Nonresidually finite one-relator groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 164 (1972),
           105–114.
[Mes74]            , A finitely generated residually finite group with an unsolvable word problem,
           Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 43 (1974), 8–10.
[Mes75]            , The isomorphism problem for a class of one-relator groups, Math. Ann. 217
           (1975), no. 1, 53–57.
[Met99]    V. Metaftsis, An algorithm for stem products and one-relator groups, Proc. Edinburgh
           Math. Soc. (2) 42 (1999), no. 1, 37–42.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            157


[Mik58]    K. A. Mikhailova, The occurrence problem for direct products of groups, Dokl. Akad.
           Nauk SSSR 119 (1958), 1103–1105.
[Mik16]    Roman Mikhailov, A one-relator group with long lower central series, Forum Math.
           28 (2016), no. 2, 327–331. MR 3466572
[Mil52]    Clair Miller, The second homology group of a group; relations among commutators,
           Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (1952), 588–595.
[Mil68]    Charles F. Miller, III, On Britton’s theorem A, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (1968),
           1151–1154.
[Mil71]            , On group-theoretic decision problems and their classification, Annals of
           Mathematics Studies, No. 68, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ; University
           of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, 1971.
[Mil21]    Benjamin Millard, Stackings and one-relator products of groups, Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
           versity College London, 2021.
[MKS66]    Wilhelm Magnus, Abraham Karrass, and Donald Solitar, Combinatorial group theory:
           Presentations of groups in terms of generators and relations, Interscience Publishers
           [John Wiley & Sons], New York-London-Sydney, 1966.
[MKS04]            , Combinatorial group theory, second ed., Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola,
           NY, 2004, Presentations of groups in terms of generators and relations. MR 2109550
[ML84]     Saunders Mac Lane, Spectral complications in cohomology computations, Contribu-
           tions to group theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
           1984, pp. 11–23.
[MM54]     Wilhelm Magnus and Ruth Moufang, Max Dehn zum Gedächtnis, Math. Ann. 127
           (1954), 215–227.
[MO15]     Ashot Minasyan and Denis Osin, Acylindrical hyperbolicity of groups acting on trees,
           Math. Ann. 362 (2015), no. 3-4, 1055–1105. MR 3368093
[Mol67]    D. I. Moldavanskiı̆, Certain subgroups of groups with one defining relation, Sibirsk.
           Mat. Ž. 8 (1967), 1370–1384. MR 0220810
[Mol68]    D. I. Moldavanskii, The intersection of finitely generated subgroups, Sibirsk. Mat. Ž.
           9 (1968), 1422–1426.
[Mol69a]           , A certain theorem of Magnus, Ivanov. Gos. Ped. Inst. Učen. Zap. 44 (1969),
           no. mat., 26–28.
[Mol69b]           , Conjugacy of subgroups of a free group, Algebra i Logika 8 (1969), 691–694.
[Mol69c]           , Nielsen’s method for a free product of groups, Ivanov. Gos. Ped. Inst. Učen.
           Zap. 61 (1969), no. mat., 170–182.
[Mor81]    Siegfried Moran, On a conjecture of Papakyriakopoulos, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
           4 (1981), no. 2, 189–191.
[Mos66]    A. Wlodzimierz Mostowski, On the decidability of some problems in special classes
           of groups, Fund. Math. 59 (1966), 123–135.
[MP71]     James McCool and Alfred Pietrowski, On free products with amalgamation of two
           infinite cyclic groups, J. Algebra 18 (1971), 377–383.
[MP73]             , On a conjecture of W. Magnus, Word problems: decision problems and the
           Burnside problem in group theory (Conf., Univ. California, Irvine, Calif., 1969; ded-
           icated to Hanna Neumann), Stud. Logic Found. Math., vol. Vol. 71, North-Holland,
           Amsterdam-London, 1973, pp. 453–456. MR 399269
[MPS73]    Stephen Meskin, A. Pietrowski, and Arthur Steinberg, One-relator groups with center,
           J. Austral. Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 319–323.
[MS71]     Charles F. Miller, III and Paul E. Schupp, Embeddings into Hopfian groups, J. Algebra
           17 (1971), 171–176.
[MS73]     James McCool and Paul E. Schupp, On one relator groups and HNN extensions, J.
           Austral. Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 249–256. MR 338186
[MS95]     D. Moldavanski and N. Sibyakova, On the finite images of some one-relator groups,
           Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 123 (1995), no. 7, 2017–2020. MR 1273511
[MT87]     D. I. Moldavanskii and L. V. Timofeeva, Finitely generated subgroups of a group which
           is defined by one relation and has a nontrivial center that are finitely separable, Izv.
           Vyssh. Uchebn. Zaved. Mat. (1987), no. 12, 58–59, 81.
[MT92]     Michael L. Mihalik and Steven T. Tschantz, One relator groups are semistable at
           infinity, Topology 31 (1992), no. 4, 801–804. MR 1191381
158                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Mur64]    Kunio Murasugi, The center of a group with a single defining relation, Math. Ann.
           155 (1964), 246–251. MR 163945
[Mur65]            , On the center of the group of a link, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1965),
           1052–1057.
[Mut21]    Jean Pierre Mutanguha, The dynamics and geometry of free group endomorphisms,
           Adv. Math. 384 (2021), Paper No. 107714, 60. MR 4237417
[MUW11]    Alexei Myasnikov, Alexander Ushakov, and Dong Wook Won, The word problem in the
           Baumslag group with a non-elementary Dehn function is polynomial time decidable,
           J. Algebra 345 (2011), 324–342. MR 2842068
[MZ13]     Ashot Minasyan and Pavel Zalesskii, One-relator groups with torsion are conjugacy
           separable, J. Algebra 382 (2013), 39–45.
[NA58]     P. S. Novikov and S. I. Adian, The word problem for semigroups with one-sided
           cancellation, Z. Math. Logik Grundlagen Math. 4 (1958), 66–88.
[Nag80]    Masayoshi Nagata, Commutativity of elements in an amalgamated product, Japan. J.
           Math. (N.S.) 6 (1980), no. 1, 173–178.
[NB21a]    Carl-Fredrik Nyberg-Brodda, The B B Newman spelling theorem, Br. J. Hist. Math.
           36 (2021), no. 2, 117–131.
[NB21b]            , The word problem for one-relation monoids: a survey, Semigroup Forum
           103 (2021), no. 2, 297–355.
[NB22]             , S. I. Adian’s papers on the undecidability of algorithmic problems in group
           theory (English translation), Available online at arXiv:2208.08560.
[Neu49]    B. H. Neumann, On ordered division rings, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 66 (1949), 202–
           252. MR 32593
[Neu50]            , A two-generator group isomorphic to a proper factor group, J. London Math.
           Soc. 25 (1950), 247–248.
[Neu54]            , An essay on free products of groups with amalgamations, Philos. Trans. Roy.
           Soc. London Ser. A 246 (1954), 503–554.
[Neu61]    Lee Neuwirth, An alternative proof of a theorem of Iwasawa on free groups, Proc.
           Cambridge Philos. Soc. 57 (1961), 895–896.
[Neu62]    B. H. Neumann, On a theorem of Auslander and Lyndon, Arch. Math. 13 (1962),
           4–9.
[Neu73]    Peter M. Neumann, The SQ-universality of some finitely presented groups, J. Austral.
           Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 1–6, Collection of articles dedicated to the memory of Hanna
           Neumann, I. MR 333017
[Neu74]    B. H. Neumann, Some groups I have known, Proceedings of the Second International
           Conference on the Theory of Groups (Australian Nat. Univ., Canberra, 1973), Lecture
           Notes in Math., Vol. 372, Springer, Berlin-New York, 1974, pp. 516–519.
[New68a]   B. B. Newman, Some results on one-relator groups, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 74 (1968),
           568–571. MR 222152
[New68b]   Bill Bateup Newman, Some aspects of one-relator groups, 1968, Thesis (Ph.D.)–
           University College of Townsville.
[New73]    B. B. Newman, The soluble subgroups of a one-relator group with torsion, J. Austral.
           Math. Soc. 16 (1973), 278–285.
[New74]    M. F. Newman (ed.), Proceedings of the Second International Conference on the
           Theory of Groups, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. Vol. 372, Springer-Verlag,
           Berlin-New York, 1974, Held at the Australian National University, Canberra, August
           13–24, 1973, With an introduction by B. H. Neumann. MR 344315
[Nie17]    J. Nielsen, Die Isomorphismen der allgemeinen, unendlichen Gruppe mit zwei Erzeu-
           genden, Math. Ann. 78 (1917), no. 1, 385–397. MR 1511907
[Nie18]            , Über die Isomorphismen unendlicher Gruppen ohne Relation, Math. Ann.
           79 (1918), no. 3, 269–272.
[Nie21]            , Om regning med ikke-kommutative faktorer og dens anvendelse i gruppete-
           orien, Mat. Tidsskr. B 1921 (1921), 78–94.
[Nie48]    Jakob Nielsen, Kommutatorgruppen for det frie produkt af cykliske grupper, Mat.
           Tidsskr. B 1948 (1948), 49–56.
[Nie55]            , A basis for subgroups of free groups, Math. Scand. 3 (1955), 31–43.
[NN51]     Bernhard H. Neumann and Hanna Neumann, Zwei Klassen charakteristischer Unter-
           gruppen und ihre Faktorgruppen, Math. Nachr. 4 (1951), 106–125.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            159


[Nov52]    P. S. Novikov, On algorithmic unsolvability of the problem of identity, Doklady Akad.
           Nauk SSSR (N.S.) 85 (1952), 709–712.
[Nov54]            , Unsolvability of the conjugacy problem in the theory of groups, Izv. Akad.
           Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 18 (1954), 485–524.
[Nov55]            , On algorithmic unsolvability of the identity problem in group theory, Izdat.
           Akad. Nauk SSSR, Moscow, 1955, Trudy Mat. Inst. Steklov. no. 44.
[Nov98]    O. A. Novikova, Solution of the occurrence and finite separability problem in a class
           of groups, Izv. Tul. Gos. Univ. Ser. Mat. Mekh. Inform. 4 (1998), no. 3, 93–98.
[OK97]     F. Otto and Y. Kobayashi, Properties of monoids that are presented by finite con-
           vergent string-rewriting systems—a survey, Advances in algorithms, languages, and
           complexity, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1997, pp. 225–266. MR 1447453
[Ol’92]    A. Yu. Ol’shanskiĭ, Almost every group is hyperbolic, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 2
           (1992), no. 1, 1–17. MR 1167524
[Ott84]    Friedrich Otto, Finite complete rewriting systems for the Jantzen monoid and the
           Greendlinger group, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 32 (1984), no. 3, 249–260.
[Ott87]            , On deciding the confluence of a finite string-rewriting system on a given
           congruence class, J. Comput. System Sci. 35 (1987), no. 3, 285–310.
[OZ81]     R. P. Osborne and H. Zieschang, Primitives in the free group on two generators,
           Invent. Math. 63 (1981), no. 1, 17–24. MR 608526
[OZ91]     Friedrich Otto and Louxin Zhang, Decision problems for finite special string-rewriting
           systems that are confluent on some congruence class, Acta Inform. 28 (1991), no. 5,
           477–510.
[Pal82]    Marek Palasiński, Unique presentation of groups with a small overlap of defining
           words, Zeszyty Nauk. Uniw. Jagielloń. Prace Mat. (1982), no. 23, 151–155.
[Pap57a]   C. D. Papakyriakopoulos, On Dehn’s lemma and the asphericity of knots, Proc. Nat.
           Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 43 (1957), 169–172.
[Pap57b]           , On Dehn’s lemma and the asphericity of knots, Ann. of Math. (2) 66 (1957),
           1–26.
[Pap58]            , Some problems on 3-dimensional manifolds, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 64
           (1958), 317–335.
[Pap63a]           , Attaching 2-dimensional cells to a complex, Ann. of Math. (2) 78 (1963),
           205–222.
[Pap63b]           , A reduction of the Poincaré conjecture to group theoretic conjectures, Ann.
           of Math. (2) 77 (1963), 250–305.
[Pap63c]           , A reduction on the Poincaré conjecture to other conjectures. II, Bull. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 69 (1963), 399–401.
[Pei49a]   Renée Peiffer, Le groupe fondamental et le groupe d’homotopie d’ordre 2, Inst. Grand-
           Ducal Luxembourg. Sect. Sci. Nat. Phys. Math. Arch. (N.S.) 18 (1949), 25–29.
[Pei49b]           , Über Identitäten zwischen Relationen, Math. Ann. 121 (1949), 67–99.
[Pei15]    David Peifer, Max Dehn and the origins of topology and infinite group theory, Amer.
           Math. Monthly 122 (2015), no. 3, 217–233.
[Pel66]    Ada Peluso, A residual property of free groups, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 19 (1966),
           435–437.
[Pet95]    Martin R. Pettet, Finitely generated groups with virtually free automorphism groups,
           Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. (2) 38 (1995), no. 3, 475–484.
[Pic71]    Sophie Piccard, Étude d’une groupe abstrait donné par un couple de générateurs liés
           par une relation caractéristique unique, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. A-B 273 (1971),
           A565–A567.
[Pie72]    Alfred Pietrowski, Extensions of free groups and a classification of one-relator groups
           with non-trivial center, 1972, Thesis (Ph.D.)–University of Toronto (Canada).
[Pie74]            , The isomorphism problem for one-relator groups with non-trivial centre,
           Math. Z. 136 (1974), 95–106. MR 349851
[Pla04]    A. N. Platonov, An isoparametric function of the Baumslag-Gersten group, Vestnik
           Moskov. Univ. Ser. I Mat. Mekh. (2004), no. 3, 12–17, 70. MR 2127449
[Poi04]    H. Poincaré, Cinquième complément à l’analysis situs., Rend. Circ. Mat. Palermo 18
           (1904), 45–110.
[Poi10]    Henri Poincaré, Papers on topology, History of Mathematics, vol. 37, American Math-
           ematical Society, Providence, RI; London Mathematical Society, London, 2010, ıt
160                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


           Analysis situs and its five supplements, Translated and with an introduction by John
           Stillwell.
[Pos47]    Emil L. Post, Recursive unsolvability of a problem of Thue, J. Symbolic Logic 12
           (1947), 1–11.
[Pos70]    Samuel Poss, A residual property of free groups, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 23 (1970),
           749–756.
[PR72]     Norman Purzitsky and Gerhard Rosenberger, Two generator Fuchsian groups of
           genus one, Math. Z. 128 (1972), 245–251.
[PR73]             , Correction to: “Two generator Fuchsian groups of genus one” (Math. Z.
           128 (1972), 245–251), Math. Z. 132 (1973), 261–262.
[PR78]     Norbert Peczynski and Wolfram Reiwer, On cancellations in HNN-groups, Math. Z.
           158 (1978), no. 1, 79–86.
[Pri72]    Stephen J. Pride, Residual properties of free groups, Pacific J. Math. 43 (1972), 725–
           733.
[Pri73]            , Residual properties of free groups. III, Math. Z. 132 (1973), 245–248.
[Pri74]    Stephen James Pride, Residual properties of free groups, 1974, Thesis (Ph.D.)– Aus-
           tralian National University.
[Pri75]    Stephen J. Pride, On the generation of one-relator groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
           210 (1975), 331–364. MR 382458
[Pri76]            , On the Hopficity and related properties of small cancellation groups, J. Lon-
           don Math. Soc. (2) 14 (1976), no. 2, 269–276. MR 437646
[Pri77a]           , The isomorphism problem for two-generator one-relator groups with torsion
           is solvable, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 227 (1977), 109–139. MR 430085
[Pri77b]           , The two-generator subgroups of one-relator groups with torsion, Trans. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 234 (1977), no. 2, 483–496.
[Pri83]            , Small cancellation conditions satisfied by one-relator groups, Math. Z. 184
           (1983), no. 2, 283–286. MR 716277
[PS84]     Dominique Perrin and Paul Schupp, Sur les monoı̈des à un relateur qui sont des
           groupes, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 33 (1984), no. 2-3, 331–334.
[PT90]     V. P. Platonov and O. I. Tavgen’, Grothendieck’s problem on profinite completions
           and representations of groups, K-Theory 4 (1990), no. 1, 89–101. MR 1076526
[Pud14]    Doron Puder, Primitive words, free factors and measure preservation, Israel J. Math.
           201 (2014), no. 1, 25–73. MR 3265279
[Rab58]    Michael O. Rabin, Recursive unsolvability of group theoretic problems, Ann. of Math.
           (2) 67 (1958), 172–194.
[Rad29]    H. Rademacher, Über die Erzeugenden von Kongruenzuntergruppe der Modulgruppe.,
           Abh. Math. Semin. Univ. Hamb. 7 (1929), 134–148.
[Rap58]    Elvira Strasser Rapaport, On free groups and their automorphisms, Acta Math. 99
           (1958), 139–163.
[Rap59]            , Note on Nielsen transformations, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 10 (1959), 228–
           235.
[Rap64a]           , On the defining relations of a free product, Pacific J. Math. 14 (1964), 1389–
           1393.
[Rap64b]           , Proof of a conjecture of Papakyriakopoulos, Ann. of Math. (2) 79 (1964),
           506–513.
[Rat84a]   John G. Ratcliffe, The cohomology ring of a one-relator group, Contributions to group
           theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984, pp. 455–
           466.
[Rat84b]           , Lyndon’s contribution to cohomology of groups, Contributions to group the-
           ory, Contemp. Math., vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1984, pp. 24–28.
[Rei32]    Kurt Reidemeister, Einführung in die kombinatorische Topologie, Braunschweig:
           Friedr. Vieweg & Sohn A.-G., 1932.
[Rei49]            , Über Identitäten von Relationen, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 16 (1949),
           no. nos. 3-4, 114–118.
[Rei62]    Bruce L. Reinhart, Algorithms for Jordan curves on compact surfaces, Ann. of Math.
           (2) 75 (1962), 209–222.
[Rem74]    V. N. Remeslennikov, A finitely presented group whose center is not finitely generated,
           Algebra i Logika 13 (1974), no. 4, 450–459, 488.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          161


[RK76]     Gerhard Rosenberger and R. N. Kalia, On the isomorphism problem for one-relator
           groups, Arch. Math. (Basel) 27 (1976), no. 5, 484–488.
[RM68]     Rimhak Ree and N. S. Mendelsohn, Free subgroups of groups with a single defining
           relation, Arch. Math. (Basel) 19 (1968), 577–580 (1969).
[Ros72]    Gerhard Rosenberger, Automorphismen und Erzeugende für Gruppen mit einer
           definierenden Relation, Math. Z. 129 (1972), 259–267.
[Ros73]            , Eine Bemerkung zu den Triangel-Gruppen, Math. Z. 132 (1973), 239–244.
[Ros76]            , Zum Isomorphieproblem für Gruppen mit einer definierenden Relation, Illi-
           nois J. Math. 20 (1976), no. 4, 614–621.
[Ros77]            , Über Gruppen mit einer definierenden Relation, Math. Z. 155 (1977), no. 1,
           71–77.
[Ros79]            , Applications of Nielsen’s reduction method to the solution of combinato-
           rial problems in group theory: a survey, Homological group theory (Proc. Sympos.,
           Durham, 1977), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 36, Cambridge Univ. Press,
           Cambridge-New York, 1979, pp. 339–358.
[Ros80]            , Über die Hopfsche Eigenschaft von Einrelatorgruppen, Arch. Math. (Basel)
           35 (1980), no. 1-2, 95–99.
[Ros82]    G. Rosenberger, On one-relator groups that are free products of two free groups with
           cyclic amalgamation, Groups—St. Andrews 1981 (St. Andrews, 1981), London Math.
           Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 71, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge-New York, 1982,
           pp. 328–344. MR 679174
[Ros94a]   Gerhard Rosenberger, The isomorphism problem for cyclically pinched one-relator
           groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 95 (1994), no. 1, 75–86.
[Ros94b]           , The isomorphism problem for cyclically pinched one-relator groups, J. Pure
           Appl. Algebra 95 (1994), no. 1, 75–86. MR 1289120
[Row23]    David E. Rowe, Max Dehn as historian of mathematics, Mathematics going forward—
           collected mathematical brushstrokes, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 2313, Springer,
           Cham, [2023] ©2023, pp. 337–357.
[RR02]     Akbar Rhemtulla and Dale Rolfsen, Local indicability in ordered groups: braids and
           elementary amenable groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 130 (2002), no. 9, 2569–2577.
           MR 1900863
[RVW07]    Abdó Roig, Enric Ventura, and Pascal Weil, On the complexity of the Whitehead
           minimization problem, Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 17 (2007), no. 8, 1611–1634.
           MR 2378055
[RW89]     E. F. Robertson and P. D. Williams, Efficient presentations of the groups PSLp2, 2pq
           and SLp2, 2pq, Canad. Math. Bull. 32 (1989), no. 1, 3–10.
[Sac77]    George S. Sacerdote, The Boone-Higman theorem and the conjugacy problem, J. Al-
           gebra 49 (1977), no. 1, 212–221.
[San40]    I. N. Sanov, Solution of Burnside’s problem for exponent 4, Leningrad State Univ.
           Annals [Uchenye Zapiski] Math. Ser. 10 (1940), 166–170.
[San47]            , A property of a representation of a free group, Doklady Akad. Nauk SSSR
           (N.S.) 57 (1947), 657–659.
[Sch24]    Otto Schreier, Über die gruppen Aa B b “ 1, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 3
           (1924), no. 1, 167–169.
[Sch27]            , Die Untergruppen der freien Gruppen, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 5
           (1927), no. 1, 161–183. MR 3069472
[Sch59]    Marcel-Paul Schützenberger, Sur l’équation a2`n “ b2`m c2`p dans un groupe libre,
           C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 248 (1959), 2435–2436.
[Sch68]    Paul E. Schupp, On Dehn’s algorithm and the conjugacy problem, Math. Ann. 178
           (1968), 119–130.
[Sch70]            , On the conjugacy problem for certain quotient groups of free products, Math.
           Ann. 186 (1970), 123–129.
[Sch76a]           , A strengthened Freiheitssatz, Math. Ann. 221 (1976), no. 1, 73–80.
[Sch76b]           , A strengthened Freiheitssatz, Math. Ann. 221 (1976), no. 1, 73–80.
           MR 463302
[Sch14]    Kevin Schreve, The strong Atiyah conjecture for virtually cocompact special groups,
           Math. Ann. 359 (2014), no. 3-4, 629–636. MR 3231009
162                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Sco73a]   G. P. Scott, Compact submanifolds of 3-manifolds, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 7 (1973),
           246–250. MR 326737
[Sco73b]           , Finitely generated 3-manifold groups are finitely presented, J. London Math.
           Soc. (2) 6 (1973), 437–440. MR 380763
[Sel95]    Z. Sela, The isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups. I, Ann. of Math. (2) 141
           (1995), no. 2, 217–283. MR 1324134
[Sel97]            , Structure and rigidity in (Gromov) hyperbolic groups and discrete groups in
           rank 1 Lie groups. II, Geom. Funct. Anal. 7 (1997), no. 3, 561–593. MR 1466338
[Ser77]    Jean-Pierre Serre, Arbres, amalgames, SL2 , Astérisque, No. 46, Société Mathématique
           de France, Paris, 1977, Avec un sommaire anglais, Rédigé avec la collaboration de
           Hyman Bass.
[Ser03]            , Trees, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003,
           Translated from the French original by John Stillwell, Corrected 2nd printing of the
           1980 English translation. MR 1954121
[She54]    Abe Shenitzer, Decomposition of a group with a single defining relation into a free
           product, 1954, Thesis (Ph.D.)–New York University.
[She95]            , In memory of my friend Wilhelm Magnus, Math. Intell. 17 (1995), 63–64.
[Shi62]    A. I. Shirshov, Some algorithmic problems for Lie algebras, Sibirsk. Mat. Ž. 3 (1962),
           292–296.
[Shi88]    M. Shirvani, A converse to a residual finiteness theorem of G. Baumslag, Proc. Amer.
           Math. Soc. 104 (1988), no. 3, 703–706.
[Sho28]    Kenjiro Shoda, Über die Automorphismen einer endlichen Abelschen Gruppe, Math.
           Ann. 100 (1928), no. 1, 674–686.
[Sie78]    Carl Ludwig Siegel, On the history of the Frankfurt Mathematics Seminar, Math.
           Intelligencer 1 (1978), no. 4, 223–230.
[SOK94]    Craig C. Squier, Friedrich Otto, and Yuji Kobayashi, A finiteness condition for rewrit-
           ing systems, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 131 (1994), no. 2, 271–294.
[Son74]    Jack Sonn, Alternating forms and one-relator groups, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 46
           (1974), 15–20.
[Squ87]    Craig C. Squier, Word problems and a homological finiteness condition for monoids,
           J. Pure Appl. Algebra 49 (1987), no. 1-2, 201–217.
[SS74a]    George S. Sacerdote and Paul E. Schupp, SQ-universality in HNN groups and one
           relator groups, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 7 (1974), 733–740. MR 364464
[SS74b]    Jack Shapiro and Jack Sonn, Free factor groups of one-relator groups, Duke Math. J.
           41 (1974), 83–88.
[ST50]     Herbert Seifert and William Threlfall, Old and new results on knots, Canad. J. Math.
           2 (1950), 1–15.
[ST00]     Magnus Steinby and Wolfgang Thomas, Trees and term rewriting in 1910: on a paper
           by Axel Thue, Bull. Eur. Assoc. Theor. Comput. Sci. EATCS (2000), no. 72, 256–269.
[Sta63]    John Stallings, A finitely presented group whose 3-dimensional integral homology is
           not finitely generated, Amer. J. Math. 85 (1963), 541–543.
[Sta65a]           , Homology and central series of groups, J. Algebra 2 (1965), 170–181.
           MR 175956
[Sta65b]   John R. Stallings, A topological proof of Grushko’s theorem on free products, Math.
           Z. 90 (1965), 1–8.
[Sta68]            , On torsion-free groups with infinitely many ends, Ann. of Math. (2) 88
           (1968), 312–334. MR 228573
[Sta70]    John Stallings, Groups of cohomological dimension one, Applications of Categorical
           Algebra (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XVII, New York, 1968), Proc. Sympos.
           Pure Math., XVII, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1970, pp. 124–128.
[Sta77]            , Coherence of 3-manifold fundamental groups, Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol.
           1975/76, 28ème année, Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 567, Springer, Berlin-New York,
           1977, pp. Exp. No. 481, pp. 167–173.
[Sta83]    John R. Stallings, Topology of finite graphs, Invent. Math. 71 (1983), no. 3, 551–565.
           MR 695906
[Ste63]    Arthur Steinberg, On free quotient images of single relator groups, 1963, Thesis
           (Ph.D.)–New York University.
[Ste64]            , On free nilpotent quotient groups, Math. Z. 85 (1964), 185–196.
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           163


[Ste71]            , On equations in free groups, Michigan Math. J. 18 (1971), 87–95.
[Ste86]            , On roots of ak bl , Math. Z. 192 (1986), no. 1, 1–8. MR 835385
[Sti82]    John Stillwell, The word problem and the isomorphism problem for groups, Bull.
           Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 6 (1982), no. 1, 33–56.
[Sti93]            , Classical topology and combinatorial group theory, second ed., Graduate
           Texts in Mathematics, vol. 72, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993.
[Sti99]            , Max Dehn, History of topology, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1999, pp. 965–
           978.
[Sti12]            , Poincaré and the early history of 3-manifolds, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
           49 (2012), no. 4, 555–576.
[Sti14]            , Translation of Reidemeister’s “Einführung in die kombinatorische Topolo-
           gie”, Available online at arXiv:1402.3906.
[Sti22]            , My friend Abe Shenitzer, Amer. Math. Monthly 129 (2022), no. 9, 803–804.
[Sti23]            , Learning from the masters (and some of their pupils), The richness of the
           history of mathematics—a tribute to Jeremy Gray, Archimedes, vol. 66, Springer,
           Cham, 2023, pp. 289–299.
[Stö83]   Ralph Stöhr, Groups with one more generator than relators, Math. Z. 182 (1983),
           no. 1, 45–47.
[Str74]    Ralph Strebel, Homological methods applied to the derived series of groups, Comment.
           Math. Helv. 49 (1974), 302–332. MR 354896
[Str13]    Ralph Strebel, Notes on the sigma invariants, 2013, arXiv:1204.0214.
[Sv11]     Mark Sapir and Iva Špakulová, Almost all one-relator groups with at least three gen-
           erators are residually finite, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 13 (2011), no. 2, 331–343.
           MR 2746769
[SW79]     Peter Scott and Terry Wall, Topological methods in group theory, Homological group
           theory (Proc. Sympos., Durham, 1977), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 36,
           Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge-New York, 1979, pp. 137–203. MR 564422
[Swa69]    Richard G. Swan, Groups of cohomological dimension one, J. Algebra 12 (1969),
           585–610.
[Swa79]    G. A. Swarup, Two reductions of the Poincaré conjecture, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
           (N.S.) 1 (1979), no. 5, 774–777.
[Swa04]    Gadde A. Swarup, Delzant’s variation on scott complexity, 2004, arXiv:0401308.
[Tac18]    Eleftherios Tachtsis, A note on the deductive strength of the Nielsen-Schreier theorem,
           MLQ Math. Log. Q. 64 (2018), no. 3, 173–177.
[Tak51]    Mutuo Takahasi, Note on chain conditions in free groups, Osaka Math. J. 3 (1951),
           221–225.
[Tan82]    C. Y. Tang, Conjugacy separability of certain 1-relator groups, Proc. Amer. Math.
           Soc. 86 (1982), no. 3, 379–384.
[Tar49]    V. A. Tartakovskii, Solution of the word problem for groups with a k-reduced basis
           for k ą 6, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 13 (1949), 483–494.
[Tay63]    Tekla Taylor, Some finiteness aspects of groups with unique roots, 1963, Thesis
           (Ph.D.)–New York University.
[Thu06]    Axel Thue, über unendliche Zeichenreihen, Christiana Videnskaps-Selskabs Skrifter,
           I. Math. naturv. Klasse 7 (1906).
[Thu10]            , Die Lösung eines Spezialfalles eines generellen logischen Problems, Chris-
           tiana Videnskaps-Selskabs Skrifter, I. Math. naturv. Klasse 8 (1910).
[Thu14]            , Problem über Veränderungen von Zeichenreihen nach gegebenen Regeln,
           Christiana Videnskaps-Selskabs Skrifter, I. Math. naturv. Klasse 10 (1914).
[Tie08]    Heinrich Tietze, Über die topologischen Invarianten mehrdimensionaler Mannig-
           faltigkeiten, Monatsh. Math. Phys. 19 (1908), no. 1, 1–118.
[Tre73]    Marvin Tretkoff, The residual finiteness of certain amalgamated free products, Math.
           Z. 132 (1973), 179–182.
[Tur36]    A. M. Turing, On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entschei-
           dungsproblem, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 42 (1936), no. 3, 230–265.
[Tur50]            , The word problem in semi-groups with cancellation, Ann. of Math. (2) 52
           (1950), 491–505.
[Val93]    Alain Valette, Short proofs for some residual properties of free groups, Exposition.
           Math. 11 (1993), no. 1, 65–71.
164                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY


[Vas80]    A. V. Vasiliev, On rational functions similar to doubly periodic functions, 1880, Mas-
           ter’s dissertation – Kazan Imperial University.
[VD22]     B. P. Vankov and N. M. Dobrovolskiy, Martin Davidovich Greendlinger – founder
           of the algebraic school and his role in the revival of the number-theoretic school in
           Tula (To the 90th anniversary of the professor Greendlinger M. D.), Chebyshevskii
           Sbornik 23 (2022), 212–218, In Russian.
[Wa779]    List of problems, Homological group theory (Proc. Sympos., Durham, 1977) (C. T. C.
           Wall, ed.), London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 36, Cambridge Univ. Press,
           Cambridge-New York, 1979, pp. 369–394. MR 564438
[Wag57]    Daniel H. Wagner, On free products of groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 84 (1957),
           352–378.
[Wal61]    C. T. C. Wall, Rational Euler characteristics, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 57 (1961),
           182–184.
[Wal66]            , Finiteness conditions for CW complexes. II, Proc. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A
           295 (1966), 129–139. MR 211402
[Wal68]    Friedhelm Waldhausen, The word problem in fundamental groups of sufficiently large
           irreducible 3-manifolds, Ann. of Math. (2) 88 (1968), 272–280.
[Weh73]    B. A. F. Wehrfritz, Generalized free products of linear groups, Proc. London Math.
           Soc. (3) 27 (1973), 402–424.
[Wei71]    C. M. Weinbaum, The word and conjugacy problems for the knot group of any tame,
           prime, alternating knot, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 30 (1971), 22–26.
[Wei72]            , On relators and diagrams for groups with one defining relation, Illinois J.
           Math. 16 (1972), 308–322. MR 297849
[Wei92a]   T. S. Weigel, Residual properties of free groups. III, Israel J. Math. 77 (1992), no. 1-2,
           65–81.
[Wei92b]   Thomas S. Weigel, Residual properties of free groups. II, Comm. Algebra 20 (1992),
           no. 5, 1395–1425.
[Wei93]            , Residual properties of free groups, J. Algebra 160 (1993), no. 1, 16–41.
[Wei02]    Richard Weidmann, The Nielsen method for groups acting on trees, Proc. London
           Math. Soc. (3) 85 (2002), no. 1, 93–118.
[Whi36]    J. H. C. Whitehead, On equivalent sets of elements in a free group, Ann. of Math.
           (2) 37 (1936), no. 4, 782–800. MR 1503309
[Whi67]    Alice Segers Whittemore, The Frattini subgroup, 1967, Thesis (Ph.D.)–City University
           of New York.
[Whi73]    Alice Whittemore, On representations of the group of Listing’s knot by subgroups of
           SLp2, Cq, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 40 (1973), 378–382.
[Wic62]    N. J. Wicks, Commutators in free products, J. London Math. Soc. 37 (1962), 433–444.
[Wie77]    James Wiegold, Free groups are residually alternating of even degree, Arch. Math.
           (Basel) 28 (1977), no. 4, 337–339.
[Wil91]    John S. Wilson, A residual property of free groups, J. Algebra 138 (1991), no. 1,
           36–47.
[Wil18]    Henry Wilton, Essential surfaces in graph pairs, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 31 (2018), no. 4,
           893–919. MR 3836561
[Wil24a]           , Rational curvature invariants for 2-complexes, Proceedings of the Royal
           Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 480 (2024), no. 2296,
           20240025.
[Wil24b]   Henry Wilton, Surface groups among cubulated hyperbolic and one-relator groups,
           2024, arXiv:2406.02121.
[Wis01]    Daniel T. Wise, The residual finiteness of positive one-relator groups, Comment.
           Math. Helv. 76 (2001), no. 2, 314–338.
[Wis03]            , Nonpositive immersions, sectional curvature, and subgroup properties, Elec-
           tron. Res. Announc. Amer. Math. Soc. 9 (2003), 1–9. MR 1988866
[Wis04]    D. T. Wise, Sectional curvature, compact cores, and local quasiconvexity, Geom.
           Funct. Anal. 14 (2004), no. 2, 433–468. MR 2062762
[Wis09]    Daniel T. Wise, Research announcement: the structure of groups with a quasiconvex
           hierarchy, Electron. Res. Announc. Math. Sci. 16 (2009), 44–55.
                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          165


[Wis20]           , An invitation to coherent groups, What’s next?—the mathematical legacy of
          William P. Thurston, Ann. of Math. Stud., vol. 205, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton,
          NJ, 2020, pp. 326–414. MR 4205645
[Wis21]           , The structure of groups with a quasiconvex hierarchy, Annals of Mathe-
          matics Studies, vol. 209, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, [2021] ©2021.
          MR 4298722
[Wis22]           , Coherence, local indicability and nonpositive immersions, J. Inst. Math.
          Jussieu 21 (2022), no. 2, 659–674. MR 4386825
[Wit37]   Ernst Witt, Treue Darstellung Liescher Ringe, J. Reine Angew. Math. 177 (1937),
          152–160.
[Won78]   Peng Choon Wong, On cyclic extensions of parafree groups, 1978, Thesis (Ph.D.)–
          New York University.
[Won80]           , Cyclic extensions of parafree groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 258 (1980),
          no. 2, 441–456.
[Won87]   P. C. Wong, A note on the residual finiteness of finitely generated free-by-cyclic
          groups, Algebra and topology 1986 (Taejǒn, 1986), Korea Inst. Tech., Taejŏn, 1987,
          pp. 154–163.
[Wri79]   David Wright, Abelian subgroups of Autk pkrX, Y sq and applications to actions on
          the affine plane, Illinois J. Math. 23 (1979), no. 4, 579–634.
[Wus84]   Hans Wussing, The genesis of the abstract group concept, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
          1984, A contribution to the history of the origin of abstract group theory, Translated
          from the German by Abe Shenitzer and Hardy Grant.
[Zie70]   Heiner Zieschang, Über die Nielsensche Kürzungsmethode in freien Produkten mit
          Amalgam, Invent. Math. 10 (1970), 4–37. MR 263929
[Zie77]           , Generators of the free product with amalgamation of two infinite cyclic
          groups, Math. Ann. 227 (1977), no. 3, 195–221.
