                          The Relationship between
                 Public Key Encryption and Oblivious Transfer
                                              Preliminary Version

                    Yael Gertner                                    Sampath Kannan
              University of Pennsylvania                         University of Pennsylvania
           ygertner@saul.cis.upenn.edu                       kannan@central.cis.upenn.edu
                        Tal Malkin                               Omer Reingold
                    AT&T Labs | Research                      AT&T Labs | Research
                     tal@research.att.com                     omer@research.att.com
                                          Mahesh Viswanathan
                                        University of Pennsylvania
                                     maheshv@saul.cis.upenn.edu
                                             November 26, 2000
                                                    Abstract
        In this paper we study the relationships among some of the most fundamental primitives and protocols
     in cryptography: public-key encryption (i.e. trapdoor predicates), oblivious transfer (which is equivalent
     to general secure multi-party computation), key agreement and trapdoor permutations. Our main results
     show that public-key encryption and oblivious transfer are incomparable under black-box reductions.
     These separations are tightly matched by our positive results where a restricted (strong) version of one
     primitive does imply the other primitive. We also show separations between oblivious transfer and key
     agreement. Finally, we conclude that neither oblivious transfer nor trapdoor predicates imply trapdoor
     permutations. Our techniques for showing negative results follow the oracle separations of Impagliazzo
     and Rudich [IR89, Rud91].




  1 Supported by grants ONR N00014-97-0505 (MURI), NSF CCR 98-20885, and ARO
DAAG55-98-1-0393


                                                         1
1     Introduction
The cryptographic research of the last few decades has proposed solutions to almost every \conceivable"
cryptographic task (and to quite a few tasks that rst seemed \inconceivable"). The correctness and se-
curity of these solutions was proven under a growing number of (unproven) computational assumptions
put forth by the community. To some extent, this state of a airs is unavoidable: the security of \almost
any" cryptographic protocol implies the existence of one-way functions1 [IL89] (which in particular implies
P 6= NP ). Therefore, for most cryptographic protocols, unconditional proofs of security seem well beyond
the reach of complexity theory. Nevertheless, it might be possible that many of these assumptions are related
or even equivalent to one another. Exploring the relationship between these assumptions, and determining
those that are integral to cryptography, would thus greatly clarify our understanding of the cryptographic
world, and is considered to be one of the most fundamental goals.
    For some primitives, this goal has been met with much success. For example, private key encryption
(Private KE), pseudo-random generators (PSRG), pseudo-random functions and permutations, bit com-
mitment, and digital signatures (Sig), have all been shown to exist if and only if one-way functions ex-
ist [Yao82, GM84, GGM86, LR88, IL89, NY89, Rom90, Nao91, HILL99]. Thus, the existence of one-way
functions is a powerful assumption that captures and uni es a large class of cryptographic primitives.
    It is, therefore, natural to wonder if all cryptographic primitives are equivalent to one-way functions.
However, this seems unlikely. For example, it is safe to assert that a construction of trapdoor permutations
out of one-way functions, if at all possible, would require immense innovation: trapdoor permutations just
seem to have much more structure than one-way functions. Yet, constructing a formal proof based on this
intuition is non-trivial. In fact, it is not even clear what is the formal meaning to such a claim, given the
common belief that both one-way functions and trapdoor permutations exist (hence a \reduction" can just
ignore the one-way functions and build trapdoor permutations from scratch).
    Indeed overcoming these challenges has proved to be very diÆcult. While we know of no techniques that
prove the failure of all reductions, Impagliazzo and Rudich [IR89] gave a method for separating primitives
under a restricted but important subclass of reductions, namely, black-box reductions. Informally, a black-
box reduction of a primitive P to a primitive Q is a construction of P out of Q that ignores the internal
structure of the implementation of Q. The exact de nition of black-box reductions and the Impagliazzo
and Rudich methodology for black-box separations are rather substle (see Section 2.2). In the introduction
however we continue with a more intuitive treatment of these notions and identify black-box reductions with
relativizing reductions (ones that work relative to any oracle). Hence, in order to prove that a black-box
reduction of P to Q is impossible, it suÆces to demonstrate an oracle relative to which the primitive Q exists
whereas P does not. We stress that such black-box seperations have their limitations (as discussed below).
Nevertheless, as noted by Impagliazzo and Rudich, almost all constructions in cryptography are black box.
Therefore, if there are no black-box reductions of P to Q then a proof that the existence of Q implies the
existence of P is most likely very diÆcult.
    Using the methodology described above, Impagliazzo and Rudich [IR89] showed that not all cryptographic
primitives are equivalent. Speci cally, they show that there are no black-box reductions from one-way
functions (OWF) to key agreement (KA). This result immediately implies separations between OWF (and
other equivalent primitives) and several other primitives which are known to imply KA. In other words, the
cryptographic primitives can be divided into two worlds: \private cryptography" consisting of OWF and all
equivalent primitives, and \public cryptography" consisting of \harder" primitives such as KA, public key
encryption (PKE), Oblivious Transfer (OT), secure function evaluation (SFE), and trapdoor permutations
(TD Perm).2 These implications are summarized in Figure 1.
    An interesting problem to consider, therefore, is the relationship between the primitives in the public
cryptography world (see e.g. [Gol97]). This is especially importent because PKE and OT are two of the
most fundamental primitives in cryptography. Essentially all of cryptography is based on them: public-key
encryption allows parties that \just met" to exchange secret messages in the presence of an eavesdropper,
and oblivious transfer allows parties to securely compute functions [Kil88, Gol98].
   1 The range of cryptographic protocols that can be proven secure in a purely information-theoretic sense (such as encryption
with one-time pad) is extremely limited compared with the realm of possibilities \computational" cryptography o ers.
   2 The names \private" vs. \public" may be misleading: we note that digital signatures, which are based on public keys, are
in fact equivalent to OWF.


                                                              1
                                                    TD Perm
                                        .                             &
                                 PKE           !       KA                 OT        !     SFE
                                                       # 6"
                             Private KE         !     OWF         !       PSRG      !      Sig

             Figure 1: Separation between \Private Cryptography" and \Public Cryptography".

   The rst indication that the situation is not as simple in the \public" world as in the \private" one,
was given by Rudich [Rud91].3 Extending the techniques of [IR89], Rudich proved a black-box separation
between KA in k + 1 passes (i.e. by exchanging k + 1 messages between the parties) and KA in k passes, for
any k. This implies a separation between KA and PKE since PKE is equivalent to KA in one round (i.e. two
passes). Another result relating primitives in the \public" world is of Even, Goldreich and Lempel [EGL85].
They showed that PKE with additional underlying properties imply OT. However, in general, very little was
known on the relationship between PKE and OT. Thus, most of the relationships between the primitives in
the \public" world were left unresolved. Figure 2 summarizes these relationships that were known before
our results.

                                                          TD Perm
                                                    .                     &
                                         PKE        !         2-KA             OT
                                                    &         # 6"        .
                                                              k-KA

                 Figure 2: Previously known Relationships in the Public Cryptography World.

    In this paper we make signi cant progress by resolving the missing relationships, with respect to black-
box reductions. We show rather surprising separations between PKE and OT. This two-sided separation
implies that in fact PKE and OT are incomparable with respect to black-box reductions, which makes it
a unique situation. It is especially surprising given the result of [EGL85] that was interpreted by many as
saying that PKE implies OT. Among our additional results are positive results in special cases, corollaries
separating OT and KA, and separating trapdoor permutations from PKE and OT. These results are detailed
in Section 1.2.
    One way to interpret the results of this paper is as an indication that obtaining a simple and clean
view of cryptography is even further beyond our reach than might have been suspected. Our results imply
that we can not even divide all of cryptography into an hierarchy of assumptions (since PKE and OT are
incomparable). Furthermore, we demonstrate that the picture of \public crypto" is not likely to simplify in
some of its most central concepts.

1.1 The Primitives and Protocols
In their seminal work, DiÆe and Hellman [DH76] gave the foundations for public-key cryptography. In
particular, they introduced one-way functions (OWF) and trapdoor OWF. Informally, a family of functions
is one way if a function fk chosen from this family is easy to compute on any input but hard to invert on
the average. Such a family is a family of trapdoor OWF if in addition the key-generation algorithm produces
a trapdoor information t = t(k) that allows its holder to invert the function fk . One-way permutations
and trapdoor one-way permutations are de ned in the same way (for families of permutations). DiÆe and
Hellman also introduced the notion of key-agreement (KA) and provided the famous DiÆe-Hellman KA
   3 In fact, the recent separation of [IR00, KSS00] between one-way functions and permutations implies that the situation is
even not completely simple in the \private" world.


                                                              2
protocol. Informally, a KA is a protocol that allows two parties, Alice and Bob, to agree on a secret key in
the presence of a polynomial-time (passive) eavesdropper (the key should be indistinguishable from random
to such an eavesdropper).
    Goldwasser and Micali [GM84] introduced the notion of semantically secure encryption schemes. Infor-
mally, these are encryption schemes such that any information on the message m that can be eÆciently
computed from its encryption c = E (m) can also be eÆciently computed without access to c. In this paper,
the term public-key encryption (PKE) refers to semantically secure schemes. Goldwasser and Micali [GM84]
also de ned trapdoor predicates and showed their equivalence to semantically secure encryption schemes.
Informally, trapdoor predicates are families of probabilistic functions over f0; 1g such that: (1) Given a key
k it is easy to sample the output of the corresponding function pk on either 0 or 1 but hard to distinguish
these two distributions. (2) Given the trapdoor information t = t(k), it is easy to distinguish an output on
0 from an output on 1. Yao [Yao82] showed that trapdoor permutations imply trapdoor predicates.
    Recently, Bellare et al. [BHSV98] showed that one-way functions imply trapdoor one-way functions (with
super-polynomial pre-image size). In addition, they showed that trapdoor one-way functions with polynomial
pre-image size imply trapdoor predicates. These results imply that in some sense, trapdoor one-way functions
are interesting if and only if their pre-image size is polynomial (indeed, most works in cryptography focus on
trapdoor permutations). Finally, they showed that trapdoor predicates imply injective trapdoor functions in
the random oracle model.
    Oblivious transfer has several equivalent formulations [Rab81, CK88, EGL85,
                                                                                   Cre87, BCR86, CS91].
                                                                                                          The
version used in this paper is that of one-out-of-two oblivious transfer ( 21 -OT). Informally, a 21 -OT is a
protocol between two parties Alice and Bob where Alice has as input two secret strings s0 and s1 and Bob
has a secret bit b. If both parties follow the protocol, Bob learns the secret sb whereas Alice learns nothing.
In addition, even a cheating (polynomial-time) Bob (i.e. one that deviates from the protocol in an arbitrary
way) cannot learn more than a single value in fs0; s1 g and even a cheating Alice does not learn anything
during the run of the protocol. A somewhat weaker notion than OT is that of OT secure against honest but
curious parties (also known as semi-honest parties). In this case, even cheating parties are assumed to follow
the protocol with the following exceptions: (1) They keep track of all intermediate data during the run of
the protocol. (2) After the last pass is completed, they may perform any (eÆcient) computation in order to
extract additional information from their records. Using zero-knowledge proofs any honest OT protocol can
be transformed into a general (malicious) OT protocol.
    Oblivious transfer implies KA [Rab81, Blu83], signing contracts [EGL85], and in general any secure
multi-party function evaluation [Yao86, Kil88, GMW87]. Even et al. [EGL85] showed how to construct OT
from PKE that has the additional property that the distribution of cipher texts is \independent" of the
encryption key (for two di erent keys, the corresponding distributions on cipher texts are indistinguishable).
As a consequence, trapdoor permutations imply OT (see [Gol98]). Finally, several types of secure function
evaluation in various models have been shown to imply OT [Kil91, KKMO00, BMM99, Kil00].

1.2 Our Results
We make signi cant progress in understanding both directions of the relationship between OT and PKE, as
well as the relationships among these and KA, trapdoor permutations and functions. Speci cally, the main
questions we address are the following:

QUESTION 1: Does OT imply PKE?

In the speci c case in which the oblivious transfer protocol consists of only one round (i.e. one message from
Bob to Alice and one from Alice to Bob) we show:
Theorem 1     One round OT even for honest parties implies PKE.
   In the general case (when the oblivious transfer protocol consists of any number of rounds) we show:
Theorem 2     There is an oracle relative to which there exists multi-round OT (malicious) and no PKE.

                                                      3
QUESTION 2: Does PKE imply OT?

We rst generalize the result of [EGL85] by considering PKE that satis es one of the following two properties:
    Property A: Public keys can be sampled \separately of private keys", (i.e. while preserving the semantic
     security of the encryption).
    Property B: Cipher texts can be sampled \separately of plain texts", (i.e. without gaining knowledge
     on the corresponding plain text).
Theorem 3     PKE with properties A or B implies OT.
    We note that Properties A and B are both natural and have a similar avor. Furthermore, as we show
later, property B is implied by the property on PKE assumed by [EGL85]. Therefore, Theorem 3 strengthens
the result of [EGL85]. In fact, our proof of the theorem was inspired by [EGL85].
    In the general case, when the PKE does not have special properties, we show:
Theorem 4     There is an oracle relative to which there exists PKE and no OT (even for honest parties).
QUESTION 3: What is the Relationship Between OT and KA?

Generalizing Theorem 1, we obtain:
Theorem 5     For every k, k-pass OT for honest parties implies k-pass KA.
   Extending Theorem 2, we obtain:
Theorem 6    For every k  2 there is an oracle relative to which there exists k-pass OT (malicious or honest)
and no (k   1)-pass KA.
   As an immediate (but interesting) corollary of Theorem 4, we get:
Corollary 7   There is an oracle relative to which there exists KA and no OT (even for honest parties).
QUESTION 4: Do PKE and OT Imply Trapdoor Permutations?

Since trapdoor permutations imply both PKE and OT we obtain the following direct corollaries of our
results:
Corollary 8 There is an oracle relative to which there exists PKE but no trapdoor permutations.
Corollary 9 There is an oracle relative to which there exists OT but no trapdoor permutations.

In fact, given the result of [BHSV98] we can strengthen this corollary and obtain:
Corollary 10      There is an oracle relative to which there exists OT but no trapdoor functions with polynomial
pre-image size.
Finally, an interesting and important generalization of Theorem 4, is the following result.
Theorem 11     There is an oracle relative to which there exist injective trapdoor functions and no OT (even
for honest parties).
Therefore, even a very minor weakening of trapdoor permutations does not seem to be enough as a building
block for OT.




                                                        4
Some Remarks on Our Results
We note that in all our results, PKE may be replaced by trapdoor predicates, as these are equivalent [GM84].
Furthermore, since any two-party function that cannot be computed information-theoretically is equivalent
to OT (in the malicious model) [BMM99], OT may be replaced by any such function (e.g., OR).
    We have stated all negative results in terms of oracle separations. These imply that there are no black-
box reductions between the corresponding primitives. As discussed in Section 2.2, there are two standard
types of black-box reductions (one a weakening of the other). We note that a more careful statement of our
results can be shown to apply to both these types (see Section 2.2 for more details).
    As discussed above, the importance of black-box separations lies in the fact that almost all cryptographic
reductions are black-box. Another motivation is that these are the only type of reduction possible when the
assumption is physical, e.g. an OT channel which transmits bits with probability half. Nevertheless, it is
important to note that such results have their limitations | some reductions used in cryptography are not
black-box. An important (and almost single) example of a non black-box reduction is the proof that \all of
NP has zero knowledge proofs" [GMW91] (see [IR89] for a more detailed discussion of oracle separations in
cryptography). In our case, it is particularly important to notice that the known reduction of (malicious)
OT to honest OT (the scenario where Alice and Bob are honest but curious) is also not black-box (since it
relies on zero-knowledge proofs). This is exactly the reason that in each one of the theorems we use honest
OT or malicious OT as to strengthen the result. For example, Theorem 1 gives a stronger result when stated
for honest OT than when stated for malicious OT (since OT for malicious players trivially implies OT for
honest but curious players). However, in Theorem 2 we show a negative result. Therefore it is stronger when
stated for malicious OT since even when the OT is strong enough to resist malicious players, it does not
imply PKE.
    The main importance of the partial implications given in Theorems 1 and 3 is that they complement the
separations of Theorems 2 and 4. Nevertheless, Theorem 1 that deals with one-round OT became somewhat
more interesting on its own given the recent proposals of one round OT (even for malicious parties) based
on the decisional DiÆe-Hellman assumption (and other homomorphic encryption schemes) [AIR00, Nao00],
and PKE with Property A (as we show below).
    We stress that all of our separations are proven in the uniform model (as is the case in [IR89, Rud91]).
In other words, all adversaries are assumed to be probabilistic polynomial-time machines rather than
polynomial-size circuits. We see no reason why these separations would not apply to the non-uniform
model. However, we note that proofs in the non-uniform model seem substantially harder (see e.g. [GT00]).

Some More Oracle Separations.
The Impagliazzo and Rudich methodology was rst applied in [IR89, Rud91] to separate OWF from KA
and to separate KA in k passes from KA in k + 1 passes, for any k. These results have several interesting
corollaries as described in the introduction. In [Sim98], Simon gives an oracle separation between OWF
and collision intractable functions. Kim, Simon and Tetali [KST99], extend the work of [IR89] and use
oracle separations as a mean to study the eÆciency of black-box constructions (rather than their existence).
In particular [KST99] show limits on the eÆciency of black-box constructions of universal one-way hash
functions based on one-way permutations. These bounds are improved by Gennaro and Trevisan [GT00]
who also give bounds on the eÆciency of black-box constructions of pseudo-random generators based on
one-way permutations. In both cases the bounds are tight (in that they match the eÆciency of known
constructions). Finally, Impagliazzo and Rudich [IR00] use a result of Kahn, Saks and Smyth [KSS00], to
give a black-box separation between OWF and one-way permutations.

Outline
In Section 2 we provide some details on black-box reductions and the oracle separation paradigm. We also
give de nitions and notation. In Section 3 we describe partial implications between primitives, in Section 4
we prove that OT does not imply PKE under black-box reductions, and in Section 5 we prove that PKE
does not imply OT under black-box reductions. Finally, in Section 6 we prove our extensions regarding
relationships with KA and trapdoor functions.

                                                      5
2    Preliminaries
2.1 Notation and De nitions
In this section we give some additional details on the de nitions of the primitives and protocols that are the
focus of this paper (these primitives were already described in the introduction). Our de nitions here are
rather informal. For a more formal treatment, the reader is referred to [Gol98] and references therein.

Notation and Conventions

We will abbreviate probabilistic polynomial time Turing Machine with the notation PPTM. An oracle PPTM
is a PPTM that has access to a given oracle, such that in one time step it may receive the answer to a single
query to the oracle. When discussing a primitive or a protocol relative to an oracle , we assume that all the
machines that are involved (including adversaries that try to break the primitive) are in fact oracle machines
with access to the same xed oracle . We will sometimes refer to an oracle PPTM as simply a PPTM, as
appropriate by the context.
    We use the notation poly() to refer to some polynomially bounded function and neg() to refer to some
function that is smaller than 1=p() for any polynomial p() (for all suÆciently large inputs).

Public-Key Encryption

A public-key encryption scheme, consists of three probabilistic polynomial time algorithms (G; E; D) such
that (for simplicity we x ` to be both the security parameter and input length):
     G is the algorithm for generating keys. Given 1` as input, G outputs the pair (pk; sk) of public key
      and secret key s.t. jpkj = jskj = poly(`).
     E and D are the encryption and decryption algorithms. For every message m of length `, for every pair
      (pk; sk) generated by G on input 1` , and all possible coin tosses of E, it should hold that Dsk (Epk (m)) =
      m.
    Intuitively, a public-key encryption scheme is semantically secure [GM84] if anything that can be com-
puted on the plain text m given the cipher text c = Epk (m) can also be computed without access to c. More
formally, (G; E; D) is semantically secure (against a chosen plain text attack), if for every PPTM A (the
adversary that tries to extract information from the cipher text) there exists another PPTM A0 such that
for every eÆciently sampalable distribution D on plain texts, for every eÆcient a priori information function
h, and every predicate T (the information A tries to gain)
                P r(A(Epk (m); pk; h(m); 1`) = T (m)) < P r(A0 (h(m); 1l ) = T (m)) + neg(`)
Where (pk; sk) = G(1` ) and m is a message (of length `) sampled from D.

Two-Party Protocols

A two-party protocol, is a probabilistic process where two parties, Alice and Bob, exchange messages in
turns. Each message sent by a party is a function of its input, its random string and previous messages
exchanged by the parties during the run of the protocol. A two-party protocol is de ned by these round
functions. A protocol is eÆcient if the round functions can be computed in probabilistic polynomial time. A
pass of the protocol consists of a single message sent from one party to the other. Therefore, each run of the
protocol consists of the the two parties alternating passes. A round of the protocol consists of two passes.
A protocol is called k-rounds (resp. k-passes) if every run of the protocol consists of exactly k-rounds (resp.
k-passes). The output of each party is computed after its last pass. In this paper, we shall denote a k-pass
protocol by k-protocol; so, k-KA refers to a k-pass Key Agreement protocol, while k-OT refers to a k-pass
Oblivious Transfer protocol.
   The sequence of all messages that are exchanged during a run is called the conversation. The view of each
party consists of its input, random string, and the conversation. In case the protocol is performed between
oracle machines, the view of each party also includes all the (query,answer) pairs asked by that party during
the run.

                                                        6
Key Agreement

A key agreement protocol is an eÆcient protocol between two parties Alice and Bob. The input of both
Alice and Bob is the security parameter ` written in unary. The outputs of both Alice and Bob are k-bit
strings (for some k = poly(`)). If both output strings are the same, Alice and Bob are said to agree on a
secret. In this case, the common output is called the key. A secure key agreement protocol (KA) is such that
Correctness: Alice and Bob agree with probability 1 (when they follow the protocol).

Secrecy: No PPTM Eve (the passive eavesdropper), that is only given ` and the conversation between
      Alice and Bob, can distinguish with non-negligible advantage the key from a uniformly distributed
      k-bit string

Oblivious Transfer
                                                                                                
Oblivious transfer (OT) has several equivalent avors. The one we use here is 21 -OT and we refer to it as
simply OT. An OT protocol is an eÆcient protocol between two parties Alice and Bob. The inputs of both
Alice and Bob include the security parameter ` written in unary. In addition, Bob has the bit b, and Alice
has as input two k-bit strings s0 and s1 (where k = poly(`)) 4 The protocol is correct if when Alice and Bob
follow the protocol, Bob outputs the string sb with probability 1; note, that in OT Alice does not output
anything.
    We de ne the security of the protocol like in secure function evaluation. In other words, the security of
the protocol is compared to the security in an ideal model, where a trusted party Carol, receives the secrets
from Alice and Bob's bit, and sends sb to Bob. The protocol is secure if a cheating Alice (resp. Bob) running
the protocol can be simulated by a cheating Alice (resp. Bob) in the ideal world. In more detail:
     The view of any cheating Alice can be eÆciently simulated by an algorithm that only has access to `
      and to Alice's input (i.e. the strings s0 and s1 and any additional a priori information). This means
      that the output of this machine is indistinguishable from the view of the cheating Alice.
     The view of any cheating Bob can be eÆciently simulated by an algorithm that only has access to `,
      to Bob's input and to any single value in fs ; s g of its choice.
                                                           0   1

    The de nition of an OT protocol secure against honest but curious parties is as above with the simplifying
assumption that even the cheating parties follow the protocol (i.e. send the correct messages speci ed by
the protocol). Notice that the view of each party includes all the information that the party had access to
during the run of the protocol. One can therefore think of an honest but curious party as one that follows
the protocol with the following restrictions: (1) It does not erase any intermediate data during the run of the
protocol. (2) After the last pass is completed, it may perform any (eÆcient) computation in order to extract
additional information from its records (including oracle access if this is an oracle machine). We sometimes
refer to such a protocol as an honest OT, and to the general OT protocol as malicious OT.

2.2 Black-Box Reductions.
The notion of a black-box reduction is somewhat confusing, as there are two di erent types commonly
referred to as black box. We will call these types fully black-box reductions and semi black-box reductions.5
A semi black-box reduction of a primitive P to a primitive Q is a construction of P out of Q that ignores
the internal structure of Q (both in the construction itself and in its proof of correctness). Somewhat
more formally, this is a construction of a polynomial time oracle machine M such that M C implements the
primitive P whenever C implements the primitive Q. Namely, Q is given in the construction as a black box
rather than, say, as the description of an algorithm that implements it. In addition, the proof of correctness
is also limited to a black-box access to Q. This means that for any polynomial-time oracle machine AP ,
   4 Sometimes OT is de ned where s and s are bits rather than strings. Using the stronger de nition (with strings) does not
                                       0      1
a ect our results since in the honest but curious model an OT protocol for bits can easily be transformed into an OT protocol
for strings (and the transformation does not increase the number of rounds).
   5 [IR89] refer to these as black-box reduction, and black-box construction, respectively. A fully black-box reduction is also
known as a relativizing reduction.


                                                               7
there exists a polynomial-time oracle machine AQ such that, if AP with access to C breaks M C (as an
implementation of P ), then AQ with access to C breaks C itself (as an implementation of Q). Note that AQ
may use the internal structure of AP (only C is given as a black box). A fully black-box reduction between
P and Q is a semi black-box reduction, where in addition the proof is black box in a stronger sense: There
is a polynomial time adversary AQ which, given oracle access to any adversary AP that breaks M C (as an
implementation of P ), manages to break C (as an implementation of Q). Note that this kind of black-box
argument is more restricted than the one allowed in semi black-box reductions. In this paper, by black-box
reduction we refer to a fully black-box reduction.

The Oracle Separation Paradigm.               Let P; Q be two cryptographic primitives. To separate P and
Q with respect to black-box reductions it is enough to construct an oracle such that relative to the
primitive Q exist whereas P does not. This in itself is enough to conclude that there are no fully black-box
reductions from P to Q. In fact, Impagliazzo and Rudich [IR89] suggested a more powerful methodology
which we follow in all of our separations. In [IR89], is constructed as a combination of an oracle O and
a PSPACE complete oracle. Relative to the PSPACE complete oracle, P=NP. Therefore in some sense, all
of the computational hardness relative to comes from the oracle O. The steps for separating P and Q are
the following. First, prove that there is an implementation of the primitive Q using only O, which is secure
with respect to . That is, the implementation uses polynomial time and polynomial number of queries to
O only, but it's security is proven with respect to polynomial time adversaries which have access both to
O and to the PSPACE complete oracle in . Second, prove that if P = NP then relative to O there is no
secure implementation of the primitive P . The proof should extend (given the implications of the PSPACE
complete oracle) to showing that relative to , there is no secure implementation of the primitive P . The
implication of such a construction can be interpreted in two ways:
     As before, there are no fully black-box reductions from P to Q. But in addition:
     P=NP ) There are no semi black-box reduction from P to Q. Equivalently, providing such a semi
      black-box reduction is as hard as proving P6=NP.
All our separation results follow this paradigm, and so the above two conclusions apply in all of them (we
usually use the rst formulation, but all our result can also be stated as the second). We will sometime
loosely say that Q does not imply P, meaning that there is a separating under black-box reductions, as in
the above paradigm.

3    Partial Implications
The main result of this paper is that PKE and OT are incomparable under black-box reductions. Never-
theless, we start by showing that PKE (resp. OT) with some special properties does imply the existence of
(full edged) OT (resp. PKE). In addition, we present a \pass-preserving" reduction from OT to KA. These
partial implications serve two purposes. First, they show tightness of our separations (that are presented
in Sections 4 and 5). Second, from a pedagogical standpoint, it is useful to understand the limitations of
standard reductions between primitives as a rst step in their separations.

3.1 Equivalence of PKE and 2-KA
We will now review known reductions between PKE and 2-KA that demonstrate their equivalence. This
equivalence is used throughout the paper; when trying to construct PKE from some primitive, we might
instead construct 2-KA, or vice versa.
    Recall that 2-KA is a 2-pass KA protocol between two parties Alice and Bob. Let r be the random string
of Alice and s the random string of Bob. Any 2-KA protocol has the following general structure:
                 Alice                Bob
                            f1 (s)
                      r               s
            0           f2 (r;f1 (s))
      z = R (r; f1 (s))       ! z = R(s; f2 (r; f1 (s)))

                                                     8
In the above protocol, f1 ; f2 ; R; and R0 are some eÆcient algorithms, and z is the key which Alice and
Bob agree upon. Finally, recall that the protocol is secure if (no eÆcient eavesdropper) Eve that is given
the communication hf1 (s); f2 (r; f1 (s))i as input, is able to distinguish between the key z and a uniformly
distributed k-bit string, with non-negligible advantage.
    Given this 2-KA protocol, we can de ne the three probabilistic algorithms of the PKE scheme (i.e. the
generator (G), encryption (E ), and decryption (D)), as follows:
    G: pk = f (s), sk = s.
                1

    E : Epk (m; r) = hf (r; pk); R0 (r; pk)  mi.
                         2

    D: Dsk (c ; c ) = R(sk; c )  c .
               1    2          1     2

The correctness of E and D, as encryption and decryption algorithms, follows from the fact that Alice and
Bob agree on the key in the 2-KA protocol. The semantic security of the scheme is a simple consequence of
the secrecy of the KA protocol.
   Constructing a 2-KA protocol from a PKE scheme is straightforward. In the rst pass, Bob sends to
Alice his public key, pk. In the next pass, Alice selects the key z and sends its encryption, Epk (z; r). Bob
can then compute the secret using the decryption algorithm Dsk , where sk is his secret key. The correctness
and secrecy of the protocol follow from that of the PKE scheme.
   Finally, we note that for k > 2, there are no black-box constructions of PKE out of k-KA (since
Rudich [Rud91] gave a black-box separation between k-KA and (k 1)-KA, and since PKE is equivalent to
2-KA).

3.2 Pass-preserving Reduction of KA to OT
That OT implies KA was part of folklore. However, the construction we explicitly present here is pass-
preserving. Hence k-OT implies k-KA, and as a consequence 2-OT (or 1-round OT) implies PKE. In
Sections 4 and 6, we show that it is not possible to reduce the number of passes when constructing KA from
OT. More formally, there are no black-box constructions of (k 1)-KA out of k-OT. This result also shows
that, in general, OT does not imply PKE.
    It is intuitive that an OT may imply a KA. After all, an OT allows Alice to send one of her two secrets,
s0 or s1 to Bob and such a secret can serve as the key. The protocol used below follows this intuition: Alice
sends s0 to Bob and they agree on it as their key. The correctness of the protocol is immediate. A more
subtle point is to show that s0 remains secret even when the OT protocol is performed with Bob's input
 xed to zero.
Theorem 5    For every k, k-OT for honest parties implies k-KA.
Proof: The KA protocol between A and B is the following: A selects two random k -bit strings s0 and s1 .
A and B then simulate Alice and Bob, respectively, in an OT protocol. The inputs of Alice in the OT are s0
and s1 whereas the input b of Bob is set to 0. Finally, A outputs s0 and B outputs the value Bob received
in the OT protocol. By the correctness of the OT protocol, Alice and Bob agree with probability one. It is
also immediate that the KA has exactly the same number of passes as the OT.
    To complete the proof it is enough to show that if the KA is not secure, then neither is the OT. Assume
that the KA protocol is indeed not secure. This means that there exists an eÆcient eavesdropper E that,
given the communication between A and B , distinguishes s0 from a uniformly distributed string. There are
two possible scenarios: (1) E distinguishes s0 from random even when Bob's input, b, is set to 1 (instead
of 0). (2) When Bob's input is set to 1, E has at most a negligible advantage in distinguishing s0 from
random. In each one of the cases, E can be used to break the OT. More speci cally, in each case one of
the (honest but curious) parties can use E to learn more than they should. In the rst case, the view of a
honest Bob with input 1 gives s1 (with probability one) but also gives information on s0 (namely, the ability
to distinguish it from random). In the second case, the view of a honest Alice gives a way to guess the value
of b with non-negligible advantage over 1=2. The prediction essentially goes as follows: If E distinguishes s0
from random (given the communication between Alice and Bob) guess \b = 0". Otherwise, guess \b = 1".
Testing which is the case can be done given s0 itself (which is also part of the view of the honest Alice). 2

                                                      9
   Note that, although Theorem 5 is stated for honest OT, it also applies to malicious OT (as an immediate
consequence).

3.3 Special Cases of PKE that imply OT
In Section 3.2 we showed that k-OT implies k-KA. It is therefore natural to explore the converse direction,
i.e., does k-KA imply k-OT? In Section 5, we show that the answer is no. In fact, even 2-KA does not imply
OT (with any polynomial number of rounds). Yet, in this section, we show that if a KA has some special
properties then it is possible to construct OT from it. We then translate the special properties of the KA to
special properties of PKE that are suÆcient for the construction of OT.
     Our starting point is the constructions in [EGL85, Gol98] of OT based on PKE with additional properties
(or trapdoor-pernutations). We o er constructions based on weaker properties. To this end, we rst abstract
and generalize their constructions, viewing them in terms of KA (rather than PKE).
     Suppose Alice has a single secret s that she wants to send to Bob in the presence of an eavesdropper.
Alice and Bob can perform a KA protocol. At the last pass Alice can also send z  s, where z is the key they
agree upon. This allows Bob to compute s while an eavesdropper learns nothing about s. In an OT protocol,
however, Alice has two secrets s0 and s1 , Bob wants to learn sb and Alice should not learn b. Finally, Bob
should not learn more than one secret. If we ignore this last requirement, then Alice can just send both
s0 and s1 to Bob using two parallel executions of the KA protocol. Surprisingly, in some cases this simple
(and silly) protocol can be transformed into an OT protocol for honest parties. The idea is simple, the only
change that is needed is that in the execution of the KA that corresponds to s1 b Bob should \fake" his
role. Namely, it only acts as if he is trying to agree on a key, where in fact he learns nothing about the key
that Alice outputs for that execution. More speci cally, the properties needed from these fake runs are the
following:
   1. Alice should not be able to distinguish a fake run from a real run. Therefore, the view of Alice can be
      simulated by performing two real (or fake) runs of the KA protocol.
   2. In a fake run, Bob cannot distinguish the key Alice outputs from random. Therefore, it is enough to
      simulate the view of Bob when instead of sending s1 b , Alice sends a random string. Such a view can
      be easily simulated (given the string sb that is available to the simulator).
   We now de ne two properties for PKE, such that if a PKE satis es one of these properties, then a
corresponding KA protocol is fakeable. This will imply that honest-OT can be based on a PKE with one of
these properties.
  A: One can eÆciently select a string pk with a distribution which is indistinguishable from that of a public
     key generated by G, while preserving the semantic security of the encryption Epk . Namely, even the
     algorithm that selects pk does not learn anything on a message m from Epk (m).6
  B: For any public key pk, one can eÆciently select a string c which is indistinguishable from a random
     encryption of a randomly chosen message m, without having information on the decryption Dsk (c).
     (i.e., Dsk (c) is pseudo-random even to the algorithm that selects c).
Proposition 12      PKE having property A implies (2-pass) OT for honest parties.
Proof: The fakeable KA protocol looks as follows:

         Alice              Bob
                    pk
                            Run G to select(pk; sk)
                  Epk (z)
      Select z      ! z = Dsk (Epk (z ))
  6 In particular, the semantic security requirement implies that the selecting algorithm cannot just run G, ignore sk and
output pk. Similarly, for property B the selecting algorithm cannot simply encrypt a random message and output the resulting
ciphertext.



                                                            10
To fake this protocol, Bob selects pk using the method guaranteed by property A (instead of running G). In
this case, Bob learns nothing about the key z (which is sent encrypted), because of the semantic security in
property A. Nevertheless, since pk has an indistinguishable distribution from that obtained by selecting it
using G, we get that the fake run is indistinguishable from a real run (even to Alice).
    By the reduction described above, we can obtain 1-round honest OT protocol from this fakeable KA
protocol (using parallel executions of a real KA and a fake one). We note that this OT protocol was
independently found by [Bei].                                                                             2
Proposition 13        PKE with property B implies (3-pass) OT for honest parties.
Proof: The fakeable KA protocol looks as follows:

            Alice                    Bob
                            pk
      G : (pk; sk)          !
                        c=Epk (r)
                                     Select r
                         zDsk (c)
          Select z
                        =
                            !        z = r
To fake this protocol, Bob selects c using the method guaranteed by property B (instead of applying Epk
to r). In this case, Bob learns nothing since Dsk (c) is indistinguishable to Bob from random. Nevertheless,
since c is a pseudo-random ciphertext, the fake run is indistinguishable from a real run (even to Alice).
    By the reduction described above, we can obtain 3-pass honest OT protocol from this fakeable KA
protocol.                                                                                                 2
    Propositions 12 and 13, together, complete the proof of Theorem 3.

Discussion of the Properties.           These properties are convenient abstractions of properties shared by
well-known cryptosystems. For example, property A is true for El Gamal Encryption (corresponding to
DiÆe-Hellman KA): A public key p; g; y (where y = gx for the secret key x) can be sampled with identical
distribution to that produced by the generating algorithm, since gx is a permutation and therefore y can
be selected at random. This is semantically secure if the PKE itself is semantically secure (i.e., under the
decision DH assumption). Property B is true for many PKEs since in many cases a ciphertext is uniformly
distributed on some easily sampalable set. One example is the general construction of PKE based on any
trapdoor permutation [Yao82, GM84] (where a random ciphertext is a uniform string plus a uniform element
from the domain of the permutation).
    As mentioned above, the methodology of our constructions (using fakeable KA) is based on generalizing
constructions of [EGL85]. There, OT was constructed based on PKE with the property that the distribution
of ciphertexts is essentially the same for any public key. This is a special case of our property B (and thus a
stronger restriction). Finally, we note that similar properties were recently de ned by [DN00], for di erent
purposes. They call these properties oblivious public-key generation and oblivious ciphertext generation.

4     OT Does Not Imply PKE
In this section we construct an oracle 3 relative to which there is 3-OT, but no 2-KA (thus, no PKE). This
can be extended (as we argue in Section 6) to show that for every k  3 there is an oracle k relative to
which there is k-OT but no (k 1)-KA. Note that this tightly matches our positive result of Section 3.2,
where we showed that k-OT does imply k-KA.
    The oracle 3 is de ned as follows.
     Three uniformly distributed, length-tripling functions f (; ), f (; ), and f (; ; ). We restrict f to
                                                                 1       2            3                      3
      be injective.
     A function R satisfying R(w; ) = z whenever       = f3 (z; r; f2 (w; f1 (z; r)))) for some jz j = jrj = jwj
      (we call such pairs (w; ) valid), and random everywhere else. That is, when (w; ) is not a valid pair,
      R(w; ) returns a random value of size jwj. Note that R is well de ned, since f3 is injective.

                                                       11
    a PSPACE-complete oracle.
Note that we can essentially ignore the restriction that f3 is injective since, with probability 1, a random
length tripling function is injective for suÆciently long inputs.
    In Section 4.1 we will rst show that relative to 3 , 3-KA is possible. We will then observe that this KA
is in fact \fakeable" in the sense discussed in Section 3.3. We will thus conclude that relative to this oracle,
3-pass honest OT is possible. Finally, we will show how this honest OT protocol may be modi ed to yield
a 3-OT for malicious parties. In Section 4.2 we will show that relative to this oracle, 2-KA is not possible
(thus PKE is not possible). The proof of impossibility follows the arguments of Rudich [Rud91], who showed
another oracle relative to which 2-KA is not possible, but 3-KA is.7

4.1 3-OT Using the Oracle
3-KA protocol

The following is a 3-KA protocol using          3   :
           Alice                        Bob
                       1 =f1 (z;r )
      Select z; r           !
                      2 =f2 (w; 1 )
                                        Select w
                      3 =f3 (z;r; 2 )
       Output z             !           Output R(w; 3 )
    The correctness of the protocol follows from the de nition of R, which implies that Bob's output
R(w; 3 ) = R(w; f3 (z; r; f2(w; f1 (z; r)))) = z is the same as Alice's output. To show the secrecy of the
protocol, we need to show that given the conversation, z is indistinguishable from a uniformly chosen string.
If R was not part of the oracle, proving this is standard using the fact that the functions are random. It can
be shown that this remains true even in the presence of R, since, by the fact that the functions are length
tripling, it is hard to sample elements from their range without actually applying the function, and so no
\useful" application of R is possible based on the conversation alone. The argument is similar to ones used
by [IR89, Rud91] and in our Section 5, and is omitted here.

3-OT for honest parties

Observe that the 3-KA protocol presented above is in fact fakeable: Bob in his turn can select a random 2
of an appropriate length, and since f2 is a random function, this fake 2 is indistinguishable to Alice from
one generated by applying f2 (w; 1 ) for some w. On the other hand, without a w such that 2 = f2(w; 2 ),
Bob cannot distinuish z from random (and indeed such a w not only is hard to nd, but it is likely to not
even exist).
    Since the 3-KA is fakeable, a 3-OT for honest parties is possible, as described in Section 3.3, by executing
in parallel a real and a fake run of KA, where Alice also sends her secrets concealed with keys agreed upon
in the two executions.

General (malicious) 3-OT

The 3-OT described above is only secure for honest parties, since it relies on honest Bob faking one of
the parallel KA executions (and not using two real runs). However, relying on the properties of our oracle
functions, we are able to construct a malicious 3-OT protocol. In fact, this 3-OT will be even simpler than
the one for honest parties.
   The protocol is based on the same idea of executing two parallel runs of KA, but this time Bob (even
when malicious) is forced to run at most one real KA run, while the other run must be fake. This is done by
  7 An alternative proof of our result that 3-OT does not imply 2-KA may use a very similar oracle to the one used by [Rud91],
with a small (but essential) modi cation which allows for a 3-OT protocol (and not only 3-KA). We prefer the alternative
presented here, since it seems to capture 3-KA in a very general and natural way, containing a function for each pass, and a
function for the reconstruction.


                                                             12
letting Bob choose 2 for only one of the runs, while for the other run 2 will be such that Bob cannot nd
a corresponding w, and thus cannot distinguish Alice's secret from random, as argued above. To guarantee
the latter, we use a simple idea: use the same 2 for both runs. More speci cally, the 3-OT protocol is as
follows.
                                                   Alice                               Bob
                                        input : s0 ; s1                                input : b
                                  Select z0 ; z1; r0 ; r1 ;
                                                                     0; 1
                  0
                  1   = f1 (s0 ; r0 ); 11 = f1 (s1 ; r1 )            1 1
                                                                         !
                                                                    f w; b1 )
                                                                 2= 2(
                                                                                       Select w
       0
       3   = f3 (z0 ; r0 ; 2 );    1
                                   3   = f3 (z1 ; r1 ; 2 );
                                                              0 ; 1 ;z   s0 ;z1 s1
                         0   = z0  s 0 ; 1 = z1  s 1        3 3 0
                                                                         !             Output R(w; b3 )  b
   The security of this protocol follows from the fact that it is hard to genreate 2 that corresponds to some
 1 without actually applying the function f2 (w; 1 ) for some w, and thus it is hard for Bob, even when
malicious, to nd one 2 that corresponds to both 01 and 11 (moreover, such an 2 most likely does not
even exist). It follows that 2 is \real" for at most one of the runs, whereas for the other run it is fake,
namely Bob cannot distinguish the corresponding secret from random. Thus, Bob's view can be simulated
by an eÆcient algorithm that may ask for a single value sb . Simulating the view of a malicious Alice is
standard, and therefore the OT protocol is secure.

4.2 No 2-KA Relative to the Oracle
The proof that no 2-KA protocol exists relative to 3 is quite complicated, but very similar to the proof
of Rudich in [Rud91], who showed that no 2-KA is possible relative to his own oracle. His arguments, in
turn, rely on techniques developed by Impagliazzo and Rudich [IR89], some of which are sketched in the
following Section 5. Since the proof of this part contains no new technical ideas beyond those of [Rud91], we
only present a very informal intuition behind the proof. We note that some of these intuitions are further
developed in Section 5.
    First, it is proven in [IR89] that for an oracle containing a random function and a PSPACE-complete
oracle, no KA is possible. Informally, they show that in that setting, for any protocol, an evesdropper
Eve who is given the conversation can guess \everything both Alice and Bob know in common" with non-
negligible probability. Thus, if Alice and Bob agree on a secret, Eve can also guess the secret. Following
the same proof, relative to our oracle 3 there is no KA protocol which never queries R (in any polynomial
number of passes).
    We now want to argue that R is not \useful" in any 2-pass protocol, and thus no 2-pass KA exists. It
is intuitively clear that querying R on inputs (w; ) which are not of valid form is not useful, since R just
outputs a random value, and we are again in a setting similar to that of [IR89]. Next, it can be shown that, if
during a protocol R was queried on some valid input (w; f3 (z; r; f2(w; f1 (z; r)))), with very high probability
it must be the case that prior to this point f1 was queried on (z; r), then f2 was queried on (w; f1 (z; r)), and
then f3 was queried on (z; r; f2(w; f1 (z; r))).
    Now, consider any 2-pass protcol, and consider the rst \useful" application of R. As explained above,
we may assume that with non-negligible probability, Eve knows everything that Alice and Bob know in
common before R is applied. Assume (w.l.o.g.) that Alice is the party about to apply R on some valid input
(w; ). Since the protocol is 2-pass and f1; f2 ; f3 should have been applied sequentially, it follows that one of
the parties applied both f1 ; f2 or both f2 ; f3 on the corresponding inputs. In either case, at that point that
party knew all of w; z; r. If this party is Alice, we may eliminate her application of R without changing the
correctness or secrecy of the protocol, since she already knows the output z ; thus, in this case the application
of R is not useful. On the other hand, if this party is Bob, Bob knows w; z; r, and by accessing f1 ; f2 and
f3 he can also nd ; thus (w; ) is already known to both Alice and Bob, and therefore it is known to Eve
with non-negligible probability, in which case Eve herself can apply R(s; ).


                                                                     13
5     PKE Does Not Imply OT
In this section we construct an oracle PKE relative to which there is PKE, but no OT (not even honest-
OT) in any polynomial number of rounds, thus proving Theorem 4. We use a natural oracle containing the
functions f1 ; f2 ; R to be used for key generation, encryption, and decryption, respectively. We must, however,
take some care to de ne these functions such that the special properties of Section 3.3, under which PKE
implies OT, do not hold. Towards this end, making f1 and f2 length expanding and random will guarantee
that it is hard to generate a valid public key or a valid encryption without actually applying f1 (on the secret
key ) or applying f2 (encrypting some message), respectively. Furthermore, providing ways to test whether
a given string is a valid public key and whether a given string is a valid encryption, will guarantee that it
is even hard to come up with strings that \look" valid.8 In Section 5.2 we show that these modi cations of
f1 ; f2 and R are (not only necessary but also) suÆcient in order to guarantee the impossibility of OT. The
oracle PKE is thus de ned as follows.
     f is a uniformly distributed, length-tripling function.
       1

     f is an injective, uniformly distributed, length tripling function on the set of its valid inputs. An
       2
      input hm; r; yi is valid for f if for some x, both y = f (x) and jxj = jmj = jrj. On any invalid input
                                      2                              1
      f outputs ?.
       2

     R satisfying R(c; x) = m whenever c = f (m; r; f (x)) and jmj = jrj. Otherwise, R(c; x) =?. R is well
                                                     2        1
      de ned since f2 is injective.
     A P SP ACE -complete oracle.
We will call an input to R valid if the output on this input is not ? (this is consistent with the de nition of
valid inputs to f2 ).
    Note that we can essentially ignore the restriction that f2 is injective. This is because, with probability
1, a uniformly distributed length-tripling function is one-to-one on all suÆciently long inputs. Also note
that f2 provides a way to test whether a given y is in the range of f1 or not, e.g., by calling f2 (~0; ~0; y) and
checking whether ? is returned. Similarly, R provides a way to test whether a given c is valid with respect
to x, namely wheter c = f2 (m; r; f1 (x)) for some m; r.

5.1 PKE Using the Oracle
PKE under this oracle is straightforward: The key generation PPTM G(1l ) chooses a random s 2R f0; 1gl,
and sets sk = s, pk = f1 (s); The encryption PPTM chooses a random string r 2R f0; 1gl and sets Epk (m) =
f2 (m; r; pk); The decryption PPTM simply calls R, namely Dsk (c) = R(c; SK ).
    The correctness of this PKE follows directly from the de nition of the oracle, and security can be proved
in a standard way from the fact that f1 and f2 are random functions.
    Note that this PKE protocol does not use the fact that the functions f1 ; f2 are \testable": The same
protocol would work even if f2 and R returned a random string instead of ? when their input is not valid.
The testability property will be necessary for guaranteeing that no OT exists, as we show next.

5.2 No OT Exists Relative to This Oracle
We prove that no OT protocol exists relative to PKE. Since our proof is technically involved, we start by
providing a high level overview of the main ideas and challenges, concentrating on the intuition behind the
proof. Some additional technical details follow. A complete proof is de ered to the full version.
  8 Without such a test, choosing a random string of the appropriate length will look valid. This would mean that Properties
A and B of Section 3.3 hold for the PKE and therefore a honest OT protocol is still possible.




                                                            14
High Level Overview

Informally, we prove that there is no honest-OT by proving that for any protocol between Alice and Bob,
honest-but-curious Alice can nd out \everything that Bob can learn about her". This will imply that, in
particular, she can nd out which of her secrets Bob can learn, thus implying that the protocol cannot be
a secure OT (since either Bob can learn both secrets, or he cannot learn any secret, or Alice can nd out
which secret he was after).
     Towards making this intuition more formal, we start by modeling the concept of \knowledge", as in [IR89,
Rud91], via the queries made to the oracle (and its answers), and modeling what two parties know in common
as their intersection queries, namely queries that they both made to the oracle. Further, we require that any
protocol for OT take a normal form, which includes the requirement that Alice queries the oracle on her two
secrets, and Bob queries the oracle on the secret he recovered. Now, we are left with proving that Alice can
indeed nd out all the intersection queries, and thus no OT exists, as explained above.
     To see how we go about proving this, let us start by taking a closer look at the way our oracle PKE was
constructed. First, the oracle contains random functions f1 ; f2 and a P SP ACE -complete oracle. Following
the proof of [IR89], if these were the only parts of the oracle, KA would not be possible. Speci cally,
[IR89] prove that for such an oracle there exists an \eavesdropper" PPTM Eve which with high probability,
given the conversation alone, can nd a polynomial length list containing all the intersection queries (and
thus containing the agreed key).9 However, by adding R to our oracle, KA becomes possible (as shown in
Section 5.1). Moreover, as discussed above, with f2 or R de ned as random everywhere, OT is also possible.
Therefore, a crucial part of our oracle is that f2 and R are de ned on valid inputs only, thus providing a
way to test whether a string is valid. Also crucial is that valid inputs are hard to guess (since f1 and f2 are
length expanding and random). We will argue that these properties guarantee that OT is impossible (while
still maintaining the possiblity of KA, as shown by the protocol of Section 5.1).
     What makes the validity tests so powerfull that they prevent OT? The main idea is the following:
whenever a new intersection query is created the validity tests help detecting and verifying it. To see that, let
us consider how intersection queries are created. One kind of intersection queries are those created without
the use of R. In some sense, these are not really interesting since both parties (and even an eavesdropper)
are aware of such common knowledge. Therefore, we only need to care about intersection queries that are
created by R. A typical example is the one obtained by the PKE of Section 5.1: One party selects x and
sends y = f1 (x) to the second party which selects m and r and sends c = f2 (m; r; y) back to the rst party.
The knowledge they both have in common now contains m (since the rst party can compute m = R(c; x)).
How can Alice detect such intersection queries? Intuitively, all she needs to do is handle two cases: (1) A
new intersection query c is created. Alice knows x such that m = R(c; x) 6=?. If Alice did not obtain c
herself (by a previous query to f2 ) she can deduce that Bob did (since the only way to obtain a valid output
of f2 is essentially by querying f2 ). Alice can therefore conclude that m is an intersection query. (2) A new
intersection query c 6=? is created. Alice knows m; r and y such that c = f2 (m; r; y). If Alice did not obtain
y herself (by a previous query to f1 ) she can deduce that Bob did (since the only way to obtain a valid
output of f1 is essentially by querying f1 ) and he therefore knows x such that y = f1(x). Alice can therefore
conclude that m is an intersection query (since Bob can compute m = R(c; x)). The formal proof is of course
by far more subtle. We now give some details on the proof technique.

Overview of Proof Technique

To carry out the intuitive arguments above, we would like to extend the proof techniques of [IR89] to work
for our (more complex) oracle. However, it is clear that in our setting there is no Eve which can nd the
intersection queries from the conversation alone, since otherwise KA would not be possible. Nevertheless,
we are able to use similar techniques to prove a claim appropriate for our setting. As explained above, this
claim is roughly saying that (curious) Alice can nd the intersection queries from her view. One subtle and
important di erence between our claim and the one used by [IR89], is that for us it is not enough to merely
  nd a polynomial size list containing the intersection queries (indeed, this would be trivial for Alice, by
   9 We note that [IR89] work with an oracle containing a single random function, but the same proof can be extended to
an oracle with two functions f1 ; f2 where f1 is random, and f2 is random on valid inputs of the form (m; r; f1 (x)), and is ?
otherwise.


                                                             15
simply outputting all her queries). Instead, for our rationale to go through and imply that no OT exists,
the list output by Alice should also have the property that (curious) Bob can indeed nd all the queries on
the list. This is exactly where we will use the power to test for validity of a string (from the range of f1 or
f2 ): Alice will use this power to make sure she does not add to her list queries that Bob cannot nd.
     Putting the above intuition together, the main lemma we prove is the following.
Main Lemma (informal statement): For every OT protocol (Alice, Bob) there are PPTMs EA ; EB
(which can be thought of as the \curious" parts of Alice and Bob, respectively) such that EA gets as input
Alice's view and outputs a list LA , EB gets as input Bob's view and outputs a list LB , and the following is
satis ed (with good probability):
     LA contains all intersection queries.       10


     LA  L B .
   That is, intuitively, anything Bob learned about Alice is on her list LA , and anything he cannot learn
(even when behaving curiously) is not on her list. Thus, if Bob learns one of her secrets but cannot learn
the other one, Alice knows which is the secret he learned, and OT is not possible.

Some More Details | Repeated Sampling Paradigm

Repeated sampling is an important method, used in the de nition of EA and EB in the proof of the main
lemma. This method is adapted from [IR89]. We now give a very high level description of repeated sampling
in the context of [IR89] and in the context of our proof.
    Recall that the oracle world of [IR89] contains a random function f and a P SP ACE -complete oracle. Let
Eve be the evesdropper that breaks the KA protocol in [IR89]. Eve maintains at each stage a polynomial
size list L containing all intersection queries between the two parties upto this point. To guess the next
intersection query (if one is made in the next round), Eve repeats polynomialy many times the following
process:
Simulation Phase Sample an (almost) uniformly distributed run of the protocol that is consistent with
      the communication so far and the partial knowledge of Eve on f . We stress that any simulated query
      to f that was not determined so far gets a simulated answer (therefore, the probability distribution of
      the simulated run is also over random f 's consistent with Eve's partial knowledge). Based on a result
      of [JVV86] it is shown in [IR89] (see their Corollary 3.2), that this sampling phase can be performed
      eÆciently (using the P SP ACE -complete oracle).
Updating Phase All the queries of the simulation phase are now asked from the                        actual oracle. They are
      subsequently added to L.
    Why does this work? Assume that in the next round Bob has a non-negligible chance of making a new
intersection query. In this case, a non-negligible fraction of possible Alice's already made this query, and
thus by sampling them Eve has a chance to nd it too. Another way of looking at this intuition is that when
sampling Alice, in each execution of the process, during the simulation phase all \made-up" oracle answers
are either: (1) Consistent with Bob's view of the oracle (i.e., they are not intersection queries). In this case
the simulated Alice view is a possible one from Bob's point of view (thus there is nothing \hidden" that
Alice and Bob both know which Eve does not); or (2) The answers are not consistent with Bob's view. In
this case the simulation phase is useless, but during the update phase a new intersection query will be found,
making progress towards having a \good" simulation (as in (1)).
    The repeated sampling technique of [IR89] can be partially carried out to our setting. In our case EA and
EB will use repeated sampling to maintain the lists LA and LB that satisfy the desired properties of the main
lemma (up to the current stage). Nevertheless, the use of repeated sampling in our context is more subtle.
The main di erence is that letting EA and EB simulate runs of the protocol that are consistent with the
conversation alone is not good enough. The place where the previous intuition fails with an oracle like ours
  10 To be a bit more accurate, L will contain all queries that are intersections with probability larger than some   xed threshold
                                 A
". Nevertheles, such a list LA is good enough for our arguments.



                                                               16
(which has R as well), is that now it is possible that a made-up simulated oracle is both inconsistent with
Bob's view and does not yield \progress" via an intersection query. For example, assume Alice chooses x and
sends y = f1(x) to Bob, then receives c = f2 (m; r; y) from him, and applies R(x; c). Then in the simulation
phase, a wrong x^ will be sampled (\pretending" that f1 (^x) = y), but asking for the real value of R(^x; c) in
the update phase provides useless information. This can happen in every repetition for polynomially many
times, without revealing any new intersection queries. The solution comes from the fact that EA has access
to all of (real) Alice's view, and EB has aceess to (real) Bob's view. Therefore, EA and EB sample runs of
the protocol that are consistent with both the conversation and this additional information. In the example
above, Bob's view already contains m, and Alice's view contains the real x such that f1 (x) = y, thus after
invoking R(x; c) she obtains the real m (and R is never invoked on the useless (^x; c)).
    We conclude with brie y mentioning two additional subtelties of our proof:
     The generation of almost uniform runs of a protocol (that are consistent with some partial information)
      is more complex in our oracle (though still doable).
     While creating the list LA , we cannot be as rackless as Eve is in the descryption above. Namely, EA
      cannot add all the update queries to LA since LB may not contain them. Therefore, EA should be very
      conservative in creating LA. This is where she uses the validity tests described above. On the othere
      hand, EB can be much more liberal and put all his knowledge into LB (which creates the asymmetry
      between LA and LB ).

6     Relationships with KA and with Trapdoor Functions
Our results extend beyond the relationship between PKE and OT, to show interesting relationships to KA,
trapdoor functions, and trapdoor permutations. In this section we sketch our additional results (some of
which follow as direct corollaries of our previous theorems, and some require extensions of the proofs).

6.1 Relationship between OT and KA
Recall that OT is known to imply KA, and that in fact KA can be constructed from OT in a pass-preserving
way, as we showed in Section 3.2. That is, k-OT implies k-KA. However, we now show that a construction
that reduces the passes is not possible.

k-OT does not imply (k 1)-KA, for any k  2. In Section 4 we have constructed an oracle 3
with the desired properties for k = 3. This construction can be generalized to any k in a straightforward
way, by using k containing (in addition to a PSPACE-complete oracle) random length tripling functions
f1 ; : : : ; fk , and a reconstruction function R such that R(w; ) = z whenever is of the appropriate form for
k sequential applications of f1 ; : : : ; fk alternating between applications of the form fi (z; r; i 1 ) and of the
form fi (w; i 1 ). The oracle is slightly di erent (syntactically) in the case that k is odd and the case k is
even, depending on whether the rst function f1 is de ned on (z; r) (when k is odd), or on w (when k is
even). Proving that a k-OT (malicious) protocol exists relative to k , as well as proving that no (k 1)-KA
protocol exists, is very similar to the corresponding proofs for k = 3.
     Note that the above result clearly implies a separation between k-KA and (k 1)-KA (which was proven
in [Rud91]), and a separation between k-OT and (k 1)-OT (both of which are weaker).

KA does not imply OT.         Since we have proved that PKE (or 2-KA) does not imply OT (in any number
of rounds), this immediately yields the corollary that, while OT implies KA, the converse is not true. That
is, KA does not imply OT (under black-box reductions).

6.2 Relationships with Trapdoor Functions
Trapdoor permutations vs. PKE.            While trapdoor permutations are known to imply PKE, our re-
sults imply that the converse is not true, namely PKE does not imply trapdoor permutations. This is so


                                                        17
since trapdoor permutations imply OT, and thus relative to our oracle           PKE   , PKE exists but trapdoor
permutations do not.

Trapdoor functions vs. OT.          By the result of Bellare al. [BHSV98], trapdoor functions with polynomial
pre-image size imply PKE. Thus, we conclude that OT does not imply trapdoor functions with polynomial
pre-image size (obviously, it follows that OT does not imply injective trapdoor functions, and in particular
it does not imply trapdoor permutations).11
    On the other hand, we may extend our results to prove that injective trapdoor functions do not imply
OT. For this purpose we may use our oracle PKE, for which we already know that no OT exists. We
may now consider the family fTy (m; r) = (f2 (m; r; y); r)g where the key generation algorithm rst chooses
a random t as the trapdoor information, and sets the key to y = f1 (t). It is easy to see that Ty is easy
to compute, and easy to invert given the trapdoor (and access to R). The one-wayness of Ty (without the
trapdoor information) follows from the fact that f2 is random (thus it is hard to invert without access to
R), and the fact that f1 is random (thus it is hard to use R in a meaningful way, given y and the output of
Ty ). Ty is injective since f2 is.
    We may conclude that OT and injective trapdoor functions are incomparable (and they are both implied
by trapdoor permutations). The same construction also implies a separation between trapdoor permutations
(i.e. trapdoor functions which are injective and onto), and trapdoor functions which are injective.

Acknowledgments
We thank Sha Goldwaser for mentioning this open problem and inspiring us to continue working on it. We
are grateful to Amos Beimel for many insightful remarks and useful discussions on previous works as well
as our own. Finally, we would like to thank anonymous referees for comments on an earlier version of the
paper.

References
[AIR00]     W. Aiello, Y. Ishai, and O. Reingold. Oblivious commerce: How to sell digital goods. Manuscript
            in Preperation, 2000.
[BCR86]     G. Brassard, C. Crepeau, and J.M. Robert. Information theoretic reductions among disclosure
            problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science,
            pages 168{173, 1986.
[Bei]       Amos Beimel. Personal communication.
[BHSV98] M. Bellare, S. Halevi, A. Sahai, and S. Vadhan. Many-to-one trapdoor functions and their
         relations to public-key cryptosystems. In Advances in Cryptology { Crypto '98 Proceedings,
         Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1998.
[Blu83]     M. Blum. How to exchange (secret) keys. ACM Transactions of Computer Systems, 1(2):175{
            193, 1983. Preliminary version in the Proceedings the ACM Symposium on the Theory of
            Computing, pages 440{447, 1983.
[BMM99] A. Beimel, T. Malkin, and S. Micali. The all-or-nothing nature of two-party secure computation.
        In Advances in Cryptology { Crypto '99 Proceedings, volume 1666 of Lecture Notes in Computer
        Science, pages 80 { 97, 1999.
[CK88]      C. Crepeau and J. Kilian. Achieving oblivious transfer using weakened security assumptions.
            In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 42{52,
            1988.
  11 As for trapdoor functions with super-polynomial pre-image size, these are implied by (standard) one-way func-
tions [BHSV98], and thus by OT, as well as PKE, and any other assumption that implies OWF.


                                                       18
[Cre87]   C. Crepeau. Equivalence between two avours of oblivious transfers. In Advances in Cryptology
           { Crypto '87 Proceedings, pages 350{354, 1987.
[CS91]     C. Crepeau and M. Santha. On the reversibility of oblivious transfer. In Proceedings of EURO-
           CRYPT, volume 547 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 106{113, 1991.
[DH76]     W. DiÆe and M.E. Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Transactions in Information
           Theory, 22(6):644{654, 1976.
[DN00]     I. Damg
                  ard and J.B. Nielsen. Improved non-commiting encryption schemes based on a general
           complexity assumption. In Advances in Cryptology { Crypto '00 Proceedings, pages 432{450,
           2000.
[EGL85]    S. Even, O. Goldreich, and A. Lempel. A randomized protocol for signing contracts. Commu-
           nications of the ACM, 28(6):637{647, 1985.
[GGM86] O. Goldreich, S. Goldwasser, and S. Micali. How to construct random functions. Journal of
        the ACM, 33(4):792{807, October 1986. Preliminary version in the Proceedings of the IEEE
        Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 464{479, 1984.
[GM84]     S. Goldwasser and S. Micali. Probabilistic encryption. Journal of Computer Security, 28:270{
           299, 1984. Preliminary version in the Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on the Theory of
           Computing, pages 365{377, 1982.
[GMW87] O. Goldreich, S. Micali, and A. Wigderson. How to play any mental game, or: A completness
        theorem for protocols with honest majority. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Theory
        of Computing, pages 218{229, 1987.
[GMW91] O. Goldreich, S. Micali, and A. Wigderson. Proofs that yield nothing but their validity or
        all languages in np have zero-knowledge proofs. Journal of the ACM, 38(3):691{729, July 1991.
        Preliminary version in the Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer
        Science, pages 174{187, 1986.
[Gol97]    S. Goldwasser. New directions in cryptography: Twenty some years later. In Proceedings of the
           IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 314{325, 1997.
[Gol98]    O. Goldreich.       Secure multi-party computation (working draft).             http://www.
           wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/foc.html, 1998.
[GT00]     R. Gennaro and L. Trevisan. Lower bounds on the eÆciency of generic cryptographic construc-
           tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, 2000.
           To Appear.
[HILL99]   J. H_astad, R. Impagliazzo, L.A. Levin, and M. Luby. A pseudorandom generator from any
           one-way function. SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1364{1396, 1999.
[IL89]     R. Impagliazzo and M. Luby. One-way functions are essencial for complexity based cryptography.
           In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 230{235,
           1989.
[IR89]     R. Impagliazzo and S. Rudich. Limits on the provable consequences of one-way permutations.
           In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 44{61, 1989.
[IR00]     R. Impagliazzo and S. Rudich. Personal communication.
[JVV86]    M. Jerrum, L. Valiant, and V. Vazirani. Random generation of combinatorial structures from a
           uniform distribution. Theoretical Computer Science, 43:169{188, 1986.
[Kil88]    J. Kilian. Founding cryptography on oblivious transfer. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium
           on Theory of Computing, pages 20{31, 1988.
                                                  19
[Kil91]    J. Kilian. A general completeness theorem for two-party games. In Proceedings of the ACM
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 553{560, 1991.
[Kil00]    J. Kilian. More general completeness theorems for secure two-party computation. 2000.
[KKMO00] J. Kilian, E. Kushilevitz, S. Micali, and R. Ostrovsky. Reducibility and completeness in private
         computations. SIAM Journal on Computing, 29(4):1189{1208, 2000.
[KSS00]    J. Kahn, M. Saks, and C. Smyth. A dual version of Reimer's inequality and a proof of Rudich's
           conjecture. In Proceedings of the 15th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity,
           2000.
[KST99]    J.H. Kim, D. Simon, and P. Tetali. Limits on the eÆciency of one-way permuation-based hash
           functions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science,
           pages 535{542, 1999.
[LR88]     M. Luby and C. Racko . How to construct pseudo-random permutations from pseudo-random
           functions. SIAM Journal on Computing, 17(2):373{386, April 1988. Preliminary version in
           Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 1986.
[Nao91]    M. Naor. Bit commitment using pseudorandomness. Journal of Cryptology, 4(2):151{158, 1991.
           Preliminary version in Advances in Cryptology { Crypto '89 Proceedings, pages 128{136, 1989.
[Nao00]    M. Naor. Presentation in DIMACS workshop on Cryptography and Intractibility, March 2000.
[NY89]     M. Naor and M. Yung. Universal one-way hash functions and their cryptographic applications.
           In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 33{43, 1989.
[Rab81]    M.O. Rabin. How to exchange secrets by oblivious transfer. Technical Report TR-81, Harvard
           University, 1981.
[Rom90]    J. Rompel. One-way functions are necessary and suÆcient for secure signatures. In Proceedings
           of the ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 387{394, 1990.
[Rud91]    S. Rudich. The use of interaction in public cryptosysytems. In Advances in Cryptology { Crypto
           '91 Proceedings, volume 576 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 242{251, 1991.
[Sim98]    D. Simon. Finding collisions on a one-way street: Can secure hash functions be based on general
           assumptions. In Proceedings of EUROCRYPT, volume 1403 of Lecture Notes in Computer
           Science, 1998.
[Yao82]    A. Yao. Theory and applications of trapdoor functions. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
           on the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 80{91, 1982.
[Yao86]    A.C. Yao. How to generate and exchange secrets. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
           the Foundations of Computer Science, pages 162{167, 1986.




                                                   20
