                                         On One-Shot Signatures, Quantum vs Classical Binding, and
                                                        Obfuscating Permutations
                                                                   Omri Shmueli1 and Mark Zhandry1,2
                                                                                  1
                                                                                   NTT Research
                                                                             2
                                                                                 Stanford University
arXiv:2507.12456v1 [cs.CR] 16 Jul 2025




                                                                                      Abstract
                                         One-shot signatures (OSS) were defined by Amos, Georgiou, Kiayias, and Zhandry (STOC’20).
                                         These allow for signing exactly one message, after which the signing key self-destructs, preventing
                                         a second message from ever being signed. While such an object is impossible classically, Amos
                                         et al observe that OSS may be possible using quantum signing keys by leveraging the no-
                                         cloning principle. OSS has since become an important conceptual tool with many applications
                                         in decentralized settings and for quantum cryptography with classical communication. OSS
                                         are also closely related to separations between classical-binding and collapse-binding for post-
                                         quantum hashing and commitments. Unfortunately, the only known OSS construction due to
                                         Amos et al. was only justified in a classical oracle model, and moreover their justification was
                                         ultimately found to contain a fatal bug. Thus, the existence of OSS, even in a classical idealized
                                         model, has remained open.
                                             We give the first standard-model OSS, with provable security assuming (sub-exponential) in-
                                         distinguishability obfuscation (iO) and LWE. This also gives the first standard-model separation
                                         between classical and collapse-binding post-quantum commitments/hashing, solving a decade-
                                         old open problem. Along the way, we also give the first construction with unconditional security
                                         relative to a classical oracle. To achieve our standard-model construction, we develop a notion
                                         of permutable pseudorandom permutations (permutable PRPs), and show how they are useful
                                         for translating oracle proofs involving random permutations into obfuscation-based proofs. In
                                         particular, obfuscating permutable PRPs gives a trapdoor one-way permutation that is full-
                                         domain, solving another decade-old-problem of constructing this object from (sub-exponential)
                                         iO and one-way functions.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                    3
  1.1 Results and Paper Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
  1.2 Motivation and Other Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
  1.3 The Bug in the previous work of AGKZ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
  1.4 On the Lower Bound for OWPs from iO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
  1.5 Directions for Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2 Technical Overview                                                                                    11
  2.1 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
  2.2 OSS Relative to a Classical Oracle (Section 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          13
  2.3 Obfuscating PRPs (Section 5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
  2.4 OSS In the Standard Model(Section 6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          24

3 Cryptographic Tools                                                                                   27
  3.1 Two iO Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
  3.2 Information-Theoretical Hardness of Hidden Subspace Detection . . . . . . . . . . .               31
  3.3 Cryptographic Hardness of Hidden Subspace Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             35

4 One-Shot Signatures Relative to a Classical Oracle                                                    40
  4.1 Bloating the Dual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     43
  4.2 Simulating the Dual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       46
  4.3 Hardness of the Dual-free Case from 2-to-1 Collision-Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . .           49

5 Permutable PRPs and Applications                                                                      52
  5.1 How to use OP-PRPs with Indisitnguishability Obfuscation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              57
  5.2 ONS-Merges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      61
  5.3 From ONS-Merge to ONS-PRP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             65
  5.4 Achieving OP-PRPs for Decomposable Permutations Using Obfuscation . . . . . . .                   67

6 One-Shot Signatures in the Standard Model                                                             69
  6.1 Bloating the Dual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     70
  6.2 Simulating the Dual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       76
  6.3 Hardness of the Dual-free Case from LWE and iO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            79




                                                    2
1        Introduction
One-shot signatures (OSS) were originally proposed by Amos, Georgiou, Kiayias, and Zhandry
[AGKZ20]. Here, we have a signer who generates a verification key/signing key pair, publishes the
verification key, but keeps the signing key secret. Later, using the secret signing key, the signer can
sign any message of their choosing. However, doing so provably destroys their signing key, rendering
it impossible to sign even a second message relative to the same verification key. Note that the
signer has full control over generating the verification key, signing key, message, and signature, and
even with all this control they can never produce a second signature.
    Such a protocol is clearly impossible classically. Using quantum protocols, however, it is conjec-
tured by [AGKZ20] that an OSS is possible. Namely, the setup procedure now produces a quantum
signing key, and the (quantum) signing algorithm is such that it requires measuring the key, which
destroys it and prevents subsequent signatures. Verification keys, messages, signatures, and even
the verification algorithm itself remain classical. Such an object is not trivially impossible, since the
measurement principle of quantum mechanics means that computing the signature may irreversibly
destroy the signing key.
    OSS yields many applications that are not otherwise known: smart contracts without any
blockchain [Sat22], overcoming lower-bounds in consensus protocols, a solution to the blockchain
scalability problem [CS20], quantum money with classical communication, and more. Because
of these advantages, OSS has gained significant interest within the blockchain community, were a
major focus of recent workshops [QSi24, NTT23], and it has been claimed that practical OSS would
“completely change the endgame of blockchains” [Dra23]. See Section 1.2 for more discussion.
    Unfortunately, the status of OSS has been unclear. OSS lives atop a hierarchy of notions relating
to quantum money, with even milder versions being notoriously difficult to construct. [AGKZ20]
observe that prior work of [ARU14, Unr16b] can be used to give OSS relative to a quantum oracle1 ,
but there was no known way to actually instantiate this oracle, even heuristically. [AGKZ20] then
propose a construction relative to a classical oracle2 , which can then be heuristically instantiated
using (post-quantum) indistinguishability obfuscation (iO). To date, this was the only plausible
candidate construction.
    To justify the plausibility of their construction, [AGKZ20] prove the security of their scheme
in the classical oracle model. Unfortunately, their proof turned out to have a bug discovered
by [Bar23], which appears fatal and the proof in [AGKZ20] has been retracted. See Section 1.3 for
discussion. This bug does not indicate an actual attack, but has left the existence of OSS uncertain.

Post-quantum hashing and commitments. Even before quantum computers will enable pow-
erful quantum protocols, they will pose a threat to current classical cryptography. Sometimes,
even if the underlying building blocks are replaced with “post-quantum” equivalents, security vul-
nerabilities may remain. One notable example is the security of commitments: as observed by
Unruh [Unr16b], the classical notion of binding for commitments is insufficient against quantum
attacks. That is, even if the security game for commitments is “upgraded” to allow the adversary
to run a quantum computer but is otherwise unchanged, this is not enough to guarantee meaningful
security in a quantum world. Instead a stronger, inherently quantum, notion of collapse-binding
is needed. When instantiating commitments from hashing, (post-quantum) collision-resistance is
    1
        That is, an oracle that performs general unitary transformations.
    2
        That is, an oracle implementing a classical function but which can be queried in superposition.
likewise not enough, and instead a stronger notion of collapsing is needed.
    One may wonder if classical-binding / collision-resistance actually implies collapse-binding /
collapsing. Unruh argues that this is likely not the case, by noting that a prior work of [ARU14]
gives counterexample relative to a quantum oracle. However, there is no known standard-model
separation, or even a classical-oracle separation. It is entirely consistent with existing results that
classical binding implies collapse-binding in a non-relativizing way. As evidence for this, known
positive results [Unr16a, Zha22] have given collapse-binding commitments/hashes from essentially
all of the same post-quantum assumptions known to imply classical binding. Nevertheless, our
understanding of the relationship between classical-binding and quantum collapsing-binding is far
from complete.
    Interestingly, [AGKZ20, DS23] shows that a separation between classical and collapse-binding
actually implies a one-shot signature, showing that these questions are closely linked.3 This is in
fact how the construction in [AGKZ20] works.

One-way permutations from obfuscation? The concept of cryptographically useful program
obfuscation dates to the pioneering work of Diffie-Hellman [DH76]. Obfuscation allows for embed-
ding cryptographic secrets into public software. The proposal of [DH76], though not phrased in
this language, is the following: Obfuscate a pseudorandom permutation (PRP) to get a trapdoor
one-way permutation. More generally, obfuscation heuristically translates security using oracles
into standard-model security, by actually giving out the obfuscated code of the oracles.
    It ultimately took over 30 years for cryptographically useful general-purpose obfuscation to
emerge [GGH+ 13]. Unfortunately, by then it was shown that obfuscation cannot in general translate
oracles into the standard model [BGI+ 01]. For example, obfuscating an arbitrary PRP provably
cannot guarantee any meaningful security. Instead, the community has settled on a much weaker
but precise notion of indistinguishability obfuscation (iO), which says that the obfuscations of
programs with the same functionality are computationally indistinguishable [BGI+ 01].
    Though much weaker than ideal, numerous techniques have been developed to use iO. Most
revolve around the use of pseudorandom functions (PRFs). While PRFs, just like PRPs, in general
cannot be obfuscated, a strengthening known as a puncturable PRF [KPTZ13, BW13, BGI14]
actually does give provable guarantees when using iO [SW14], leading to numerous positive results.
    Despite many successes, some major open questions remain. Notably, Diffie and Hellman’s
original proposal of obtaining a trapdoor permutation by obfuscating a PRP remains open. In
fact, to the best of our knowledge, there are no known positive iO results that obfuscate PRPs to
achieve any goal. One key challenge is that there has been no construction of a puncturable PRP
or analogous object, and some evidence suggests that they may be impossible [BKW17].
    Note that [BPW16, GPSZ17] construct trapdoor permutations using iO, though these permu-
tations are not full-domain, i.e., where if n is the number of bits needed to represent any element
in the domain (formally, the permutation domain χ is such that χ ⊆ {0, 1}n ), then we have the
equality χ = {0, 1}n . These works use a very different structure and do not simply obfuscate a
PRP. Moreover, these solutions have a major drawback that the domain χ of the permutation is
a sparse set in {0, 1}n that cannot be directly sampled from nor efficiently recognized. This com-
plicates their use in applications (see for example [CL18]) and it is unknown how to use them in
quantum settings [MY23], where one further wants to efficiently generate quantum superpositions
   3
    The first connection between such a separation and unclonable cryptography was due to [Zha19], who shows that
a separation implies the weaker object called quantum lightning. These works improved the implication to OSS.


                                                       4
over subsets of the domain. An open question is if full-domain (trapdoor) OWPs are possible from
iO, whether by obfuscating a PRP or by other means. There is some indication that such a OWP
may in fact be impossible [AS16].

1.1    Results and Paper Organization
There are two parts to our work.


Part 1: Classical Oracle OSS. The first part proves Theorems 1 and 2 given below. It
includes an oracle construction of a non-collapsing hash function and an unconditional proof of
collision resistance. A proof overview is given in Section 2 and the full proof is in Section 4.

Theorem 1. Relative to a classical oracle, secure OSS exists.

   Similarly to the blueprint suggested in [AGKZ20], we prove Theorem 1 through separating
quantum hashing notions:

Theorem 2. Relative to a classical oracle, there exist post-quantum collision-resistant hash func-
tions that are non-collapsing, and there exist post-quantum classically-binding commitments that
are not collapse-binding.

    We do not actually know how to prove security for the oracle in [AGKZ20]. Instead, we
prove Theorems 1 and 2 by a new construction. Our construction is inspired by the previous
work of [AGKZ20] and a proposal made by [Bar23] at the NTT Research Quantum Money Work-
shop [NTT23]. We prove security through a new technique, showing the random self-reducibility of
our collision problem, and a sequence of reductions to simpler problems. Ultimately we show colli-
sion finding in our hash is no easier than collision finding in plain 2-to-1 random functions, which
is known to be hard. This gives the first classical-oracle construction of OSS4 , and also the first
such separation of classical- and collapse-binding. The construction is even the first classical-oracle
construction of quantum lightning, a weaker notion than OSS, proposed in [Zha19].


Part 2: Standard-model OSS. The second part of this paper proves Theorems 3, 4, 5 and 6
below. It includes the development of a new cryptographic notion we call permutable pseudorandom
permutations (permutable PRPs). We show how permutable PRPs can be used to prove the security
of our construction in the standard model, and also for solving a number of long-standing open
problems in cryptography, as elaborated below.

Theorem 3. There exists secure OSS assuming each of the following: (1) sub-exponentially-
secure indistinguishability obfuscation, (2) sub-exponentially-secure one-way functions, and (3)
(polynomially-secure) LWE with a sub-exponential noise-modulus ratio.

Theorem 4. Under the same assumptions as Theorem 3, there exist post-quantum collision-
resistant hash functions that are non-collapsing, and there exist post-quantum classically-binding
commitments that are not collapse-binding.
   4
     By “classical-oracle construction,” we mean the first construction provably and unconditionally secure relative to
a classical oracle.



                                                          5
      As before, Theorem 3 follows from Theorem 4, which is proved in Section 6. This gives the first
standard-model OSS5 , and also the first standard-model separation between classical- and collapse-
binding, solving this decade-old question6 . Even for the weaker notion of quantum lightning, for
which there exist a handful of candidates, this is the first construction with provable security under
widely-studied assumptions.
      The basic idea is to obfuscate the functions in our oracle construction rather than putting it in
an oracle. The main technical gap between proving security in the oracle model and the standard
model stems from the fact that the construction uses random permutations. Our oracle construction
uses a (truly) random permutation and our standard model construction uses a pseudorandom
permutation (PRP). Obfuscating PRPs and getting any formal security guarantees, however, is a
known challenge in cryptography, independently of quantum computation.
      We develop a new notion of PRPs, called permutable PRPs, that can be obfuscated using iO
with provable security. A permutable PRP Π very roughly allows the following: Given a key k
and a (known) permutation Γ in the form of having its circuit, one can produce a “permuted” key
k Γ , which allows for computing Γ (Π (k, ·)) (as well as the inverse Π−1 k, Γ−1 (·) ). Moreover, the
key k Γ hides the fact that the outputs were permuted by Γ. See Section 2 for a more detailed
explanation, and Section 5 for a formal definition, as well as a formal statement and proof of the
following:
Theorem 5 (Informal). There exist permutable PRPs for a large class of Γ assuming (1) sub-
exponentially-secure iO and (2) sub-exponentially-secure one-way functions.
    Such PRPs can be seen as the PRP analogue of a puncturable pseudorandom function (PRF),
which is one of the main techniques used to prove security in the iO literature. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first example which provably obfuscates a PRP. We also show that our
techniques are quite general, and in Section 5 we prove the following:
Theorem 6. There exist full-domain trapdoor one-way permutations (OWPs), assuming (1) sub-
exponentially-secure iO and (2) sub-exponentially-secure one-way functions.
    Here, we remind that our notion of “full-domain” means that the permutation domain is just
{0, 1}n . We thus solve the decade-old problem of constructing full-domain (trapdoor) one-way per-
mutations from iO7 , and give an answer to the decades-old problem of obfuscating PRPs to obtain
trapdoor permutations. In light of the impossibility in [AS16], Theorem 6 may seem surprising.
However, we explain in Section 1.4 that it actually does not contradict their impossibility.
    Our trapdoor OWP simply obfuscates a permutable PRP. The proof is straightforward given
a permutable PRP; the bulk of the technical effort is then in constructing the permutable PRP in
Theorem 5. This demonstrates the utility of our new PRP notion.
    For another application, by plugging into the elegant proof of quantumness of [MY23], we
immediately obtain:
Corollary 7. Assuming sub-exponentially (classically) secure iO and sub-exponentially (classically)
secure one-way functions, there exists a proof of quantumness protocol.
    This is the first proof of quantumness using iO, as the non-full-domain trapdoor permutations
of [BPW16, GPSZ17] cannot be used in this construction.
  5
     By “standard-model,” we mean with provable security under widely-used computational assumptions, as opposed
to merely conjecturing that a construction is secure.
   6
     [Unr16b] was first made public in early 2015.
   7
     [BPW16] was first made public in early 2015.


                                                       6
Paper Organization. In the remainder of the introduction, we discuss additional motivation
and related work (Section 1.2), why the bug in [AGKZ20] is unfixable (Section 1.3), and why the
impossibility of [AS16] does not apply to our construction (Section 1.4). In Section 2, we provide an
overview of our techniques. A reader only interested in our results on obfuscating PRPs, including
our application to trapdoor permutations, can find an overview in Section 2.3. Section 2.3 is entirely
classical and can be read independently of the rest of the paper without any background in quantum
computing. A reader interested in our OSS construction should start with Section 2.2 which gives
our oracle construction and an overview of the oracle proof. Then after developing our techniques
for obfuscating PRPs, we explain how to translate our oracle construction into a standard-model
construction in Section 2.4.

1.2   Motivation and Other Related Work
Quantum money and variants. Quantum money uses unclonable quantum states as currency
to prevent counterfeiting. One-shot signatures lives at the top of a hierarchy of related concepts:
   • Secret key quantum money. This was originally proposed by Wiesner [Wie83]. A major
     drawback, however, is that only the mint is able to verify, leading to a number of limitations.
   • Public key quantum money. This was proposed by Aaronson [Aar09] to remedy the
     various issues with Wiesner’s scheme. Here, anyone can verify banknotes but only the mint
     can create new notes. It has been a major challenge to construct public key quantum money.
     Several candidate constructions exist [FGH+ 12, KSS22, LMZ23, Zha24]. It was also shown
     to exist in a classical oracle model [AC12], which was later improved to a standard-model
     construction using iO by [Zha19].
   • Quantum lightning. This concept allows anyone to mint banknotes together with clas-
     sical serial numbers such that anyone can verify pairs of a serial number and a quantum
     banknote, but ensures that no user can create two valid banknotes with the same serial num-
     ber. This last property of unclonability (even for the state generator) allows to use quantum
     lightning in decentralized settings, in ways that standard (public-key) quantum money can-
     not generally be used. Quantum lightning was first suggested by [LAF+ 09] (under the name
     “collision-free quantum money”) and rigorously formalized by [Zha19]. It implies in particular
     a public-key quantum money scheme, where a banknote is a quantum lightning state/serial
     number pair |$⟩, σ, together with a signature on σ, signed using the mint’s (standard clas-
     sical post-quantum) signing key. Some of the quantum money candidates are also quantum
     lightning [FGH+ 12, KSS22, LMZ23, Zha24]. But others, including the classical oracle and
     iO results mentioned above, are not quantum lightning. Prior to our work, all quantum
     lightning schemes required novel computational assumptions that had not been studied by
     the wider cryptography community. Moreover, no prior scheme has provable security in a
     classical oracle model. In fact, our OSS gives in particular the first quantum lightning scheme
     with provable security under widely-studied assumptions, and the first unconditional proof
     in a classical oracle model.
   • One-shot signatures (OSS). Further strengthening quantum lightning, OSS treats the
     lightning state as a quantum signing key, which can sign a single message and then provably
     self-destructs. Among other things, the upgrade from quantum lightning to OSS adds the abil-
     ity to use only classical communication and local quantum computation, decrease the needed

                                                  7
       coherence times for quantum lightning states, and more. No known provable classical-oracle
       constructions nor standard-model instantiations (under any reasonable-sounding assumption)
       were known prior to this work.

Quantum cryptography with classical communication. An interesting application of OSS
is to send quantum money using classical communication. This may sound impossible at first,
but [AGKZ20] observe that it is nevertheless possible to send quantum money using a simple
classical interactive protocol: for the mint to send a money state to Alice, Alice will create a
lightning state/OSS signing key and serial number for herself |$Alice ⟩, σAlice , and send σ to the
mint. The mint then signs the serial number, providing the signature σmint→Alice , which the mint
sends back to Alice. Now Alice’s money state is |$Alice ⟩, σAlice , σmint→Alice , which was obtained by
just sending classical messages! Then, if Alice wants to send money to Bob, Bob simply creates a
new lightning state/OSS signing key and serial number for himself |$Bob ⟩, σBob , sends σBob to Alice,
who then signs σBob using her quantum lightning/OSS signing key, obtaining signature σAlice→Bob ,
which she sends to Bob. Bob now has the money state |$Bob ⟩, σBob , σAlice→Bob , σmint→Alice . By the
OSS guarantee, Alice’s money state has now self-destructed, meaning she no longer has the money
but Bob does. Bob can then send the money to Charlie, etc.8
    The Mint-to-Alice step using classical communication was previously solved by [Shm22a] using
iO and other tools, but the money could not be subsequently sent to Bob without quantum com-
munication9 . Our work allows for Alice to send money to any party in the system classically and
directly. These works on quantum money with classical communication are part of a broader class
of protocols for performing quantum cryptography using classical communication, such as tests
of quantumness and certified randomness [BCM+ 18], position verification [LLQ22], and certified
deletion [BKP23, BK23, KNY23, BGK+ 24].

Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains. One-shot signatures have numerous applications in the
cryptocurrency and blockchain settings. For example, they can be used to give decentralized
currency and even smart contracts without a blockchain at all [Zha19, AGKZ20, Sat22]. OSS are
known [CS20] to provide a solution to the blockchain scalability problem10 , using only classical
communication. They also have various advantages for other blockchain-related tasks, such as
decreasing the threshold for perfect finality, eliminating slashing and leakage risks in liquid staking,
and more [Dra23].

Obfuscating pseudorandom objects. Perhaps the main technique in the literature for us-
ing iO is the punctured programming paradigm [SW14], which primarily utilizes a puncturable
pseudorandom function [KPTZ13, BW13, BGI14]. These are functions where one can give out a
“punctured” key, which allows for evaluating the PRF on all but a single point x. Meanwhile, even
with this ability, the value on x remains pseudorandom.
   8
     The Mint-to-Alice step actually only requires quantum lightning, but Alice-to-Bob, etc seem to require the
stronger OSS.
   9
     Using the results from [Shm22b] it is possible to use only classical communication and send money to Bob.
However, this still necessitates Alice to communicate with the Bank repeatedly for every new transaction.
  10
     The work of [CS20] uses a strengthening of quantum lightning, where there is an additional procedure to destroy
quantum lightning states and produce a classical ”proof of deletion”. This strengthening is known to follow from
OSS, but not from standard quantum lightning.




                                                         8
    Puncturable invertible functions were considered in [BKW17], though their construction ex-
pands the input size, so it is not a permutation but rather an (efficiently invertible) injection. They
also discuss puncturable PRPs, and explain that they are impossible in some settings. In particular,
in the setting where the domain is polynomial-sized, if the punctured key reveals the permutation
on all points but x, it also reveals x.
    Our notion of permutable PRPs avoids this issue and even is valid in the small-domain setting.
We can “puncture” a permutable PRP at a point x with output y by choosing a random image y ′ ,
letting Γ be the transposition which swaps y and y ′ , and outputting the permuted key k Γ . This
allows for computing the PRP on all points except for x (and also the pre-image x′ of y ′ ), but
hides the true value of y. The impossibility of punctured PRPs has come up in several settings
(e.g. [SACM21, MZRA22, LMZ23, HPPY24]). It would be interesting to explore if our notion could
be useful in these settings.

(Trapdoor) OWPs from iO. Trapdoor one-way permutations (OWP) were proposed by [Yao82]
to abstract the ideas behind public key cryptosystems based on both RSA and Rabin. The domain
and range of these objects are sets with algebraic structure. However, it became much simpler
to describe applications in terms of a full-domain OWP where the domain and range are simply
{0, 1}n . This simplification lead to several conceptual errors (see [GR13] for explanation). To
account for these errors, when using sparse-domain OWPs, one must often stipulate additional
conditions (called “enhanced” or “doubly enhanced”) that are trivially satisfied by full-domain
OWPS.
    Once iO emerged as a powerful cryptographic tool [GGH+ 13], a natural question was whether
iO could give a third way of building a trapdoor permutation. A particular motivation is to achieve
post-quantum security, since RSA and Rabin are both quantumly insecure due to Shor’s algo-
rithm [Sho94]. Constructions were given [BPW16, GPSZ17], but these constructions were “messy,”
with sparse domains that could not be efficiently recognized and required cryptographic procedures
to sample. An interesting question was whether a clean, full-domain trapdoor permutation was
possible from iO. Our work mostly resolves this question, though we still have the limitation that
the space of keys is sparse.
    As a concrete application, our trapdoor OWPs can be plugged into the elegant proofs of quan-
tumness of [MY23], to obtain proofs of quantumness from (classically-hard sub-exponential) iO
and one-way functions11 . This is the first proof of quantumness based on iO. The prior OWPs
of [BPW16, GPSZ17], despite being doubly enhanced, did not suffice for this application. More
generally, permutations on simple domains like {0, 1}n appear much more useful in the context of
quantum cryptosystems, whereas permutations on highly structured domains break the delicate
structure of quantum states.

1.3      The Bug in the previous work of AGKZ
The bug in [AGKZ20] as found by [Bar23] is rather technical, and we do not discuss it here. How-
ever, we argue that the bug is likely unfixable using the techniques employed by [AGKZ20]. The
issue is that in [AGKZ20], the security of the OSS boils down to showing the collision resistance
of a certain hash function, and the proof technique uses what is known as the inner-product ad-
versary method – first developed in [AC12]. Unfortunately, the inner-product adversary method
 11
      The OWP part of our work does not need LWE.



                                                    9
is unlikely to be able to prove even the basic collision problem is hard, even before adding all the
structure that [AGKZ20] need to obtain their OSS scheme. The reason is that the collision problem
has a small certificate complexity, and it is known that the adversary method cannot prove good
lower-bounds for problems with small certificate complexity, as shown by [Aar03]. This certificate
complexity barrier extends to all “positive weight” adversary methods, including the inner-product
method. Thus, it seems any fixed proof for [AGKZ20] must use additional techniques.12
    Note that most of our oracle result is proved using standard adversary method techniques.
However, our result assumes the standard collision lower bound as previously proved in [AS04,
Zha15]. These results were proved using the polynomial method that is not subject to the certificate
complexity barrier.

1.4    On the Lower Bound for OWPs from iO
Asharov and Segev [AS16] show a barrier for constructing OWPs from iO and one-way functions.
Specifically, they show that any “black-box” construction of one-way permutations from iO and one-
way functions, cannot be “domain-invariant”. Here, black-box in the context of iO is a bit subtle,
but their notion captures most known iO techniques, including ours. Recall that in a (keyed) OWP,
we sample one permutation out of exponentially many permutations in an efficiently samplable
family. As for domain-invariance, the abstract of [AS16] defines it as “each permutation [in the
family] may have its own domain, but these domains are independent of the underlying building
blocks”. At first glance, this would seem to contradict our full-domain trapdoor permutation, since
the domain of all permutations in the family of our construction is just {0, 1}n , clearly independent
of any building block.
    However, there are really two types of domain invariance: One for the key, and one for the
actual input. The formal specification of the impossibility in [AS16] reveals that their notion of
domain-invariance refers to schemes that satisfy both notions. In fact, in the model they propose,
obfuscating a PRP actually does yield an input-domain-invariant (trapdoor) OWP; also, since the
key is an obfuscated program and most strings do not correspond to valid programs / keys, it is
not key-domain invariant.
    Our (trapdoor) OWPs are similarly input-domain invariant but not key-domain invariant, since
our key is likewise an obfuscated program, with the added benefit of provable security under iO.
Thus, our result does not contradict the impossibility of [AS16]. Instead, it helps clarify the
impossibility as being more about key-domain-invariance.

1.5    Directions for Future Work
Here are some natural follow-up directions from our work:

    • Can OSS be achieved without using iO? While there are several approaches (using new
      hardness assumptions) that seem to give weaker objects like quantum lightning [FGH+ 12,
      KSS22, LMZ23, Zha24], they do not seem amenable to producing classical signatures, even
      heuristically.
   12
      One caveat is that the barrier only applies to lower bounds for the number of queries to distinguish a function
with collisions from a function that is injective. Such a lower-bound immediately implies a lower-bound for actually
finding collisions. But the converse is not true, and the certificate complexity barrier does not seem to rule out
directly proving the hardness of finding collisions. Nevertheless, it does not seem like the techniques of [AGKZ20]
circumvent this barrier.


                                                         10
    • Is it possible to remove the need for sub-exponential hardness in our constructions? Sub-
      exponential hardness arises in two key places. The first is in our PRP: we start with a “base”
      PRP (based just on one-way functions) which is permutable only for the class of “neighbor
      swaps” that exchange a given z with z + 1, and upgrade it to more general permutations Γ
      by decomposing such permutations into a sequence of neighbor swaps. The proof incurring a
      security loss for each step in the decomposition. General permutations, even just transposi-
      tions (which are enough to get trapdoor OWPs) require an exponential-sized decomposition.
      In order to get around this limitation, it seems that the “base” PRP needs to support a richer
      class than just neighbor swaps. Is there a base PRP that support, say, general transpositions,
      from just one-way functions? The second place sub-exponential hardness comes in is when
      we are switching from the construction to a simulated distribution; this utilizes a hybrid over
      all possible outputs. Perhaps there is a clever way to change all possible outputs in one go.

    • Can we achieve a “clean iO” approach to OSS that uses just iO and generic primitives?
      Note that it is unlikely that OSS can be obtained from iO and one-way functions: OSS
      requires collision resistance, which is believed to not be possible from iO and one-way functions
      alone [AS15]. But perhaps iO and collision-resistance is enough. Or at a minimum, maybe
      our LWE assumption can be replaced with other algebraic techniques to give a diversity of
      assumptions.

    • We introduced a new technique for obfuscating PRPs, and it would be interesting to see if
      this enables any new results, or at least streamlines old results.

    Finally, we conclude with a fascinating complexity-theoretic question inspired by our techniques.
Any permutation Γ on {0, 1}n can be decomposed into an exponentially long product of transpo-
sitions Γ = (a1 a2 ) ◦ (a3 a4 ) ◦ · · · . While such a decomposition is clearly inefficient, the following
question asks if the partial products can be made small:

Question 8 (Efficient Permutation Decomposition Problem). For any permutation Γ on {0, 1}n
such that Γ, Γ−1 have circuits of size s, is it possible to decompose Γ into a product of transpositions
Γ = τ1 ◦ τ2 ◦ · · · ◦ τT such that each partial product Γt := τ1 ◦ τ2 ◦ · · · ◦ τt for t ∈ [T ] and its inverse
Γ−1
 t  have circuits of size poly(s, n)?

     As part of constructing our permutable PRPs and applying them to construct OSS, we show
that very general families of permutations can be efficiently decomposed in this way (see Figure 5
for a non-exhaustive list of such families). On the other hand, we do not know how to handle all
efficient permutations, and even for very simple permutations like multiplying by a scalar mod N ,
we only know a general solution assuming the Extended Riemann Hypothesis.


2     Technical Overview
In this section we explain the main techniques shown in this work.

2.1    Definitions
We first give the formal definition of one-shot signatures.



                                                      11
Definition 9 (One-Shot Signature Scheme). A one-shot signature (OSS) scheme is a tuple of
algorithms (Setup, Gen, Sign, Ver) together with message-space (Mλ )λ satisfying the following:

    • CRS ← Setup 1λ : A classical probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm that given the security
                       

      parameter, samples the classical common reference string (CRS).

   • (pk, |sk⟩) ← Gen(CRS): A quantum polynomial-time algorithm that takes the classical CRS
     and samples a classical public key pk and quantum secret key |sk⟩.

   • σ ← Sign (CRS, |sk⟩, m): A quantum polynomial-time algorithm that given CRS and the quan-
     tum key |sk⟩, given any message m ∈ Mλ produces a classical signature σ.

   • Ver (CRS, pk, m, σ) ∈ {0, 1}: A classical deterministic polynomial-time algorithm which veri-
     fies a message m and signature σ relative to a public key pk.

   • Correctness: There exists a negligible function negl such that, for any λ and any m ∈ Mλ
     we have
                          Pr         [Ver (CRS, pk, m, σm ) = 1] ≥ 1 − negl (λ) .
                    CRS←Setup(1λ ),
                         (pk,|sk⟩)←Gen(CRS),
                        σm ←Sign(CRS,|sk⟩,m)

   • Security: For any QPT algorithm A, there exists a negligible function negl such that for all
     λ the following probability is bounded by ≤ negl (λ),

                        Pr                 [Ver (CRS, pk, m0 , σ0 ) = 1 ∧ Ver (CRS, pk, m1 , σ1 ) = 1] .
                  CRS←Setup(1λ ),
             (pk,m0 ,m1 ,σ0 ,σ1 )←A(CRS)


    It is straightforward to adapt the above definition to utilize an oracle. In this case, the oracle
will play the role of CRS, and we will omit the algorithm Setup.

OSS from Non-collapsing Hashing. As observed informally by [AGKZ20], a collision-resistant
but non-collapsing hash function gives an OSS, and this was made formal and general by [DS23].
Our OSS therefore will be built from such a hash function. Here, we give the notion of collision
resistant and non-collapsing hash functions.

Definition 10 (Collision-Resistant Always-Non-Collapsing Hash). A collision-resistant always-
non-collapsing hash function is a pair of PPT algorithms (Setup, H) such that

   • CRS ← Setup 1λ : A classical probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm that given the security
                      

     parameter, samples the classical common reference string (CRS).

   • y ← H (CRS, x): A classical deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that given the CRS and
     input x, outputs y.

   • Collision-resistance: For any QPT algorithm A, there exists a negligible function negl such
     that for all λ,
                            Pr         [H (CRS, x0 ) = H (CRS, x1 )] ≤ negl (λ) .
                       CRS←Setup(1λ ),
                           (x0 ,x1 )←A(CRS)



                                                         12
   • Always non-collapsing: There exists a pair of QPT algorithms (S, D) and a negligible
     function negl (λ) such that for all λ,
                                         CRS←Setup(1λ ),
                                                        
                 Pr D (x, aux) = 1 : (|ψ⟩,aux)←S(CRS), −
                                         x←Measure(|ψ⟩)
                       "                                            #
                                                    CRS←Setup(1λ ),
                    Pr D (|ψy ⟩, aux) = 1 :       (|ψ⟩,aux)←S(CRS),   ≥ 1 − negl(λ) .
                                             |ψy ⟩←PartialMeasureH(CRS,·) (|ψ⟩)

      Here, x ← Measure (|ψ⟩) means to measure |ψ⟩ in the computational basis arriving at mea-
      surement x. |ψy ⟩ ← PartialMeasureH(CRS,·) means to compute H (CRS, ·) (in superposition,
      with output register on the side) with input register |ψ⟩, and measuring the result, resulting
      in outcome y. Then the state |ψ⟩ collapses to |ψy ⟩, which contains some superposition of
      preimages of y.
    We will not formally give the proof that such a hash function implies OSS, but give the sketch for
the interested reader. The idea is that Gen runs S to get |ψ⟩, aux, and then applies H(CRS, ·) to |ψ⟩
and measures, obtaining y. We set pk = y, and |sk⟩ = |ψy ⟩, aux where |ψy ⟩ is the post-measurement
state. Observe that the support of |ψy ⟩ are strings x that hash to y.
    For a bit b, let |ψy,b ⟩ be the state post-selecting on x whose first bit is b. One can create
|ψy,b ⟩ for a random choice of b my simply measuring the first qubit. Then very roughly it is shown
in [AGKZ20, DS23] how to use the distinguisher D to move back and forth between |ψy,0 ⟩ and
|ψy,1 ⟩.
    To sign a bit b, one obtains |ψy,b ⟩ and measures, obtaining a string x beginning with the bit b
that hashes to y. This is a signature on b, which is easy to verify. Moreover, the collision-resistance
of H implies that it is computationally infeasible to find two signatures. Thus, we have an OSS for
a single bit. Then by parallel repetition, we obtain an OSS for arbitrary messages.

2.2   OSS Relative to a Classical Oracle (Section 4)
Since OSS follows from non-collapsing collision-resistant hash functions, we will focus on construct-
ing the latter.

The Construction From [AGKZ20]. The OSS of [AGKZ20] utilizes what we will call a coset
partition function in this work. This is a function Q that is many-to-1, and where the pre-image
set of any image is a coset of a linear subspace: that is, the pre-image sets have the form Q−1 (y) :=
{Ay · r + by : r ∈ Zk2 }, where Ay , ry are a matrix/vector pair that depends on the image y. The
function Q will be the hash function, provided as an oracle.
    In order to be non-collapsing, [AGKZ20] employ the hidden subspaces approach of [AC12],
and additionally provide a separate oracle D, which provides membership testing for the linear
space A⊥ :=P   {z : Ay · z = 0}. This allows for testing if a state is in the uniform superposition
   −1
|Q (y)⟩ := x∈Q−1 (y) |x⟩ : first use Q to test that the state is in the support of Q−1 (y), then
apply the quantum Fourier transform (QFT), and use D to test that the resulting state has support
on A⊥ . The only state that passes both verifications is the state |Q−1 (y)⟩.
    In order to obtain a non-collapsing hash/OSS scheme, then one needs to prove that Q is collision-
resistant, given the oracles for Q and D. As mentioned, the proof provided in [AGKZ20] contained
a fatal bug, and while the scheme is plausibly collision-resistant, it remains unclear how to prove
this.

                                                  13
Relaxing the structure. A key challenge with the approach in [AGKZ20] is that it is non-
trivial come up with a coset partition function that is not trivially insecure. The cosets need to
have very different orientations (Ay values), lest the function Q be periodic and therefore subject
to quantum period-finding algorithms [Sho94]. But how do we perfectly partition the domain into
cosets that are all of different orientations, but no overlaps? The coset partition function used
in [AGKZ20] is derived in a very specific way, and the various pre-image sets are highly correlated,
making reasoning about them quite challenging. This is further complicated by the D oracle, which
contains even more information about the cosets. An interesting proposal was made by [Bar23]:
Simply have the hash function be a random function H, but provide an additional oracle which
maps each pre-image set H −1 (y) to a random coset Sy embedded in a much larger space. The point
is that, the cosets Sy for different y’s no longer need to partition the space they live in, as they are
independent of each other.
    Our following construction is inspired by the above general principles. We sample a random
secret permutation Π on {0, 1}n , and let H(x), J(x) denote the first r bits and last n − r bits of
Π(x), respectively. H : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}r will be our hash function. For each y ∈ {0, 1}r , we
also choose a random coset Sy ⊆ {0, 1}k of dimension n − r, described by a matrix/vector pair
         k×(n−r)
Ay ∈ Z2            , by ∈ Zk2 as Sy = {Ay · r + by : r ∈ {0, 1}n−r }. We then provide an oracle P(x)
which outputs H(x), u = AH(x) · J(x) + bH(x) . In other words, it computes y := H(x), then uses
this information to determine a coset, and then uses the remaining permutation information J(x)
to determine the point u in that coset that x maps to. We likewise provide the oracle D(y, v) which
checks if v ∈ Sy⊥ , where Sy⊥ is the kernel of Ay .
    We have to provide one more oracle, which is denoted P −1 (y, u), which inverts the oracle P:
It outputs x if P(x) = (y, u) and otherwise outputs a special symbol ⊥, indicating that (y, u) is
not in the range of P. This oracle is necessary in order to actually preserve the non-collapsing
property: Given the uniform
P                           P      superposition of pre-images |H −1 (y)⟩, applying the oracle P gives
   x∈H −1 (y) |x, P(x)⟩ =     x∈H −1 (y) |x, y, Ay · J(x) + by ⟩. We would like to apply the QFT to the
register containing Ay · J(x) + by , but this will not work: since the register x remains around and
is entangled with the register containing Ay · J(x) + by , performing the QFT will actually yield
random junk. The oracle P −1 allows us to un-compute x, thereby allowing verification to work as
desired.
    We now need to prove the collision-resistance of H. Unfortunately, quantum query lower-
bounds for oracles with inverses is a notorious challenging problem. This problem, together with
the presence of the oracle D, were the primary barriers to proving the security of this construction.
    In what follows, we describe our proof in the oracle setting. At a very high-level, our proof will
gradually eliminate parts of the oracles P, P −1 , D, until all that remains is a simple hash function
oracle, and we can then invoke the known query lower-bounds for collision-finding to conclude
security.

Warm-up: A Random Self-Reduction. As a warm-up that will lead to our proof, we in-
troduce a random self-reduction for the oracles P, P −1 , D. Given an instance of the oracles
P, P −1 , D (with underlying arbitrary permutation Π on {0, 1}n and arbitrary matrix/vector pairs
          k×(n−r)
Ay ∈ Z2           ,by ∈ Zk2 for all y ∈ {0, 1}r , where all we know is that Ay is full-rank), we can
construct another instance as follows. Choose a random permutation Γ on {0, 1}n and for every
y ∈ {0, 1}r , choose a random full-rank Cy ∈ {0, 1}k×k and random dy ∈ {0, 1}k . Note that Cy , dy
define a random affine permutation Ly (u) = Cy · u + dy on {0, 1}k . Then define:


                                                  14
   • P(x): Compute x ← Γ(x), (y, u) ← P(x), u ← Ly (u) and output (y, u).
                                                   −1
   • P −1 (y, u): Compute u ← L−1
                                y (u), x ← P            (y, u), x ← Γ−1 (x) and output x.

   • D (y, v): Output D y, vT · Cy .
                                  

The resulting oracle implicitly sets Π := Π ◦ Γ, and for every y ∈ {0, 1}r sets Ay := Cy · Ay ,
by := Cy · by + dy , which all distribute independently of the underlying Π, Ay , by . Thus this
random self-reduction turns any instance P, P −1 , D into a fresh independent instance P, P −1 , D.
Moreover, if we let H and H be the functions outputting the first r bits of P and P respectively,
we can turn a collision for H into a collision for H by applying Γ. Thus, we can derive the collision-
resistance for random instances based on the collision resistance of any fixed instance. We note
that there does not appear to be an analogous random self-reduction for the oracles of [AGKZ20].
We will use variants of this self-reduction to gradually remove components from our oracle.

Step 1: Bloating the Dual. The first step of our actual proof, inspired by techniques of [Zha19],
is to “bloat the dual”. This means, for each y, we choose a random super-space Ty⊥ of Sy⊥ :=
ColSpan (Ay )⊥ , and replace D with the oracle D′ which checks for membership in Ty⊥ . The super-
space Ty⊥ is chosen at random such that (1) it is a sparse subset of {0, 1}k and (2) Sy⊥ is a sparse
subset of Ty⊥ . We can prove that D′ is indistinguishable form D, since the points in Ty⊥ but not in
Sy⊥ are random sparse points hidden from the adversary. Thus an adversary that finds a collision
given the more informative D, will also find a collision given D′ .
    In [Zha19], this technique was employed to reduce the security of the quantum money scheme
of [AC12] to an information-theoretic statement. Crucially in that proof, both the primal S and
dual S ⊥ were bloated, which then implies that the original space S is information-theoretically
hidden. In our case, however, the original subspaces Sy are still part of the oracles P, P −1 , and
it is unclear how to bloat them. This key difference is that in [Zha19], there was only a single
sparse space S, and it could be bloated by consuming some of the abundant “free” ambient space.
However, in our case, the entire domain is partitioned into sets H −1 (y), and it seems that we would
need to bloat each of them. But this is impossible, since there is no “free” space left as each point
is already part of some subspace. Nevertheless, in the following, we will see that the dual-bloating
is still useful.

Step 2: Simulating the Dual. We will now completely eliminate the dual oracle D′ . To do so,
we use a version of the random self-reduction described above, but starting from a smaller instance
      −1
(P, P , D). We will show that embedding the smaller instance lets us (without querying the
smaller instance) know some information about the subspaces Sy⊥ , namely a random super-space
Ty⊥ of Sy⊥ . This allows us to simulate D′ without querying D at all, and in turn to eliminate the
dual oracle D entirely.
    In more detail, let s = log2 (|Ty⊥ |/|Sy⊥ |), which is how much larger (in terms of dimension) Ty⊥ is
                   −1
from Sy⊥ . Let P, P be an instance of our oracle, but with input space {0, 1}n−(n−r−s) = {0, 1}r+s
and output space {0, 1}r ⊗ {0, 1}k−(n−r−s) . In other words, we shrink the input x and the vector
part of the output u each by n − r − s bits, but we keep the y part of the output (the actual hash
function output) the same length. We will not have access to the oracle D.



                                                   15
                                             −1                           −1
    We simulate P, P −1 , D′ using P, P . However, since P, P             is a smaller instance, we first
expand it into a full-sized instance (i.e., without considering how our mapping distributes). Essen-
tially, we just pass the first r + s bits of x into P, and the last n − r − s bits we output in the clear
as part of u. In more detail:

    • P(x): Break the input x ∈ {0, 1}n into two parts: x := x ∈ Zr+s               e ∈ Zn−r−s
                                                                                               
                                                                                2 ,x     2       and we
       moreover interpret x e as a vector of dimension n − r − s. Now query (y, u) ← P (x), and set
       u = (u, x
               e). Output (y, u).
                                                              
                                         k−(n−r−s)                                  −1
    • P −1 (y, u): Write u = u ∈ Z2                 e ∈ Z2n−r−s , compute x ← P (y, u) and output
                                                   ,x
       x = (x, x
               e).
                                                           
                                     k−(n−r−s)
    • D′ (y, v): Write v = v ∈ Z2                e ∈ Z2n−r−s . Output 1 if and only if x
                                                ,x                                      e = 0n−r−s .

Now this clearly does not simulate the correct distribution of oracles P, P −1 , D′ since for example
the last n − r − s bits of input are clearly visible in the output, and D′ checks a fixed subspace.
However, it is a valid instance of the oracles P, P −1 , D′ , in the sense that there is some choice
permutation Π, cosets Sy and spaces Ty⊥ that gives these oracles, or in other words, we output an
oracle that’s inside the support of P, P −1 , D′ . Note that our output oracle satisfies that for every
y ∈ {0, 1}r we have that Ty⊥ is just the space of vectors whose last n − r − s entries are 0 – we’ll
use this fact later. We can then apply our random self-reduction to generate a correctly distributed
instance.13
                                                                                    −1
    To re-randomize P, P −1 , D′ , let H the hash function in the oracles P, P , let H the
                                   
                                                                                                  hash
function in the oracles P, P −1 , D′ and let H
                                     
                                               e the hash function in the oracles P, e Pg −1 , D
                                                                                               e , which
are generated by applying the random self reducibility on P, P −1 , D′ . By the random
                                                                            
                                                                                                    self-
                                                                                                        
reducibility, we know that any algorithm which finds collisions for H given access to P, P , D
                                                                        e                     e  g−1  e
will find collisions for the simulated H relative to P, P −1 , D′ . To complete our elimination of the
                                                                  

dual oracle, we need to show that such collisions in H actually yield collisions in H. For simplicity,
we will work with the non-random-self reduced      oracles described above P, P −1 , D′ . First, observe
that if we write x = x ∈ Zr+s      e ∈ Z2n−r−s , then H(x) = H(x). There are two ways a collision
                                              
                                2 ,x
    ′
x, x in H can occur:

   • x ̸= x′ . In this case x and x′ form a collision in H, as desired.

   • x = x′ . We will call these “bad” collisions, which we will now handle. Observe that in these
     cases, since x ̸= x′ , we must have     e′ . Also,
                                          e ̸= x
                                          x                         ′                     ′
                                                        since x = x , we have that u= u . But letting
                   k−(n−r−s)        n−r−s                     k−(n−r−s)        n−r−s
     u = u ∈ Z2                e ∈ Z2
                              ,x             and u′ = u ∈ Z2             e′ ∈ Z2
                                                                        ,x            , this means that
      u − u′ is a non-zero vector whose first k − (n − r − s) entries are 0.
      In that case, let Ty be the linear space that is dual to Ty⊥ . Recall that in the non-re-randomized
      case, Ty⊥ is the space of vectors whose last n−r−s entries are 0; this means that Ty is the space
      of vectors whose first k − (n − r − s) entries are 0. Thus, “bad” collisions give (u − u′ ) ∈ Ty .
      This property is moreover preserved by applying the random self-reduction. In contrast, a
  13
     Note that   in our warm-up, the random self-reduction re-randomized    an instance of the actual construction
 P, P −1 , D , but we are now re-randomizing an instance P, P −1 , D′ , when the dual is bloated. The same random
                                                                    

self-reduction works just as well in this setting.


                                                       16
        general collision will have u − u′ in a much larger space, namely Sy , the analogous linear
        space dual to Sy⊥ .14
        Thus, we see that bad collisions cause u − u′ to concentrate in a much smaller space than
        general collisions. Following a technique introduced in [Shm22b] (which we necessarily make
        optimal, in Lemmas 22 and 26), we will use this fact to show that an algorithm which produces
        bad collisions actually distinguishes the bloated from un-bloated cases, contradicting our
        earlier proof of the indistinguishability of these two cases.
        In slightly more detail, this is because we can run an adversary several times (using a separate
        random self-reduction each time) to collect several independent vectors u − u′ . If the vectors
        are always concentrated in Ty , the span of them will be contained in Ty and therefore have
        dimension n − r − s. On the other hand, if we do the same for the original un-bloated oracles,
        we argue (again using self-reducibility) that the vectors u − u′ will be random in Sy and
        hence with enough of them we span the whole larger space of dimension n − r. Looking at the
        dimension of the spanned space therefore distinguishes the original and bloated duals, which
        we already showed was impossible. Thus, the original algorithm must at least occasionally
        output collisions that are not bad.

Step 3: Reducing to a Coset-Partition Function. We have now reduced our problem to
proving the collision resistance of H when only given the oracles P, P −1 but where the adversary
does not have access to the oracle D. We now prove such collision resistance, assuming the collision-
resistance of some coset-partition function Q. This may seem counter-productive; after all, we
deliberately moved away from the coset-partition structure of [AGKZ20]. Looking ahead, we will
see that, since we have now stripped away the dual oracle, we actually can analyze the coset-
partition structure.
    We explain that given a coset-partition function Q : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}r , we can readily construct
an instance of P, P −1 : P(x) sets y = Q(x), and u = x, 0k−n . This also makes P −1 y, x, 0k−n
                                                                                                    

trivial as x is already present in the clear; we just need to verify that Q(x) = y before outputting
x (and outputting ⊥ otherwise). This gives a valid instance of the oracles P, P −1 since the pre-
image sets of Q are already cosets, so outputting x padded with 0’s satisfies the structure of P.
The oracles P, P −1 clearly do not have the correct distribution, but we can once more apply the
random self-reduction to simulate a proper random instance of P, P −1 .
    Importantly, observe that the reduction which simulate P, P −1 only require access to Q in the
forward direction. This means we have reduced our problem to the collision resistance of Q, given
only forward queries to Q.

Step 4: Constructing Hard Coset-Partition Functions. It may appear that we are still
stuck: while we have eliminated the dual and inverse oracles, we have re-introduced the extra
structure of a coset partition function. Thankfully, our reduction from the previous Step 3 actually
shows that any coset partition function Q can be used to simulate the oracles P, P −1 , as long as
Q maps from n to r bits and each preimage set, which is a coset, has size 2n−r . This means that
finding any distribution over such Q that is provably collision resistant, will constitute the collision
resistance of our construction.
 14
      Sy contains, and is s dimensions larger than Ty , since Sy⊥ is contained, and is s dimensions smaller than Ty⊥ .




                                                            17
    We now explain a simple construction of such a function Q. We start by observing that a
2-to-1 function is trivially a coset partition function. This is because any pre-image set, which is
2 points x, x′ , is automatically a coset of the 1-dimensional subspace S := {0n , x ⊕ x′ } ⊆ Zn2 with
a constant shift of x (or equivalently, a constant shift of x′ ). Also, the known quantum collision
lower-bounds [AS04, Zha15] imply that a random 2-to-1 function is provably collision resistant.
Now, just any random 2-to-1 function is not enough for us, but the following can be done.
    We observe that a straightforward combination of several existing results proves that a random
2-to-1 function, with the added property that it is shrinking by 1 bit, is also collision resistant.
                                                                    ′            ′                    ′
Given such shrinking ℓ i.i.d. random 2-to-1 functions H1 : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n −1 , · · · , Hℓ : {0, 1}n →
       ′                     ′            ′
{0, 1}n −1 , take Q : {0, 1}n ·ℓ → {0, 1}n ·ℓ−ℓ to be the ℓ-wise parallel application of them. The pre-
image sets are then the direct sums of ℓ pre-image sets of the underlying 2-to-1 functions, and direct
sums of cosets are cosets. Parallel application also preserves collision resistance. Putting everything
together we set n := n′ ·ℓ, r := n′ ·ℓ−ℓ, which proves the oracle-security of our construction, thereby
proving Theorems 1 and 2.

2.3   Obfuscating PRPs (Section 5)
Our next goal is to turn our oracle proof into a standard-model proof. The natural approach is,
instead of providing oracles for the various functions P, P −1 , D, to provide obfuscations of these
functions. To make the functions efficient, we will replace the random permutation Π with a pseudo-
random permutation, and the random choices of Ay , by with values generated by a pseudorandom
function.
    But we immediately run into a problem: There are simply no known techniques for proving
the security of obfuscated pseudorandom permutations when using the standard notion of indistin-
guishability obfuscation (iO). This is because iO only provides a seemingly very weak guarantee:
Functionally-equivalent programs are indistinguishable when obfuscated. In order to use iO, some
of the program transformations actually need happen outside of the iO, which in turn requires
other cryptographic techniques. Most of the iO literature follows the punctured programming ap-
proach [SW14], which uses the notion of a “punctured PRF” [KPTZ13, BW13, BGI14]. These, very
roughly, allow for giving out a program that either computes the PRF correctly, or the program
computes the PRF everywhere but a single (known) point, and for that one point the output is
uniformly random. Security says that these two programs are indistinguishable.

Permutable PRPs. Unfortunately, pseudorandom permutations provably cannot be punctured
in the same sense as PRFs, as explained by [BKW17]. Roughly, the reason is that replacing the
output at a single point with a uniform random value means the function is no longer a permutation.
    We instead define the notion of a permutable PRP. Here, given k ∈ {0, 1}λ a PRP secret
key and some fixed permutation Γ on {0, 1}n , it is possible to produce a circuit which computes
either (1) Π(k, ·) and its inverse correctly, or (2) Γ(Π(k, ·)) and its inverse. Security requires that
(1) and (2) are indistinguishable, even if Γ is known. This avoids the impossibility of [BKW17]
since we always maintain that the program being computed is a permutation. When used in iO
proofs, permutable PRPs readily give that iO(Π(k, ·)) is computationally indistinguishable from
iO(Γ(Π(k, ·))). This even holds true if given obfuscated programs for the inverses, and even for
more complicated programs that may query the permutations several times. Observe that a similar
statement for puncturable pseudorandom functions readily follows from [CLTV15], but that case
inherently has no inverse.

                                                  18
                   M(k2 , ·)
                   <latexit sha1_base64="VMZPAOCUka83/VQ14pzhSdb1gbU=">AAAB/3icbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqODGzWARKkhJSlGXRTduhAr2AU0Ik8mkHTqZhJmJUGIX/oobF4q49Tfc+TdO0yy0emDgcM693DPHTxiVyrK+jNLS8srqWnm9srG5tb1j7u51ZZwKTDo4ZrHo+0gSRjnpKKoY6SeCoMhnpOePr2Z+754ISWN+pyYJcSM05DSkGCkteeZB5kRIjWQIb6a1sdc4dXAQqxPPrFp1Kwf8S+yCVEGBtmd+OkGM04hwhRmScmBbiXIzJBTFjEwrTipJgvAYDclAU44iIt0szz+Fx1oJYBgL/biCufpzI0ORlJPI15N52EVvJv7nDVIVXrgZ5UmqCMfzQ2HKoIrhrAwYUEGwYhNNEBZUZ4V4hATCSldW0SXYi1/+S7qNun1Wb942q63Loo4yOARHoAZscA5a4Bq0QQdg8ACewAt4NR6NZ+PNeJ+PloxiZx/8gvHxDc5xlVM=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !(k0 , ·)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         !(k1 , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="IIVVNyz46fkUZ/hxV8tdoVOzwIE=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrq22cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPHq6RoQ==</latexit>        <latexit sha1_base64="IHBz42rEcHjuHLncVjzU8mo9PHg=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrqO2cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPIDmRog==</latexit>




      Figure 1: The PRP construction Π(k, ·) of [GP07]. There are 2n input nodes on the
      bottom, one per input, and 2n output nodes. The left and right halves correspond
      to inputs starting with 0 and 1 respectively. Here, k0 , k1 , k2 are keys pseudorandomly
      derived from k. Then M (k2 , ·) is a pseudorandom object we call a Merge which preserves
      the order of each half but otherwise pseudorandomly scrambles them. Π (k0 , ·) and
      Π (k1 , ·) are then recursive calls to the construction on inputs of length n − 1.


Constructing Permutable PRPs for Neighbor Swaps. For now we will focus on an ex-
tremely simple setting, where we restrict Γ to be a swap between z ∈ {0, 1}n and (z + 1) ∈ {0, 1}n
for some value z, but leave all other points unaffected. We will call such Γ a neighbor swap.
    Even for the simple case of a neighbor swap, a permutable PRP is non-trivial. An “obvious”
choice is to take a PRP built from a pseudorandom function (PRF), and instantiate the PRF with
a puncturable PRF. But it is not at all clear a priori how puncturing the underlying PRF allows
for swapping outputs.
    In fact, this strategy cannot work in general. For example, we argue that it cannot work for
Luby-Rackoff PRPs. To see this, we observe that in the setting where the domain size is polynomial,
a neighbor-swap PRP actually is also a standard PRP. This is because the neighbor-swap property
ensures that you can computationally undetectably swap z and z+1 in the output truth table. Since
any permutation on a polynomial-domain can be decomposed into a polynomial-length sequence of
neighbor swaps, this says that you can apply a random permutation un-detectably. But composing
with a random permutation actually gives a truly random permutation, thus showing that the
truth table of the PRP is computationally indistinguishable from the truth table of a random
permutation. We can also scale this argument up, and show that if the neighbor-swap PRP is
sub-exponentially secure, then it must be secure against a “truth-table” adversary that is provided
the entire (exponential-sized) truth table. We then recall that standard PRP constructions such as
Luby-Rackoff cannot achieve security in the small-domain/ truth-table setting [Pat01].
    Guided by the above discussion, we look to the literature on small-domain permutations, specifi-
cally the work of [GP07]. While [GP07] present their construction in a very procedural way involving
“permutators”, “splitters” and “repartitors”, we will present the idea in a more conceptual way. We
will then explain how our permuting algorithm executes neighbor swaps efficiently for any (possibly
exponential) domain size. The first observation is that one can construct a random permutation
as follows: Divide into two equal sized piles (those strings starting with 0 and 1, respectively),
and then recursively, randomly permute each pile independently. Then randomly merge the two
piles together; this step preserves the order in each pile (which were already shuffled, so this is
fine), but randomly determines how the two piles are interleaved. It is not hard to see that every


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="qjx5Wi/1Ezam6+aUF3Y4Q+9B0Xg=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY5ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9ovltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpias+lMuk9SgZMtFYSqIicn8azLgCpkRE0soU9zeStiIKsqMzaZgQ/BWX14nrauyd12uNCql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYMbqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AIgnjMU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                          <latexit sha1_base64="xOra1flrqf7FD7e/7ECUaWQ39nw=">AAAB6HicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKexKUI9BLx4TyAuSJcxOepMxs7PLzKwQQr7AiwdFvPpJ3vwbJ8keNLGgoajqprsrSATXxnW/ndzG5tb2Tn63sLd/cHhUPD5p6ThVDJssFrHqBFSj4BKbhhuBnUQhjQKB7WB8P/fbT6g0j2XDTBL0IzqUPOSMGivVG/1iyS27C5B14mWkBBlq/eJXbxCzNEJpmKBadz03Mf6UKsOZwFmhl2pMKBvTIXYtlTRC7U8Xh87IhVUGJIyVLWnIQv09MaWR1pMosJ0RNSO96s3F/7xuasJbf8plkhqUbLkoTAUxMZl/TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2RRsCN7qy+ukdVX2rsuVeqVUvcviyMMZnMMleHADVXiAGjSBAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox7I152Qzp/AHzucPspeM4Q==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="PvkqMPf0KQ2ZiRgX4QPbidqMLN8=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF4+QyCOBDZkdemFkdnYzM2tCCF/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR3cxvPaHSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1FipftkrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa88SdcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl76pcqVdK1dssjjycwCmcgwfXUIV7qEEDGCA8wyu8OY/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AICTjMA=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="c75us17EGycl3gISVHpMBCwXSZ8=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiFy9CBfsBbSib7aZdutmE3YlQQn+EFw+KePX3ePPfuG1z0NYHA4/3ZpiZFyRSGHTdb6ewtr6xuVXcLu3s7u0flA+PWiZONeNNFstYdwJquBSKN1Gg5J1EcxoFkreD8e3Mbz9xbUSsHnGScD+iQyVCwShaqZ31TEjup/1yxa26c5BV4uWkAjka/fJXbxCzNOIKmaTGdD03QT+jGgWTfFrqpYYnlI3pkHctVTTixs/m507JmVUGJIy1LYVkrv6eyGhkzCQKbGdEcWSWvZn4n9dNMbz2M6GSFLlii0VhKgnGZPY7GQjNGcqJJZRpYW8lbEQ1ZWgTKtkQvOWXV0nroupdVmsPtUr9Jo+jCCdwCufgwRXU4Q4a0AQGY3iGV3hzEufFeXc+Fq0FJ585hj9wPn8ACqmPYw==</latexit>




      Figure 2:   A merge M and the associated tally tree T , for the case N0 = N1 = 8,
      N = 16.


permutation uniquely corresponds to a triple containing a merge (determining the interleaving)
and two recursive permutations. Thus this process perfectly simulates a random permutation. See
Figure 1.
    It turns out that permutations structured in this way can be evaluated efficiently, even for an
exponential-size domain. To evaluate on a point, we only need to efficiently evaluate one of the
recursive permutations for the pile it belongs to, and then the merge operation (which we simply
call a Merge). As there will be n levels of the recursion and each level only makes a single recursive
call, this means that we can evaluate the overall permutation using n Merge evaluations. We show
how to compute the Merge operation efficiently using a random data-structure we call a tally tree.
A tally tree is a full binary tree on 2n nodes, where leaf z corresponds to an output of the Merge,
and is given the value of the first bit of the pre-image of z. Then the internal nodes count the
total number of 1’s in the leaves of the sub-tree rooted at that node. An example tally tree T for
a marge M is given in Figure 2.
    Using a tally tree we can efficiently evaluate the Merge. We start by describing the inverse:
since the Merge preserves the order within each half, we can compute the inverse of z just knowing
two pieces of information: (1) which half the pre-image of z belongs to, and (2) how many nodes
to the left of z go to the same half. This can be computed easily using the tally tree. Then the
forward direction can be computed using a binary search algorithm which makes queries to the
inverse and again exploits the order-preserving property.
    The next observation is, rather than choosing a random merge and computing the tree in a
bottom-up manner, we can actually sample the tree in a top-down manner. In this view, the value
in each node follows an appropriate hypergeometric distribution based on the value of its parent.
Then the random choices can be simulated using a pseudorandom function (PRF). The values in
the tree are left implicitly determined by the PRF key, to be computed on the fly as needed during
evaluation (which only visits a polynomial-sized portion of the tree since evaluation is efficient).
The result is that keys can be small (independent of the domain size), and evaluation takes time
poly-logarithmic in the domain size.
    We start with this construction, and first show that we can permute z and z + 1 by either
permuting the Merge or by permuting one of the recursive calls to Π. In particular, if the pre-
images of z and z + 1 lie in different halves of the domain, then we can permute within the Merge.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    z+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="MG/ZJNMrk6v+eAPGdjcOKKfHwN4=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMgCGFXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLsZJIMmZ1dZnqFuOQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7glgKg6777eRWVtfWN/Kbha3tnd294v5Bw0SJZrzOIhnpVkANl0LxOgqUvBVrTsNA8mYwupn6zUeujYjUA45j7od0oERfMIpWun8687rFklt2ZyDLxMtICTLUusWvTi9iScgVMkmNaXtujH5KNQom+aTQSQyPKRvRAW9bqmjIjZ/OTp2QE6v0SD/SthSSmfp7IqWhMeMwsJ0hxaFZ9Kbif147wf6VnwoVJ8gVmy/qJ5JgRKZ/k57QnKEcW0KZFvZWwoZUU4Y2nYINwVt8eZk0zsveRblyVylVr7M48nAEx3AKHlxCFW6hBnVgMIBneIU3RzovzrvzMW/NOdnMIfyB8/kDwpeNdw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         z+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="MG/ZJNMrk6v+eAPGdjcOKKfHwN4=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMgCGFXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLsZJIMmZ1dZnqFuOQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7glgKg6777eRWVtfWN/Kbha3tnd294v5Bw0SJZrzOIhnpVkANl0LxOgqUvBVrTsNA8mYwupn6zUeujYjUA45j7od0oERfMIpWun8687rFklt2ZyDLxMtICTLUusWvTi9iScgVMkmNaXtujH5KNQom+aTQSQyPKRvRAW9bqmjIjZ/OTp2QE6v0SD/SthSSmfp7IqWhMeMwsJ0hxaFZ9Kbif147wf6VnwoVJ8gVmy/qJ5JgRKZ/k57QnKEcW0KZFvZWwoZUU4Y2nYINwVt8eZk0zsveRblyVylVr7M48nAEx3AKHlxCFW6hBnVgMIBneIU3RzovzrvzMW/NOdnMIfyB8/kDwpeNdw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="VcduhImtG31xtIwCRH/3qEwy95Y=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtYECV/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOwvjQc=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="VcduhImtG31xtIwCRH/3qEwy95Y=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtYECV/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOwvjQc=</latexit>




    <latexit sha1_base64="KQW5bBntPYL3W2joe0jOuIizRJU=">AAACDnicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUZdugqXQYikzpajQTdGNG6GCfUBnHDKZTBuaeZBkhDr0C9z4K25cKOLWtTv/xvSx0NYDl3s4516Se9yYUSEN41vLrKyurW9kN3Nb2zu7e/r+QVtECcekhSMW8a6LBGE0JC1JJSPdmBMUuIx03OHlxO/cEy5oFN7KUUzsAPVD6lOMpJIcvZBawofX4+LQqd6lxQfHtOpWXbUTs1TG47KFvUiWHD1vVIwp4DIx5yQP5mg6+pflRTgJSCgxQ0L0TCOWdoq4pJiRcc5KBIkRHqI+6SkaooAIO52eM4YFpXjQj7iqUMKp+nsjRYEQo8BVkwGSA7HoTcT/vF4i/XM7pWGcSBLi2UN+wqCM4CQb6FFOsGQjRRDmVP0V4gHiCEuVYE6FYC6evEza1Yp5Wqnd1PKNi3kcWXAEjkERmOAMNMAVaIIWwOARPINX8KY9aS/au/YxG81o851D8Afa5w/TgpoT</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (z   z1 +1),c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M(k2 , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="VMZPAOCUka83/VQ14pzhSdb1gbU=">AAAB/3icbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqODGzWARKkhJSlGXRTduhAr2AU0Ik8mkHTqZhJmJUGIX/oobF4q49Tfc+TdO0yy0emDgcM693DPHTxiVyrK+jNLS8srqWnm9srG5tb1j7u51ZZwKTDo4ZrHo+0gSRjnpKKoY6SeCoMhnpOePr2Z+754ISWN+pyYJcSM05DSkGCkteeZB5kRIjWQIb6a1sdc4dXAQqxPPrFp1Kwf8S+yCVEGBtmd+OkGM04hwhRmScmBbiXIzJBTFjEwrTipJgvAYDclAU44iIt0szz+Fx1oJYBgL/biCufpzI0ORlJPI15N52EVvJv7nDVIVXrgZ5UmqCMfzQ2HKoIrhrAwYUEGwYhNNEBZUZ4V4hATCSldW0SXYi1/+S7qNun1Wb942q63Loo4yOARHoAZscA5a4Bq0QQdg8ACewAt4NR6NZ+PNeJ+PloxiZx/8gvHxDc5xlVM=</latexit>




    M(k2 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y0 y1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="Bb6yH+VKPAh6JpEQJyyrFBqbRNA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2k3bpZhN2N0Io/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekAiujet+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjU0nGqGDZZLGLVCahGwSU2DTcCO4lCGgUC28H4dua3n1BpHstHkyXoR3QoecgZNVZ6yPpuv1xxq+4cZJV4OalAjka//NUbxCyNUBomqNZdz02MP6HKcCZwWuqlGhPKxnSIXUsljVD7k/mpU3JmlQEJY2VLGjJXf09MaKR1FgW2M6JmpJe9mfif101NeO1PuExSg5ItFoWpICYms7/JgCtkRmSWUKa4vZWwEVWUGZtOyYbgLb+8SloXVe+yWruvVeo3eRxFOIFTOAcPrqAOd9CAJjAYwjO8wpsjnBfn3flYtBacfOYY/sD5/AEOoI2p</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="S9Cu8AKFnK6I/8lMB82XcUuy6Gc=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2m3bpZhN2J0Io/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVjDdZLGPdCajhUijeRIGSdxLNaRRI3g7GtzO//cS1EbF6xCzhfkSHSoSCUbTSQ9b3+uWKW3XnIKvEy0kFcjT65a/eIGZpxBUySY3pem6C/oRqFEzyaamXGp5QNqZD3rVU0YgbfzI/dUrOrDIgYaxtKSRz9ffEhEbGZFFgOyOKI7PszcT/vG6K4bU/ESpJkSu2WBSmkmBMZn+TgdCcocwsoUwLeythI6opQ5tOyYbgLb+8SloXVe+yWruvVeo3eRxFOIFTOAcPrqAOd9CAJjAYwjO8wpsjnRfn3flYtBacfOYY/sD5/AEQJI2q</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="tKZPuxxk3wc4gxTcFPvcZNdTqHs=">AAACCHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqEsXBovQQimJFBW6KbpxWcE+oIlhMpm0QyeTMDMRQujSjb/ixoUibv0Ed/6N0zYLbT1w4XDOvdx7jxdTIqRpfmuFldW19Y3iZmlre2d3T98/6Ioo4Qh3UEQj3vegwJQw3JFEUtyPOYahR3HPG19P/d4D5oJE7E6mMXZCOGQkIAhKJbn6sd0mlbFr3meV1DXtpt1MXataQ5OajfxIVl29bNbNGYxlYuWkDHK0Xf3L9iOUhJhJRKEQA8uMpZNBLgmieFKyE4FjiMZwiAeKMhhi4WSzRybGqVJ8I4i4KiaNmfp7IoOhEGnoqc4QypFY9Kbif94gkcGlkxEWJxIzNF8UJNSQkTFNxfAJx0jSVBGIOFG3GmgEOURSZVdSIViLLy+T7lndOq83bhvl1lUeRxEcgRNQARa4AC1wA9qgAxB4BM/gFbxpT9qL9q59zFsLWj5zCP5A+/wBzNWX8Q==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y1 ),c                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !(k1 , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="IHBz42rEcHjuHLncVjzU8mo9PHg=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrqO2cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPIDmRog==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !(k0 , ·)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !(k1 , ·)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  !(k0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="IIVVNyz46fkUZ/hxV8tdoVOzwIE=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrq22cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPHq6RoQ==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="IHBz42rEcHjuHLncVjzU8mo9PHg=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrqO2cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPIDmRog==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 3: Our permuting algorithm. Here, k (z z+1),c means the permuted key, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c = 0 means no swapping occurs, and c = 1 means z and z + 1 are swapped. Red
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 squares indicate the points z, z + 1, red solid arrows indicate the original permutation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (c = 0), and blue dashed lines indicate the permuted permutation (c = 1). Let y0 , y1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 be the pre-images of z, z + 1 in the Merge.Left: The case where y0 , y1 lie in different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 halves, and we permute z, z +1 by permuting the merge M.Right: The case where y0 , y1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 lie in the same half, and we permute z, z + 1 by permuting the recursive application of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Π, as indicated by the red squares.


If the pre-images lie in the same half, then we cannot permute the Merge since this would violate
the ordering of elements in that half. In this case, however, the order-preserving property of the
Merge guarantees that the pre-images of z, z +1 are adjacent, and so we can instead permute within
the recursive Π call for that half. See Figure 3.
    Thus, we have reduced the task of permuting Π to permuting the Merge, and we only need
to concern ourselves with the case where the pre-images of z, z + 1 lie in different halves. If we
look at the leaf nodes z, z + 1 in the tally tree, since they have pre-images in different halves, this
means one of the nodes has a value of 0 and the other a value of 1. Moreover, permuting z, z + 1
corresponds to exchanging which is a 0 and which is a 1.
    What we show is that such permuting can be accomplished by puncturing the underling pseu-
dorandom function (PRF) that is used to generate the tally tree. We use a puncturable PRF that
can be punctured at several points, resulting in those points being replaced with random values.
Concretely, we puncture at the nodes z, z + 1, as well as all nodes on the paths from these nodes
to the root, and also the siblings of those nodes. By analyzing the induced hypergeometric distri-
butions, we conclude after puncturing that the values at z, z + 1 are actually statistically equally
likely to be 0 or 1. Thus, we can swap their values without detection. See Figure 4 for an example.


Remark 11. [GP07] is not particularly efficient from a practical perspective, due to having to
sample from hypergeometric distributions. Other works have given more efficient constructions of
small-domain PRPs [Mor05, HMR12, RY13, MR14], but it is unclear if these also give permutable
PRPs when instantiated with a puncturable PRF.

Extending to More General Permutations. Neighbor swaps are not sufficient for most ap-
plications. We therefore explain how to extend the construction to handle much more general
permutations Γ.
    The idea is simple, and builds upon the intuition that neighbor swaps are enough to generate

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="qjx5Wi/1Ezam6+aUF3Y4Q+9B0Xg=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY5ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9ovltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpias+lMuk9SgZMtFYSqIicn8azLgCpkRE0soU9zeStiIKsqMzaZgQ/BWX14nrauyd12uNCql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYMbqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AIgnjMU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="qjx5Wi/1Ezam6+aUF3Y4Q+9B0Xg=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY5ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9ovltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpias+lMuk9SgZMtFYSqIicn8azLgCpkRE0soU9zeStiIKsqMzaZgQ/BWX14nrauyd12uNCql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYMbqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AIgnjMU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="y+WDoqttszdexELZg6EJPDYoWM8=">AAAB5HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qlcvi0XwVBIp6rHoxWMF+wFtKJvtpF272YTdjVBCf4EXD4pXf5M3/43bNgdtfTDweG+GmXlhKrg2nvftlDY2t7Z3yrvu3v7B4VHFPW7rJFMMWywRieqGVKPgEluGG4HdVCGNQ4GdcHI39zvPqDRP5KOZphjEdCR5xBk1VnqoDypVr+YtQNaJX5AqFGgOKl/9YcKyGKVhgmrd873UBDlVhjOBM7efaUwpm9AR9iyVNEYd5ItDZ+TcKkMSJcqWNGSh/p7Iaaz1NA5tZ0zNWK96c/E/r5eZ6CbIuUwzg5ItF0WZICYh86/JkCtkRkwtoUxxeythY6ooMzYb14bgr768TtqXNf+qVq82boswynAKZ3ABPlxDA+6hCS1ggPACb/DuPDmvzseyseQUEyfwB87nDxedi5c=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="PvkqMPf0KQ2ZiRgX4QPbidqMLN8=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF4+QyCOBDZkdemFkdnYzM2tCCF/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR3cxvPaHSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1FipftkrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa88SdcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl76pcqVdK1dssjjycwCmcgwfXUIV7qEEDGCA8wyu8OY/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AICTjMA=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="YMsxORc1qROyZt/Sshecb25Lu40=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfju7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9IvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia88adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWpWyd1WuNqql2m0WRx7O4BwuwYNrqME91KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AH8PjL8=</latexit>




  0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




  <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="DSs/otLGM3tGcbw7Y+b2owP1uy4=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptcvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfYuMvg==</latexit>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="SvEw9j+G6/nNSZebhlvQwRvlSiI=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOlptsvV9yqOwdZJV5OKpCj0S9/9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NnVBnOBE5LvVRjQtmYDrFrqaQRaj+bHzolZ1YZkDBWtqQhc/X3REYjrSdRYDsjakZ62ZuJ/3nd1ITXfsZlkhqUbLEoTAUxMZl9TQZcITNiYgllittbCRtRRZmx2ZRsCN7yy6ukfVH1Lqu1Zq1Sv8njKMIJnMI5eHAFdbiDBrSAAcIzvMKb8+i8OO/Ox6K14OQzx/AHzucPfAeMvQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        z+1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        z+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="MG/ZJNMrk6v+eAPGdjcOKKfHwN4=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMgCGFXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLsZJIMmZ1dZnqFuOQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7glgKg6777eRWVtfWN/Kbha3tnd294v5Bw0SJZrzOIhnpVkANl0LxOgqUvBVrTsNA8mYwupn6zUeujYjUA45j7od0oERfMIpWun8687rFklt2ZyDLxMtICTLUusWvTi9iScgVMkmNaXtujH5KNQom+aTQSQyPKRvRAW9bqmjIjZ/OTp2QE6v0SD/SthSSmfp7IqWhMeMwsJ0hxaFZ9Kbif147wf6VnwoVJ8gVmy/qJ5JgRKZ/k57QnKEcW0KZFvZWwoZUU4Y2nYINwVt8eZk0zsveRblyVylVr7M48nAEx3AKHlxCFW6hBnVgMIBneIU3RzovzrvzMW/NOdnMIfyB8/kDwpeNdw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="MG/ZJNMrk6v+eAPGdjcOKKfHwN4=">AAAB6nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMgCGFXgnoMevEY0TwgWcLsZJIMmZ1dZnqFuOQTvHhQxKtf5M2/cZLsQRMLGoqqbrq7glgKg6777eRWVtfWN/Kbha3tnd294v5Bw0SJZrzOIhnpVkANl0LxOgqUvBVrTsNA8mYwupn6zUeujYjUA45j7od0oERfMIpWun8687rFklt2ZyDLxMtICTLUusWvTi9iScgVMkmNaXtujH5KNQom+aTQSQyPKRvRAW9bqmjIjZ/OTp2QE6v0SD/SthSSmfp7IqWhMeMwsJ0hxaFZ9Kbif147wf6VnwoVJ8gVmy/qJ5JgRKZ/k57QnKEcW0KZFvZWwoZUU4Y2nYINwVt8eZk0zsveRblyVylVr7M48nAEx3AKHlxCFW6hBnVgMIBneIU3RzovzrvzMW/NOdnMIfyB8/kDwpeNdw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="VcduhImtG31xtIwCRH/3qEwy95Y=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtYECV/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOwvjQc=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="VcduhImtG31xtIwCRH/3qEwy95Y=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtYECV/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOwvjQc=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 4: Left: The tally tree for a permuted merge key k (z z+1),0 , where no swapping
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         happens. The red squares are the positions to be swapped z, z + 1. The blue crosses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         are the paths from root to these nodes and the gold pentagons are the siblings of these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         paths; these nodes have all been punctured.Right: The tally tree for the permuted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         merge key k (z z+1),1 . This is identical to theleft tree, except that we swapped the bits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         at z and z + 1, and accordingly updated the tallies in the paths to z, z + 1 (the blue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         crosses). The gold pentagons and all their descendants remain unchanged.


all permutations. To get the circuits computing Π(k, ·) or Γ(Π(k, ·)), we simply obfuscate those
programs using iO. To show that the two cases are indistinguishable, we decompose Γ into a
sequence of (exponentially-many) neighbor swaps, and perform a sequence of hybrids where we
apply one neighbor-swap at a time.
     There are two caveats to this approach. One is that we will need exponentially-many hybrids,
and therefore we must rely on sub-exponentially-secure iO. The underlying puncturable PRF must
also be sub-exponentially secure, which is implied by sub-exponential one-way functions.
     The more challenging caveat is the following. If we decompose Γ as Γ = τN ◦ τN −1 ◦ · · · ◦ τ1 for
neighbor-swaps τi , we actually require that each partial permutation Γt := τN ◦ τN −1 ◦ · · · ◦ τt is
computable by a small circuit. These need to be small because, at the appropriate hybrid, they will
be hard-coded into the program that gets obfuscated. To maintain security given the obfuscated
inverse circuits, we also need each Γ−1 t   to have small circuits. But in general, even if Γ, Γ−1 have
small circuits, it is not obvious that Γ can be decomposed in a way which guarantees that each
Γt , Γ−1
      t have smalls circuit. This leads to our Efficient Permutation Decomposition (EPD) Problem
(Question 8), which asks whether such a guarantee is possible in general.15
     We do not know how to resolve the EPD problem in general. Instead, we define a notion of
“decomposable” circuits, which are Γ that can be decomposed into a (potentially exponentially-
long) sequence in such a way that the Γt , Γ−1 t all have small circuits.
                                                                           16 Fortunately, decomposable

circuits capture many natural types of permutations, such as general (non-neighbor) transpositions,
linear cycles j 7→ j + 1 7→ · · · 7→ ℓ − 1 7→ ℓ 7→ j, involutions (i.e., such that Γ ◦ Γ is the identity),
and more. See Figure 5 for a longer list of examples of decomposable permutations, which are
shown to be decomposable inSection 5. Our proof shows that an obfuscated neighbor-swap PRP
  15
     Note that Question 8 was about decomposing into transpositions rather than neighbor swaps. But aswe will see,
transpositions can be decomposed into neighbor swaps, and thus the two versions are equivalent.
  16
     Note that there may be many possible decompositions into neighbor-swaps, and some decompositions may give
small circuits while others may not.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   22
                 Transpositions i ↔ j.
                 Linear cycles j → j + 1 → j + 2 → · · · → ℓ → j.
                 Affine mod-2 permutations x → A · x + v mod 2 if det(A) mod 2 = 1.
                 Products (x, y) → (Γ0 (x), Γ1 (x)) for decomposable Γ0 , Γ1 .
                 Compositions Γ = Γ0 ◦ Γ1 for decomposable Γ0 , Γ1 .
                 Controlled permutations (x, y) → (x, Γx (y)) for decomposable Γx .
                 Efficient involutions (Γ ◦ Γ = I).
                 Conjugations Λ−1 ◦ Γ ◦ Λ for decomposable Γ and efficient Λ, Λ−1 .
                 Permutations with ancillas (x, 0n ) → (Γ(x), 0n ) for efficient Γ, Γ−1 .

         Figure 5: A non-exhaustive list of decomposable permutations. Note that for conju-
         gations, Λ need not be decomposable. For ancillas, Γ : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n need not be
         decomposable, but the permutation (x, 0n ) → (Γ(x), 0n ) is only a partial function that
         is not specified on the rest of the domain. The permutable PRP domain in this case is
         the entire space including ancillas.


is a permutable PRP for all decomposable circuits. This gives the informal Theorem 5.

Remark 12. Interestingly, despite showing that a wide range of permutations are decomposable,
even for very simple permutations, decompositions can be tricky. For example, x 7→ 2x mod N for
odd N is decomposable, though our proof uses the fact that the map is a merge with an efficiently
computable tally tree, and shows that such tally trees allow for decomposition. This generalizes
to x 7→ ax mod N for polynomial a. But the only way we know how to handle general linear
maps requires decomposing a into the product (mod N ) of polynomially-bounded scalars. This in
turn requires that such polynomial scalars generate Z∗N . This is implied by the Extended Riemann
Hypothesis [Bac90]. However, we leave a general unconditional decomposition, even for scalar
multiplication, as an intriguing open question.

Applications. We show that permutable PRPs can be very useful in obfuscation applications.17
Concretely, we show that obfuscating a permutable PRP for general transpositions (which in par-
ticular are decomposable) immediately gives a full-domain trapdoor one-way permutation, yielding
Theorem 6. The proof goes through several hybrids:

       • Hybrid 0: The adversary is given an obfuscation of Π(k, ·) and a challenge point y ∗ , and has
         to find x∗ such that y ∗ = Π(k, x∗ ).

       • Hybrid 1: We choose a random output y ′ , and “puncture” the program so if Π(k, x) = y ′ , the
         program outputs y ∗ instead of y ′ . Otherwise the program is unchanged. This means there
         are now two points x∗ , x′ that map to y ∗ . This change follows standard iO techniques.
                                                 ∗   ′
       • Hybrid 2: We use permuted key k (x x ),0 ← Permute (k, (x∗ x′ ), 0) but where the transpo-
         sition (x∗ x′ ) is still turned off. Recall per Figure 5 that transpositions are decomposable.
         We use the permuted key instead of the real key k for all purposes of this hybrid. Since
  17
    As we describe it, our applications will obfuscate a permutable PRP, where our permutable PRPs are built using
obfuscation. We can equivalently simply obfuscate the underlying neighbor swap PRP, and all the hybrids in the
proof of security for the permutable PRP can instead be carried out at the level of the application. However, for
conceptual simplicity, we believe it is beneficial to describe our results using the permutable PRP abstraction.


                                                         23
      these are functionally equivalent, by the security of the iO, the transition to this hybrid is
      computationally undetectable.
   • Hybrid 3: Now we compose the PRP with the transposition swapping x∗ , x′ . That is, we
                  ∗ ′                                                       ∗ ′
     sample k (x x ),1 ← Permute (k, (x∗ x′ ), 1) and use it instead of k (x x ),0 , which was used in
     the previous hybrid. By the security of the permutable PRP this change is computationally
     indistinguishable. Note that, importantly we transpose x∗ and x′ both within the obfuscated
     program and also to verify the adversary’s output (where we check that the circuit’s output
     equals y ∗ ). This swap means that now the adversary has to find x′ instead of x∗ . That is,
     after we move to this hybrid, we can make another change to how we check the success of
     this hybrid: Take the original PRP key k and simply check that y ′ = Π (k, x).
   • Hybrid 4: Now we move to using the original key k inside the obfuscated circuit instead of
                          ∗  ′
     the permuted key k (x x ),1 . Note that the functionality of the outside circuit (which is also
     obfuscated by iO) is unchanged because it is still the case that on both, x∗ , x′ it outputs y ∗ .
     This change is computationally indistinguishable by the security of the iO.

      Finalizing the reduction. In the setting of the last hybrid experiment, we sample a
      random PRP key k and a uniformly random y ′ . We then obfuscate the circuit P1 , which
      computes the PRP with key k, checks if the output was y ′ , and if so outputs y ∗ instead of
      y ′ (or in other words, does something unrelated to the original problem). The adversary
      then finds x′ which eventually leads to finding y ′ . By standard iO techniques, finding such
      uniformly random y ′ is computationally intractable, even given the key k, the value y ∗ and
      the obfuscation of the program P1 .
   An elaborated formal proof is found in Section 5 (Theorem 42).

2.4   OSS In the Standard Model(Section 6)
We finally turn to constructing OSS in the standard model. The idea is to simply replace the
random permutation Π with a permutable PRP Π(k, ·) and to have the matrix/vector pairs Ay , by
be generated pseudorandomly from a (puncturable) pseudorandom function. Fortunately, the pre-
ceding sections have already set up most of the ideas we need for the proof, as our sequence of
reductions for proving our oracle construction actually have natural cryptographic analogs.
    For our random self-reduction, we need to argue that the simulated obfuscated program is in-
distinguishable from the real distribution. In the oracle model, we have perfect indistinguishability.
In the standard model case, we no longer have perfect indistinguishability since the simulated per-
mutation Π is now the composition of two permutable PRPs, and the matrix/vector pairs Ay , by
are derived from underlying terms Ay , by , Cy , dy , each of which are pseudorandomly generated.
Fortunately, a standard hybrid over every y, utilizing punctured PRF security lets us move to the
correct distribution over Ay , by , and permutable PRP security lets us replace the composition of
two permutable PRPs with a single PRP.
    For dual-bloating, we follow the approach of [Zha19], which shows how to increase the size of
of obfuscated subspaces using iO and one-way functions. We can likewise eliminate the dual as in
the oracle case, as our argument works just as well in the standard model. Finally, we can embed a
coset-partition function just as we did in the oracle case, but now using our computational random
self-reduction.

                                                 24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="gIk/wBMxZYXzYn0FE3NCv9q7JyM=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4sSRS1GPRi8cK9gPaWDababt0swm7G6GE/ggvHhTx6u/x5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nZXVtfWNzcJWcXtnd2+/dHDY1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hoduq3nlBpHssHM07Qj+hA8j5n1Fip5T5m4bma9Eplt+LOQJaJl5My5Kj3Sl/dMGZphNIwQbXueG5i/Iwqw5nASbGbakwoG9EBdiyVNELtZ7NzJ+TUKiHpx8qWNGSm/p7IaKT1OApsZ0TNUC96U/E/r5Oa/rWfcZmkBiWbL+qngpiYTH8nIVfIjBhbQpni9lbChlRRZmxCRRuCt/jyMmleVLzLSvW+Wq7d5HEU4BhO4Aw8uIIa3EEdGsBgBM/wCm9O4rw4787HvHXFyWeO4A+czx/vd49S</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d→r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="+uQyNRflh6ZfpBt0Osl+e4sjuBk=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48t2FpoQ9lsJ+3azSbsboQS+gu8eFDEqz/Jm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IBFcG9f9dgpr6xubW8Xt0s7u3v5B+fCoreNUMWyxWMSqE1CNgktsGW4EdhKFNAoEPgTj25n/8IRK81jem0mCfkSHkoecUWOl5qRfrrhVdw6ySrycVCBHo1/+6g1ilkYoDRNU667nJsbPqDKcCZyWeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1H42P3RKzqwyIGGsbElD5urviYxGWk+iwHZG1Iz0sjcT//O6qQmv/YzLJDUo2WJRmApiYjL7mgy4QmbExBLKFLe3EjaiijJjsynZELzll1dJ+6LqXVZrzVqlfpPHUYQTOIVz8OAK6nAHDWgBA4RneIU359F5cd6dj0VrwclnjuEPnM8f6quNBg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !→1 (kout , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="bLsoSt2zEqfXu92C30fziKuReCE=">AAACBHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqstuBotQQUsiRV0W3bisYB/QxDCZTtqhk0yYuRFK6MKNv+LGhSJu/Qh3/o3Tx0KrBy4czrmXe+8JEsE12PaXlVtaXlldy68XNja3tneKu3stLVNFWZNKIVUnIJoJHrMmcBCskyhGokCwdjC8mvjte6Y0l/EtjBLmRaQf85BTAkbyiyW3we+yE2dcGfqZq0MsUxgfu7Qn4cgvlu2qPQX+S5w5KaM5Gn7x0+1JmkYsBiqI1l3HTsDLiAJOBRsX3FSzhNAh6bOuoTGJmPay6RNjfGiUHg6lMhUDnqo/JzISaT2KAtMZERjoRW8i/ud1UwgvvIzHSQosprNFYSowSDxJBPe4YhTEyBBCFTe3YjogilAwuRVMCM7iy39J67TqnFVrN7Vy/XIeRx6V0AGqIAedozq6Rg3URBQ9oCf0gl6tR+vZerPeZ605az6zj37B+vgGq+6XfQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               F(klin , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="0yei+XLok+4AIGUYJsLzMU1F+Fg=">AAACA3icbZBNS8MwGMfT+TbnW9WbXoJDmCCjlaEeh4J4nOBeYC0lzdItLE1LkgqjFLz4Vbx4UMSrX8Kb38as60E3/xD48X+eJ8nz92NGpbKsb6O0tLyyulZer2xsbm3vmLt7HRklApM2jlgkej6ShFFO2ooqRnqxICj0Gen64+tpvftAhKQRv1eTmLghGnIaUIyUtjzzIHVkAG+y2tjLSd+TnTp4EKkTz6xadSsXXAS7gCoo1PLML2cQ4SQkXGGGpOzbVqzcFAlFMSNZxUkkiREeoyHpa+QoJNJN8x0yeKydAQwioQ9XMHd/T6QolHIS+rozRGok52tT879aP1HBpZtSHieKcDx7KEgYVBGcBgIHVBCs2EQDwoLqv0I8QgJhpWOr6BDs+ZUXoXNWt8/rjbtGtXlVxFEGh+AI1IANLkAT3IIWaAMMHsEzeAVvxpPxYrwbH7PWklHM7IM/Mj5/AA6elyg=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="zFgakf0wZ8TsQ7ROciarN4vAkYs=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELxwhkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtaEEL7AiweN8eonefNvHGAPClbSSaWqO91dQSK4Nq777eQ2Nre2d/K7hb39g8Oj4vFJS8epYthksYhVJ6AaBZfYNNwI7CQKaRQIbAfj+7nffkKleSwfzCRBP6JDyUPOqLFSo9YvltyyuwBZJ15GSpCh3i9+9QYxSyOUhgmqdddzE+NPqTKcCZwVeqnGhLIxHWLXUkkj1P50ceiMXFhlQMJY2ZKGLNTfE1MaaT2JAtsZUTPSq95c/M/rpia89adcJqlByZaLwlQQE5P512TAFTIjJpZQpri9lbARVZQZm03BhuCtvrxOWldl77pcaVRK1bssjjycwTlcggc3UIUa1KEJDBCe4RXenEfnxXl3PpatOSebOYU/cD5/AKBnjNU=</latexit>




                    x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            !(kin , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="IBr7nX7w8I83vHLeyixwFwT1j6g=">AAAB/nicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqLhyM1iEClISKeqy6MZlBfuAJoTJZNIOncyEmYlQQsFfceNCEbd+hzv/xmmbhbYeuHA4517uvSdMGVXacb6t0srq2vpGebOytb2zu2fvH3SUyCQmbSyYkL0QKcIoJ21NNSO9VBKUhIx0w9Ht1O8+Eqmo4A96nBI/QQNOY4qRNlJgH3ktWhsFuadiSPnk3MOR0GeBXXXqzgxwmbgFqYICrcD+8iKBs4RwjRlSqu86qfZzJDXFjEwqXqZIivAIDUjfUI4Sovx8dv4EnholgrGQpriGM/X3RI4SpcZJaDoTpIdq0ZuK/3n9TMfXfk55mmnC8XxRnDGoBZxmASMqCdZsbAjCkppbIR4iibA2iVVMCO7iy8ukc1F3L+uN+0a1eVPEUQbH4ATUgAuuQBPcgRZoAwxy8AxewZv1ZL1Y79bHvLVkFTOH4A+szx9CPJUM</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A           b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="R8odOyitRwzudFPX9zazVWINGao=">AAAB8nicbVDLSgMxFL1TX7W+qi7dBIvgqsxIUZdVNy4r2AdMh5JJM21oJhmSjFCGfoYbF4q49Wvc+Tdm2llo64HA4Zx7ybknTDjTxnW/ndLa+sbmVnm7srO7t39QPTzqaJkqQttEcql6IdaUM0HbhhlOe4miOA457YaTu9zvPlGlmRSPZprQIMYjwSJGsLGSn/VjbMZhhG5mg2rNrbtzoFXiFaQGBVqD6ld/KEkaU2EIx1r7npuYIMPKMMLprNJPNU0wmeAR9S0VOKY6yOaRZ+jMKkMUSWWfMGiu/t7IcKz1NA7tZJ5QL3u5+J/npya6DjImktRQQRYfRSlHRqL8fjRkihLDp5ZgopjNisgYK0yMbaliS/CWT14lnYu6d1lvPDRqzduijjKcwCmcgwdX0IR7aEEbCEh4hld4c4zz4rw7H4vRklPsHMMfOJ8/BjGRGA==</latexit>




                    <latexit sha1_base64="jqylwcxBagMhesCQ8VFOWEkScmo=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtZICF/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOknjQU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="MMgl1HN85xxE6Sq5rlk9WD0yF0w=">AAAB8nicbVDLSsNAFL2pr1pfVZduBovgqiQi6rLoxmUF+4A2lMl00g6dTMLMjVBCP8ONC0Xc+jXu/BsnbRbaemDgcM69zLknSKQw6LrfTmltfWNzq7xd2dnd2z+oHh61TZxqxlsslrHuBtRwKRRvoUDJu4nmNAok7wSTu9zvPHFtRKwecZpwP6IjJULBKFqpl/UjiuMgJMFsUK25dXcOskq8gtSgQHNQ/eoPY5ZGXCGT1Jie5yboZ1SjYJLPKv3U8ISyCR3xnqWKRtz42TzyjJxZZUjCWNunkMzV3xsZjYyZRoGdzBOaZS8X//N6KYY3fiZUkiJXbPFRmEqCMcnvJ0OhOUM5tYQyLWxWwsZUU4a2pYotwVs+eZW0L+reVf3y4bLWuC3qKMMJnMI5eHANDbiHJrSAQQzP8ApvDjovzrvzsRgtOcXOMfyB8/kDOFaROQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="JLYb6rJv06y1uC3l/uVLovEg/qM=">AAAB8nicbVDLSgMxFM3UV62vqks3wSK4KjNS1GXRjcsK9gHToWTSTBuaSYbkjlCHfoYbF4q49Wvc+Tdm2llo64HA4Zx7ybknTAQ34LrfTmltfWNzq7xd2dnd2z+oHh51jEo1ZW2qhNK9kBgmuGRt4CBYL9GMxKFg3XBym/vdR6YNV/IBpgkLYjKSPOKUgJX8rB8TGIcRfpoNqjW37s6BV4lXkBoq0BpUv/pDRdOYSaCCGON7bgJBRjRwKtis0k8NSwidkBHzLZUkZibI5pFn+MwqQxwpbZ8EPFd/b2QkNmYah3YyT2iWvVz8z/NTiK6DjMskBSbp4qMoFRgUzu/HQ64ZBTG1hFDNbVZMx0QTCralii3BWz55lXQu6t5lvXHfqDVvijrK6ASdonPkoSvURHeohdqIIoWe0St6c8B5cd6dj8VoySl2jtEfOJ8/XM6RUQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="0G4BY3p9+x9SK/hAwjGq7WyoMVg=">AAAB6HicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKexKUI9BL+IpAfOAZAmzk95kzOzsMjMrhJAv8OJBEa9+kjf/xkmyB00saCiquunuChLBtXHdbye3tr6xuZXfLuzs7u0fFA+PmjpOFcMGi0Ws2gHVKLjEhuFGYDtRSKNAYCsY3c781hMqzWP5YMYJ+hEdSB5yRo2V6ve9Ysktu3OQVeJlpAQZar3iV7cfszRCaZigWnc8NzH+hCrDmcBpoZtqTCgb0QF2LJU0Qu1P5odOyZlV+iSMlS1pyFz9PTGhkdbjKLCdETVDvezNxP+8TmrCa3/CZZIalGyxKEwFMTGZfU36XCEzYmwJZYrbWwkbUkWZsdkUbAje8surpHlR9i7LlXqlVL3J4sjDCZzCOXhwBVW4gxo0gAHCM7zCm/PovDjvzseiNedkM8fwB87nD6NvjNc=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u=A·z+b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="3R8kzgAxlbgV81kLT7AM3nNd17M=">AAACHHicbZBNS8NAEIY39avWr6hHL4tFEISSaFEvQtWLxwr2A5pQNptNu3SzCbsboYb8EC/+FS8eFPHiQfDfuGlL0daBhWffmWFmXi9mVCrL+jYKC4tLyyvF1dLa+sbmlrm905RRIjBp4IhFou0hSRjlpKGoYqQdC4JCj5GWN7jO8617IiSN+J0axsQNUY/TgGKktNQ1T1InRKrvBTDJLqZ8mTnYj9T0/5AdTdnLumbZqlijgPNgT6AMJlHvmp+OH+EkJFxhhqTs2Fas3BQJRTEjWclJJIkRHqAe6WjkKCTSTUfHZfBAKz4MIqEfV3Ck/u5IUSjlMPR0Zb6hnM3l4n+5TqKCczelPE4U4Xg8KEgYVBHMnYI+FQQrNtSAsKB6V4j7SCCstJ8lbYI9e/I8NI8r9mmlelst164mdhTBHtgHh8AGZ6AGbkAdNAAGj+AZvII348l4Md6Nj3FpwZj07II/YXz9AI9zoko=</latexit>




      Figure 6: The program P that gets obfuscated to give the program P. The programs
      P −1 , D are defined accordingly. Here, Π, Π−1 is a permutable PRP, and F is a punc-
      turable pseudorandom function. The output of H is r bits, z is n − r bits, and y is d
      bits.


    There are, however, two main hurdles to getting everything to work. The first is that, in order
to show that the obfuscation of the composition of two permutable PRPs is indistinguishable from
a single permutable PRP, we need our permutable PRPs itself to be decomposable. In Theorem 39
we construct permutable PRPs by our permuting algorithm, while carefully also maintaining their
decomposability. This allows for overall composition between permutable PRPs.
    Another caveat is that we need a post-quantum collision-resistant 2-to-1 function L, since we
can no longer rely on the unconditional existence relative to an oracle. It turns out that we also
need this L to have some extra properties, that were not present in the oracle case. Specifically,
when we showed that embedding Q (the parallel repetition of L) results in a valid instance of
the oracles P, P −1 , we actually argued that this means there exists an implicit permutation Π
determined by Q. Very roughly, since Q has collisions it therefore loses information, and Π outputs
Q plus some additional bits to recover the lost information. For the oracle proof, we only needed the
existence of Π to argue that the simulated oracles had the same distribution as the real oracles. But
for our standard-model argument, we will actually have a hybrid where Π is hard-coded into the
obfuscated program. That means we need Π to have a small circuit. Unfortunately, Π essentially
requires inverting Q, and so in general is computationally inefficient. Note that the inefficient
circuit is not needed in normal usage, but just in the proof.
    As a result, we need the function Q to have a number of specific properties, which mainly boil
down to having L a collision-resistant 2-to-1 function that has a trapdoor. Fortunately, we can
construct such “trapdoor” 2-to-1 hash functions from lattices, following a similar approach as the
claw-free trapdoor functions built from LWE [BCM+ 18].
    However, focusing on the LWE-based hash functions leads into the third and fourth caveats.
For the third: The range of the LWE-based hash function is actually larger than the domain. In
contrast, for our oracle construction described above, the function Q needs to be surjective in order
for filling in the lost information to actually yield a permutation. But this means the range of Q
must be smaller than the domain since it is many-to-one. This also presents a problem for invoking
permutable PRP security, since permutable PRPs allow for composing with permutations, but our
LWE-based hash function is no longer a permutation.
    Fortunately, we can expand the range by padding y with 0’s, and composing the output of
the construction with another permutable PRP. This leads to our ultimate construction, which we
describe visually in Figure 6. We can also split up the evaluation of Q into multiple stages, where
each stage is a (decomposable) permutation which allows us to invoke permutable PRP security.
    The fourth caveat is that the LWE-based hash function L is really only 2-to-1 on an overwhelm-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             x2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="AR8bw1iLV+h/TJ1WtHIGvCZC5c0=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4xyiOBDZkdemHC7OxmZtZICJ/gxYPGePWLvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLRzcxvPaLSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1Fjp/qlX6RVLbtmdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE175Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNStm7KFfvqqXadRZHHk7gFM7Bg0uowS3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8AECKNqg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      x1 !(k , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="QRlFKTdZFTH2TZmCLuq5ispBsxg=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbTbt0swm7E7GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmFldW19o7hZ2tre2d0r7x80TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWjm6nfeuTaiFg94DjhfkQHSoSCUbTS/VPP65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4ZWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJpnVe+ien53Xqld53EU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EIdGsBgAM/wCm+OdF6cd+dj3lpw8plD+APn8wcOno2p</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="IIVVNyz46fkUZ/hxV8tdoVOzwIE=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrq22cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPHq6RoQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !→1 (k1 , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="opdtSbPPlqkq7W3RW1XKT1XasUU=">AAAB/HicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vaJdugkWooCWRoi6LblxWsA9oYphMJu3QyUyYmQgh1F9x40IRt36IO//GaZuFth64cDjnXu69J0gokcq2v43Syura+kZ5s7K1vbO7Z+4fdCVPBcIdxCkX/QBKTAnDHUUUxf1EYBgHFPeC8c3U7z1iIQln9ypLsBfDISMRQVBpyTerbps85GfOpD72nVMXhVyd+GbNbtgzWMvEKUgNFGj75pcbcpTGmClEoZQDx06Ul0OhCKJ4UnFTiROIxnCIB5oyGGPp5bPjJ9axVkIr4kIXU9ZM/T2Rw1jKLA50ZwzVSC56U/E/b5Cq6MrLCUtShRmaL4pSailuTZOwQiIwUjTTBCJB9K0WGkEBkdJ5VXQIzuLLy6R73nAuGs27Zq11XcRRBofgCNSBAy5BC9yCNugABDLwDF7Bm/FkvBjvxse8tWQUM1XwB8bnDwIZk7k=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="oHKEjBPa1NpTI9acyZHKjpoa4aI=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF48Y5ZHAhswOA0yYnd3M9BrJhk/w4kFjvPpF3vwbB9iDgpV0UqnqTndXEEth0HW/ndzK6tr6Rn6zsLW9s7tX3D9omCjRjNdZJCPdCqjhUiheR4GSt2LNaRhI3gxGN1O/+ci1EZF6wHHM/ZAOlOgLRtFK90/d826x5JbdGcgy8TJSggy1bvGr04tYEnKFTFJj2p4bo59SjYJJPil0EsNjykZ0wNuWKhpy46ezUyfkxCo90o+0LYVkpv6eSGlozDgMbGdIcWgWvan4n9dOsH/lp0LFCXLF5ov6iSQYkenfpCc0ZyjHllCmhb2VsCHVlKFNp2BD8BZfXiaNs7J3Ua7cVUrV6yyOPBzBMZyCB5dQhVuoQR0YDOAZXuHNkc6L8+58zFtzTjZzCH/gfP4AEaaNqw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0     w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="OruMTjXosJIyrrN44UfuYidNs40=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4xyiOBDZkdemHC7OxmZlZDCJ/gxYPGePWLvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLRzcxvPaLSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1Fjp/qlX6RVLbtmdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE175Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNStm7KFfvqqXadRZHHk7gFM7Bg0uowS3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8ADpyNqQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="EFEcu+lIh6EdmTgwABYBo+rawa4=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF48Y5ZHAhswOA0yYnd3M9GrIhk/w4kFjvPpF3vwbB9iDgpV0UqnqTndXEEth0HW/ndzK6tr6Rn6zsLW9s7tX3D9omCjRjNdZJCPdCqjhUiheR4GSt2LNaRhI3gxGN1O/+ci1EZF6wHHM/ZAOlOgLRtFK90/d826x5JbdGcgy8TJSggy1bvGr04tYEnKFTFJj2p4bo59SjYJJPil0EsNjykZ0wNuWKhpy46ezUyfkxCo90o+0LYVkpv6eSGlozDgMbGdIcWgWvan4n9dOsH/lp0LFCXLF5ov6iSQYkenfpCc0ZyjHllCmhb2VsCHVlKFNp2BD8BZfXiaNs7J3Ua7cVUrV6yyOPBzBMZyCB5dQhVuoQR0YDOAZXuHNkc6L8+58zFtzTjZzCH/gfP4AECCNqg==</latexit>




                        x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="8XwCUehtEqqwEzmOyZU0Y3ncpu8=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lKUY9FLx4r2lpoQ9lsN+3SzSbsToQS+hO8eFDEq7/Im//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjUNnGqGW+xWMa6E1DDpVC8hQIl7ySa0yiQ/DEY38z8xyeujYjVA04S7kd0qEQoGEUr3Tf7tX654lbdOcgq8XJSgRzNfvmrN4hZGnGFTFJjup6boJ9RjYJJPi31UsMTysZ0yLuWKhpx42fzU6fkzCoDEsbalkIyV39PZDQyZhIFtjOiODLL3kz8z+umGF75mVBJilyxxaIwlQRjMvubDITmDOXEEsq0sLcSNqKaMrTplGwI3vLLq6Rdq3oX1fpdvdK4zuMowgmcwjl4cAkNuIUmtIDBEJ7hFd4c6bw4787HorXg5DPH8AfO5w/TI42C</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="AEelTs2N6zyvsKz9WxepIGU0Fas=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2m3bpZhN2J0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVjDdZLGPdCajhUijeRIGSdxLNaRRI3g7GtzO//cS1EbF6xEnC/YgOlQgFo2ilh0bf7ZcrbtWdg6wSLycVyNHol796g5ilEVfIJDWm67kJ+hnVKJjk01IvNTyhbEyHvGupohE3fjY/dUrOrDIgYaxtKSRz9fdERiNjJlFgOyOKI7PszcT/vG6K4bWfCZWkyBVbLApTSTAms7/JQGjOUE4soUwLeythI6opQ5tOyYbgLb+8SloXVe+yWruvVeo3eRxFOIFTOAcPrqAOd9CAJjAYwjO8wpsjnRfn3flYtBacfOYY/sD5/AHQG42A</latexit>




                        <latexit sha1_base64="jqylwcxBagMhesCQ8VFOWEkScmo=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtZICF/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOknjQU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="yCgdG4kxaD8oSgT721sNP4Qt8Ao=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2m3bpZhN2J0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVjDdZLGPdCajhUijeRIGSdxLNaRRI3g7GtzO//cS1EbF6xEnC/YgOlQgFo2ilh0bf65crbtWdg6wSLycVyNHol796g5ilEVfIJDWm67kJ+hnVKJjk01IvNTyhbEyHvGupohE3fjY/dUrOrDIgYaxtKSRz9fdERiNjJlFgOyOKI7PszcT/vG6K4bWfCZWkyBVbLApTSTAms7/JQGjOUE4soUwLeythI6opQ5tOyYbgLb+8SloXVe+yWruvVeo3eRxFOIFTOAcPrqAOd9CAJjAYwjO8wpsjnRfn3flYtBacfOYY/sD5/AHRn42B</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="67zubY/zRYXPtGD09zOTgpCYIlM=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbTbt0swm7E6WE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmFldW19o7hZ2tre2d0r7x80TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWjm6nfeuTaiFg94DjhfkQHSoSCUbTS/VPP65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4ZWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJpnVe+ien53Xqld53EU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EIdGsBgAM/wCm+OdF6cd+dj3lpw8plD+APn8wcNGI2o</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="oRKDlvI4JokvRgRY1wM+GPC0dIA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokU9Vj04rGi/YA2lM120i7dbMLuRimhP8GLB0W8+ou8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLEsG1cd1vZ2V1bX1js7BV3N7Z3dsvHRw2dZwqhg0Wi1i1A6pRcIkNw43AdqKQRoHAVjC6mfqtR1Sax/LBjBP0IzqQPOSMGivdP/WqvVLZrbgzkGXi5aQMOeq90le3H7M0QmmYoFp3PDcxfkaV4UzgpNhNNSaUjegAO5ZKGqH2s9mpE3JqlT4JY2VLGjJTf09kNNJ6HAW2M6JmqBe9qfif10lNeOVnXCapQcnmi8JUEBOT6d+kzxUyI8aWUKa4vZWwIVWUGZtO0YbgLb68TJrnFe+iUr2rlmvXeRwFOIYTOAMPLqEGt1CHBjAYwDO8wpsjnBfn3fmYt644+cwR/IHz+QMRpI2r</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="AR8bw1iLV+h/TJ1WtHIGvCZC5c0=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4xyiOBDZkdemHC7OxmZtZICJ/gxYPGePWLvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLRzcxvPaLSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1Fjp/qlX6RVLbtmdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE175Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNStm7KFfvqqXadRZHHk7gFM7Bg0uowS3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8AECKNqg==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x1 !(k , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="QRlFKTdZFTH2TZmCLuq5ispBsxg=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbTbt0swm7E7GE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmFldW19o7hZ2tre2d0r7x80TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWjm6nfeuTaiFg94DjhfkQHSoSCUbTS/VPP65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4ZWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJpnVe+ien53Xqld53EU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EIdGsBgAM/wCm+OdF6cd+dj3lpw8plD+APn8wcOno2p</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="IIVVNyz46fkUZ/hxV8tdoVOzwIE=">AAAB9XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69LBahgpREinosevFYwX5AE8tms2mXbjZhd6KU0P/hxYMiXv0v3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbm+YngGmz72yqsrK6tbxQ3S1vbO7t75f2Dto5TRVmLxiJWXZ9oJrhkLeAgWDdRjES+YB1/dDP1O49MaR7LexgnzIvIQPKQUwJGenCbvDrq22cuDWI47Zcrds2eAS8TJycVlKPZL3+5QUzTiEmggmjdc+wEvIwo4FSwSclNNUsIHZEB6xkqScS0l82unuATowQ4jJUpCXim/p7ISKT1OPJNZ0RgqBe9qfif10shvPIyLpMUmKTzRWEqMMR4GgEOuGIUxNgQQhU3t2I6JIpQMEGVTAjO4svLpH1ecy5q9bt6pXGdx1FER+gYVZGDLlED3aImaiGKFHpGr+jNerJerHfrY95asPKZQ/QH1ucPHq6RoQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !→1 (k1 , ·)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="opdtSbPPlqkq7W3RW1XKT1XasUU=">AAAB/HicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vaJdugkWooCWRoi6LblxWsA9oYphMJu3QyUyYmQgh1F9x40IRt36IO//GaZuFth64cDjnXu69J0gokcq2v43Syura+kZ5s7K1vbO7Z+4fdCVPBcIdxCkX/QBKTAnDHUUUxf1EYBgHFPeC8c3U7z1iIQln9ypLsBfDISMRQVBpyTerbps85GfOpD72nVMXhVyd+GbNbtgzWMvEKUgNFGj75pcbcpTGmClEoZQDx06Ul0OhCKJ4UnFTiROIxnCIB5oyGGPp5bPjJ9axVkIr4kIXU9ZM/T2Rw1jKLA50ZwzVSC56U/E/b5Cq6MrLCUtShRmaL4pSailuTZOwQiIwUjTTBCJB9K0WGkEBkdJ5VXQIzuLLy6R73nAuGs27Zq11XcRRBofgCNSBAy5BC9yCNugABDLwDF7Bm/FkvBjvxse8tWQUM1XwB8bnDwIZk7k=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="oHKEjBPa1NpTI9acyZHKjpoa4aI=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF48Y5ZHAhswOA0yYnd3M9BrJhk/w4kFjvPpF3vwbB9iDgpV0UqnqTndXEEth0HW/ndzK6tr6Rn6zsLW9s7tX3D9omCjRjNdZJCPdCqjhUiheR4GSt2LNaRhI3gxGN1O/+ci1EZF6wHHM/ZAOlOgLRtFK90/d826x5JbdGcgy8TJSggy1bvGr04tYEnKFTFJj2p4bo59SjYJJPil0EsNjykZ0wNuWKhpy46ezUyfkxCo90o+0LYVkpv6eSGlozDgMbGdIcWgWvan4n9dOsH/lp0LFCXLF5ov6iSQYkenfpCc0ZyjHllCmhb2VsCHVlKFNp2BD8BZfXiaNs7J3Ua7cVUrV6yyOPBzBMZyCB5dQhVuoQR0YDOAZXuHNkc6L8+58zFtzTjZzCH/gfP4AEaaNqw==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0     w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="OruMTjXosJIyrrN44UfuYidNs40=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYJUY9ELx4xyiOBDZkdemHC7OxmZlZDCJ/gxYPGePWLvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLRzcxvPaLSPJYPZpygH9GB5CFn1Fjp/qlX6RVLbtmdg6wSLyMlyFDvFb+6/ZilEUrDBNW647mJ8SdUGc4ETgvdVGNC2YgOsGOppBFqfzI/dUrOrNInYaxsSUPm6u+JCY20HkeB7YyoGeplbyb+53VSE175Ey6T1KBki0VhKoiJyexv0ucKmRFjSyhT3N5K2JAqyoxNp2BD8JZfXiXNStm7KFfvqqXadRZHHk7gFM7Bg0uowS3UoQEMBvAMr/DmCOfFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8ADpyNqQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="EFEcu+lIh6EdmTgwABYBo+rawa4=">AAAB6nicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHaVqEeiF48Y5ZHAhswOA0yYnd3M9GrIhk/w4kFjvPpF3vwbB9iDgpV0UqnqTndXEEth0HW/ndzK6tr6Rn6zsLW9s7tX3D9omCjRjNdZJCPdCqjhUiheR4GSt2LNaRhI3gxGN1O/+ci1EZF6wHHM/ZAOlOgLRtFK90/d826x5JbdGcgy8TJSggy1bvGr04tYEnKFTFJj2p4bo59SjYJJPil0EsNjykZ0wNuWKhpy46ezUyfkxCo90o+0LYVkpv6eSGlozDgMbGdIcWgWvan4n9dOsH/lp0LFCXLF5ov6iSQYkenfpCc0ZyjHllCmhb2VsCHVlKFNp2BD8BZfXiaNs7J3Ua7cVUrV6yyOPBzBMZyCB5dQhVuoQR0YDOAZXuHNkc6L8+58zFtzTjZzCH/gfP4AECCNqg==</latexit>




                        x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="8XwCUehtEqqwEzmOyZU0Y3ncpu8=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lKUY9FLx4r2lpoQ9lsN+3SzSbsToQS+hO8eFDEq7/Im//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8IJHCoOt+O4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjUNnGqGW+xWMa6E1DDpVC8hQIl7ySa0yiQ/DEY38z8xyeujYjVA04S7kd0qEQoGEUr3Tf7tX654lbdOcgq8XJSgRzNfvmrN4hZGnGFTFJjup6boJ9RjYJJPi31UsMTysZ0yLuWKhpx42fzU6fkzCoDEsbalkIyV39PZDQyZhIFtjOiODLL3kz8z+umGF75mVBJilyxxaIwlQRjMvubDITmDOXEEsq0sLcSNqKaMrTplGwI3vLLq6Rdq3oX1fpdvdK4zuMowgmcwjl4cAkNuIUmtIDBEJ7hFd4c6bw4787HorXg5DPH8AfO5w/TI42C</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="AEelTs2N6zyvsKz9WxepIGU0Fas=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0mkqMeiF48V7Qe0oWy2m3bpZhN2J0IJ/QlePCji1V/kzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmTjVjDdZLGPdCajhUijeRIGSdxLNaRRI3g7GtzO//cS1EbF6xEnC/YgOlQgFo2ilh0bf7ZcrbtWdg6wSLycVyNHol796g5ilEVfIJDWm67kJ+hnVKJjk01IvNTyhbEyHvGupohE3fjY/dUrOrDIgYaxtKSRz9fdERiNjJlFgOyOKI7PszcT/vG6K4bWfCZWkyBVbLApTSTAms7/JQGjOUE4soUwLeythI6opQ5tOyYbgLb+8SloXVe+yWruvVeo3eRxFOIFTOAcPrqAOd9CAJjAYwjO8wpsjnRfn3flYtBacfOYY/sD5/AHQG42A</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="jqylwcxBagMhesCQ8VFOWEkScmo=">AAAB6HicbVDLTgJBEOzFF+IL9ehlIjHxRHYNUY9ELx4hkUcCGzI79MLI7OxmZtZICF/gxYPGePWTvPk3DrAHBSvppFLVne6uIBFcG9f9dnJr6xubW/ntws7u3v5B8fCoqeNUMWywWMSqHVCNgktsGG4EthOFNAoEtoLR7cxvPaLSPJb3ZpygH9GB5CFn1Fip/tQrltyyOwdZJV5GSpCh1it+dfsxSyOUhgmqdcdzE+NPqDKcCZwWuqnGhLIRHWDHUkkj1P5kfuiUnFmlT8JY2ZKGzNXfExMaaT2OAtsZUTPUy95M/M/rpCa89idcJqlByRaLwlQQE5PZ16TPFTIjxpZQpri9lbAhVZQZm03BhuAtv7xKmhdl77JcqVdK1ZssjjycwCmcgwdXUIU7qEEDGCA8wyu8OQ/Oi/PufCxac042cwx/4Hz+AOknjQU=</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="ZUI3CDBDI/kfJt5861Aj36iJIyc=">AAAB/3icbVDLSgNBEJz1GeNrVfDiZTAI8RJ2Q1AvQtCLxyjmAcmyzE5mkyGzD2Z6JWHNwV/x4kERr/6GN//GSbIHTSxoKKq66e7yYsEVWNa3sbS8srq2ntvIb25t7+yae/sNFSWSsjqNRCRbHlFM8JDVgYNgrVgyEniCNb3B9cRvPjCpeBTewyhmTkB6Ifc5JaAl1zysuXYH2BBSzH08visO3fLppeWaBatkTYEXiZ2RAspQc82vTjeiScBCoIIo1batGJyUSOBUsHG+kygWEzogPdbWNCQBU046vX+MT7TSxX4kdYWAp+rviZQESo0CT3cGBPpq3puI/3ntBPwLJ+VhnAAL6WyRnwgMEZ6EgbtcMgpipAmhkutbMe0TSSjoyPI6BHv+5UXSKJfss1LltlKoXmVx5NAROkZFZKNzVEU3qIbqiKJH9Ixe0ZvxZLwY78bHrHXJyGYO0B8Ynz/T65Sx</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P1 if R(x2 ) = 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="67zubY/zRYXPtGD09zOTgpCYIlM=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE1GPRi8eK9gPaUDbbTbt0swm7E6WE/gQvHhTx6i/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmFldW19o7hZ2tre2d0r7x80TZxqxhsslrFuB9RwKRRvoEDJ24nmNAokbwWjm6nfeuTaiFg94DjhfkQHSoSCUbTS/VPP65UrbtWdgSwTLycVyFHvlb+6/ZilEVfIJDWm47kJ+hnVKJjkk1I3NTyhbEQHvGOpohE3fjY7dUJOrNInYaxtKSQz9fdERiNjxlFgOyOKQ7PoTcX/vE6K4ZWfCZWkyBWbLwpTSTAm079JX2jOUI4toUwLeythQ6opQ5tOyYbgLb68TJpnVe+ien53Xqld53EU4QiO4RQ8uIQa3EIdGsBgAM/wCm+OdF6cd+dj3lpw8plD+APn8wcNGI2o</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P1→ if R(x2 ) = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="3I+J7OZ/gKHZ5P6rm/Zw1Sq5rQA=">AAACAHicbVC7SgNBFJ31GeNr1cLCZjCIsQm7IaiNELSxjGIekCzL7GQ2GTL7YOauJCzb+Cs2ForY+hl2/o2TR6GJBy4czrmXe+/xYsEVWNa3sbS8srq2ntvIb25t7+yae/sNFSWSsjqNRCRbHlFM8JDVgYNgrVgyEniCNb3BzdhvPjKpeBQ+wChmTkB6Ifc5JaAl1zysufZpB9gQUsx9nN0Xh2757Mp2zYJVsibAi8SekQKaoeaaX51uRJOAhUAFUaptWzE4KZHAqWBZvpMoFhM6ID3W1jQkAVNOOnkgwyda6WI/krpCwBP190RKAqVGgac7AwJ9Ne+Nxf+8dgL+pZPyME6AhXS6yE8EhgiP08BdLhkFMdKEUMn1rZj2iSQUdGZ5HYI9//IiaZRL9nmpclcpVK9nceTQETpGRWSjC1RFt6iG6oiiDD2jV/RmPBkvxrvxMW1dMmYzB+gPjM8fOYyU4w==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="oRKDlvI4JokvRgRY1wM+GPC0dIA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokU9Vj04rGi/YA2lM120i7dbMLuRimhP8GLB0W8+ou8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLEsG1cd1vZ2V1bX1js7BV3N7Z3dsvHRw2dZwqhg0Wi1i1A6pRcIkNw43AdqKQRoHAVjC6mfqtR1Sax/LBjBP0IzqQPOSMGivdP/WqvVLZrbgzkGXi5aQMOeq90le3H7M0QmmYoFp3PDcxfkaV4UzgpNhNNSaUjegAO5ZKGqH2s9mpE3JqlT4JY2VLGjJTf09kNNJ6HAW2M6JmqBe9qfif10lNeOVnXCapQcnmi8JUEBOT6d+kzxUyI8aWUKa4vZWwIVWUGZtO0YbgLb68TJrnFe+iUr2rlmvXeRwFOIYTOAMPLqEGt1CHBjAYwDO8wpsjnBfn3fmYt644+cwR/IHz+QMRpI2r</latexit>




        Figure 7: The original program P (top) and triggered program P ′ (bottom). Here,
        P0 , P1 , P1′ , P2 are arbitrary programs as long as they are independent of the keys k0 , k1 .
        Our indistinguishability result shows that for the case where R(x2 ) tests if x2 (or some
        component thereof) is in a fixed sparse interval, then obfuscating these two programs
        yields computationally indistinguishable programs. Note that R is fixed and known,
        but due to the application of the permutable PRPs, the points that hit the trigger are
        computationally hidden once obfuscated.


ing fraction of the domain, but it is easy to devise points where the function is only 1-to-1 on those
points. Intuitively, this makes the parallel repetition Q of L be, accordingly, only an approximate
coset partition function (i.e., it is not the case that for every output point of Q, the preimage set is
a coset of the same dimensions). This breaks the straightforward iO proof: When we embed Q into
the programs, the programs will actually not have the same functionality due to the 1-to-1 points.
This prevents us from naively using iO, which requires functionally equivalent programs.
     To account for this, we add a trigger at all the sparse “bad” 1-to-1 points, and if this trigger
occurs, the program behaves differently. We could try to embed this trigger in the original con-
struction, but it is not clear if we would be able to carry out all of our re-randomization steps; even
if it could work, it would significantly complicate each of the steps. Instead, we add the trigger
only in the proof. Standard iO techniques allow for adding sparse triggers on random points that
are otherwise independent of the program, but not fixed triggers like we need.18 Here, we use our
permutable PRPs again. We show that, as long as the fixed trigger is sandwiched between two
permutable PRPs (which they are, for our case, because we are already composing another PRP
on the output) and meets some other technical conditions, we can un-detectably add the trigger.
See Lemma 43 in Section 5 for a precise statement, and Figure 7 for a visual representation of the
kinds of program changes which we can make.
     Our proof of the sparse trigger works as follows. To trigger at a single fixed point y, we
actually first add a trigger at a random point y ′ . Adding random triggers follows from standard iO
techniques. Then, we use the permutable PRP property to exchange y and y ′ , meaning now the
trigger occurs at y. This step requires a permutable PRP both before and after the trigger, since
after the trigger, we need to return y and y ′ to their original values. With a bit more work, we can
extend this to interval triggers, as long as the interval is at most a sub-exponential fraction of the
domain.
     Once we add the trigger, then embedding Q actually yields an equivalent program and allows
the proof to go through. By piecing all of the steps together, we obtain Theorems 3 and 4.
 18
      Observe that the “bad” points are fixed once the hash function is chosen.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     26
Remark 13. One may wonder if there are other instantiations of the needed 2-to-1 collision-
resistant hash function. Aside from needing the structure of being 2-to-1, another requirement that
limits instantiations is the apparent need for a trapdoor. This seems to prevent us from using hash
functions based on LPN [BLVW19, YZW+ 19] or super-singular isogeny graphs [CLG09]. One can
always make a some-what tautological assumption that obfuscating the function which discards the
last bit of a (permutable) PRP gives such a function (the trapdoor being the un-obfuscated key),
though we do not know how to prove this based on any standard assumption. Another possibility is
to look at constructions from group actions such as [AMR22], which can plausibly be post-quantum
instantiated using ordinary isogenies over elliptic curves. Their construction has a trapdoor and
can be split up into decomposable parts analogous to the LWE-based construction, and has most
of the domain being 2-to-1. However, a problem is that a non-negligible fraction of the domain is
1-to-1. This breaks the step where we embed a trigger into the obfuscated program, since the trigger
is no longer sparse. An interesting open question is whether their construction can be modified so
that an exponentially-small fraction of the domain is 1-to-1.


3    Cryptographic Tools
We present the general cryptographic tools and techniques which are used in this work. Some of
the results in this section are new and may be of independent interest.

Cryptographic Preliminaries. We use the following known primitives and notions. Both are
implicitly classical primitives with security holding against quantum algorithms.

Definition 14 (Puncturable PRFs). A puncturable pseudorandom function (P-PRF) is a pair of
efficient algorithms (F, Punc, Eval) with associated output-length function m (λ) such that:

    • F : {0, 1}λ × {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}m(λ) is a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm.

    • Punc (k, S) is a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm which takes as input a key k ∈ {0, 1}λ
      and a set of points S ⊆ {0, 1}∗ . It outputs a punctured key k S .

    • Eval k S , x is a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm.
                  

    • Correctness: For any λ ∈ N, S ⊆ {0, 1}∗ , k ∈ {0, 1}λ , x ∈
                                                                 / S, and k S in the support of
                                      S
      Punc (k, S), we have that Eval k , x = F (k, x).

    • Security: For any quantum polynomial-time algorithm A, there exists a negligible function
      ϵ such that the following experiment with A outputs 1 with probability at most 12 + ϵ (λ):

        – A(1λ ) produces a set S ⊆ {0, 1}∗ .
        – The experiment chooses a random k ← {0, 1}λ and computes k S ← Punc (k, S). For
          each x ∈ S, it also sets yx0 := F (k, x) and samples yx1 ← {0,1}m(λ) uniformly at random.
          Then it chooses a random bit b. It finally gives k S , { x, yxb }x∈S to A.
        – A outputs a guess b′ for b. The experiment outputs 1 if b′ = b.




                                                 27
Different
          security levels. For arbitrary functions f0 , f1 : N → N, we say that the P-PRF
        1
is f0 , f1 -secure if in the above the security part of the definition, we ask that the indistin-
guishability holds for every adversary of size ≤ f0 (λ) and we swap ϵ(λ) with f11(λ) . Concretely, a
sub-exponentially secure P-PRF scheme would be one such that there exists a positive real constant
                                  c
c > 0 such that the scheme is 2λ , 2λ1c -secure.

Definition 15 (Indistinguishability Obfuscation (iO)). An indistinguishability obfuscator (iO) for
Boolean circuits is a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm iO (·, ·, ·) with the following properties:

   • Correctness: For all λ, s ∈ N, Boolean circuits C of size at most s, and all inputs x to C,
                            h                                    i
                         Pr OC (x) = C(x) : OC ← iO 1λ , 1s , C = 1 .

   • Security: For every polynomial poly(·) there exists a negligible function ϵ such that the
     following holds. Let λ, s ∈ N, and let C0 , C1 two classical circuits of (1) the same functionality
     (i.e., for every possible input they have the same output) and (2) both have size ≤ s.
                                                                   
                                                            λ s
                                        OC0 : OC0 ← iO 1 , 1 , C0

                                                                              
                              ≈(poly(λ),ϵ(λ))       OC1 : OC1 ← iO 1λ , 1s , C1    .


Different
          security levels. For arbitrary functions f0 , f1 : N → N, we say that an iO scheme
        1
is f0 , f1 -secure if in the above the security part of the definition, we swap poly with a concrete
function f0 and the negligible function with the concrete f11 . Concretely, a sub-exponentially secure
iO scheme would be one such that there exists a positive real constant c > 0 such that the scheme
      c
is 2λ , 2λ1c -secure.

Definition 16 (Lossy Functions). A lossy function (LF) scheme consists of classical algorithms
(LF.KeyGen, LF.F) with the following syntax.

   • pk ← LF.KeyGen 1λ , b, 1ℓ : a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm that gets as input the
                              

     security parameter λ ∈ N, a bit b and a lossyness parameter ℓ ∈ N, λ ≥ ℓ. The algorithm
     outputs a public key.

   • y ← LF.F (pk, x): a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that gets as input the security
     parameter λ ∈ N, the public key pk and an input x ∈ {0, 1}λ and outputs a string y ∈ {0, 1}m
     for some m ≥ λ.

   The scheme satisfies the following guarantees.

   • Statistical Correctness for Injective Mode: There exists a negligible function negl(·)
     such that for every λ, ℓ ∈ N,
                                             h                        i
                              Pr               Img (LF.F (pk, ·)) = 2λ ≥ 1 − negl(λ) .
                     pk←LF.KeyGen(1λ ,0,1ℓ )


                                                        28
   • Statistical Correctness for Lossy Mode: There exists a negligible function negl(·) such
     that for every λ, ℓ ∈ N,
                                             h                        i
                              Pr               Img (LF.F (pk, ·)) ≤ 2ℓ ≥ 1 − negl(λ) .
                     pk←LF.KeyGen(1λ ,1,1ℓ )


   • Security: For every polynomial poly(·) there exists a negligible function ϵ such that the fol-
     lowing holds. Let λ, ℓ ∈ N, then (note that in the following computational indistinguishability,
     the security parameter is ℓ and not λ),
                                                                   
                                                                λ
                                    pk0 : pk0 ← LF.KeyGen 1 , 0, ℓ

                                                                               
                                                                             λ
                             ≈(poly(ℓ),ϵ(ℓ))       pk1 : pk1 ← LF.KeyGen 1 , 1, ℓ   .


Different
          security levels. For arbitrary functions f0 , f1 : N → N, we say that an LF scheme
        1
is f0 , f1 -secure if in the above the security part of the definition, we swap poly with a concrete
function f0 and the negligible function with the concrete f11 . Concretely, a sub-exponentially secure
LF scheme would be one such that there exists a positive real constant c > 0 such that the scheme
     c
is 2ℓ , 21ℓc -secure.

3.1    Two iO Techniques
Here, we recall two standard iO techniques that we will abstract as useful lemmas.

Sparse Random Triggers. Let P be some program and P ′ an arbitrary different program. Let
R be a function with range [N ] for some N that is exponential in the security parameter. Let Jy
(for ‘join’) be the following program:
                                            (
                                             P (x) if R(x) ̸= y
                                   Jy (x) =                      .
                                             P ′ (x) if R(x) = y

Lemma 17. Suppose one-way functions exist. For sufficiently large polynomial s and for y cho-
sen uniformly in {0, 1}λ , iO(1λ , 1s , P ) and iO(1λ , 1s , Jy ) are computationally indisitnguishable even
given the description of P . Moreover, y is computationally unpredictable given P, iO(1λ , 1s , Jy )

Proof. We first prove indistinguishability through a sequence of hybrid programs:

   • Hyb0 : The original obfuscation of P .

Here, the adversary is given iO(1λ , 1s , P ).

   • Hyb1 : Adding a uniformly random trigger that applies only if it is in the image of a sparse
     PRG.




                                                         29
We assume an injective length-doubling pseudorandom generator PRG : [N ] → [N ]2 . These
follow from injective one-way functions, which in turn follow from plain one-way functions and
iO [BPW16].(      Here, we choose a random w ← [N ]2 . The adversary is given iO(1λ , 1s , Jw′ ) where
             P (x) if PRG(R(x)) ̸= w
Jw′ (x) =                               . Note that since PRG is length-doubling, we have that with
             P ′ (x) if PRG(R(x)) = w
overwhelming probability over the choice of w, the second line of Jw′ will never be triggered. There-
fore, Jw′ is functionally equivalent to P . Therefore, by iO security, as long as s is larger than the
size of Jw′ (which is larger than the size of P ), hybrids 0 and 1 are indistinguishable.

   • Hyb2 : Changing the trigger to be a random element inside the image of the PRG.

Here, we switch to w = PRG(y) for a random y. Indistinguishability from Hybrid 1 follows imme-
diately from the pseudorandomness of PRG.

   • Hyb3 : Dropping the use of the PRG and checking its image directly.

Now the adversary is given iO(1λ , 1s , Jy ) for a random y. Observe that since w = PRG(y) and PRG
is injective, Jy and Jw′ have equivalent functionalities. Therefore, by iO security, hybrids 2 and 3
are indistinguishable. This completes the proof of indistinguishability.
    For the computational unpredictability of y, consider an adversary starting in hybrid 3 which
outputs y with probability ϵ. Since the indistinguishability of hybrids 2 and 3 did not rely on
the randomness of y, we can switch to hybrid 2 and still obtain an adversary that outputs y with
probability at least ϵ − negl. Now we observe that the view of the adversary only depends on
w = PRG(y), and in the end the adversary produces y with non-negligible probability. Thus, by a
straightforward reduction to the one-wayness of PRG, we conclude that ϵ − negl, and hence ϵ itself,
must be negligible.

Swapping distributions. We now move to the next standard technique. Let {D0x }x , {D1x }x be
two families of distributions over the same domain Y, which can also be thought of as deterministic
functions D0 (x; r), D1 (x; r) that take as input an index x and some random coins r. Let P be a
program that makes queries to an oracle O : X → Y for some set X . Then we have the following:

Lemma 18. Let (F, Punc) be a (fF , δF )-secure puncturable PRF and iO be a (fiO , δiO )-secure iO. Let
X a finite set and let D0 := {D0,x }x∈X ,D1 := {D1,x }x∈X two ensembles of distributions, such that
for every x ∈  X , D0,x , D1,x are (fD , δD )-indistinguishable. Let E0 (x) = D0 (x; F(k, x)) and E1 (x)
                                                                                                          =
D1 x; F k, x . Then for a sufficiently large polynomial s, iO 1 , 1 , P  λ  s   E0             λ  s
                                                                                     and iO 1 , 1 , P E1  are
(min (fF , fiO , fD ) , O (|X | · (δF + δiO + δD )))-computationally indistinguishable, where k, k ← {0, 1}λ
are uniformly random keys.

Proof. We assume X = [N ] by giving some ordering to the set. We prove security through a
sequence of hybrids.
    Hybi.0 :(The adversary gets iO(1λ , 1s , P Ei,0 ), where Ei,0 has k, k hard-coded and is defined as
             D0 (x; F(k, x)) if x ≥ i
Ei,0 (x) =                            .
             D1 (F(x; k, x)) if x < i




                                                     30
      Hybi.1 : The adversary gets iO(1λ , 1s , P Ei,1 ), where to generate Ei,1 , we compute k i ← Punc(k, i),
                                                                       
                                                                       D0 (x; F(k, x)) if x > i
                                                                       
  i
k ← Punc(k, i), sample y ← D0 (i; F(k, i)) and let Ei,1 (x) = y                            if x = i . Observe
                                                                       
                                                                         D1 (x; F(k, x)) if x < i
                                                                       
that by our choice of y, Ei,1 is identical to Ei,0 , and hence the programs P Ei,0 and P Ei,1 are
equivalent. Thus, by the security of iO, Hybrids i.0 and i.1 are indistinguishable except with
probability δiO .
      Hybi.2 : Here, we still obfuscate P Ei,1 , but instead switch to y ← D0 (i; r) for fresh random coins
r. Observe that the entire experiment except for y is simulatable using just the punctured key k i ,
and the only difference for y is that we replace F(k, i) with a random string. Thus Hybrids i.1 and
i.2 are indistinguishable except with probability δF .
      Hybi.3 : Now we change to y ← D1 (r). Hybrids i.2 and i.3 are indistinguishable except with
probability ϵ.
      Hybi.4 : Now we change to y ← D1 (F(k, i)). Hybrids i.3 and i.4 are indistinguishable except
with probability δF .
      Next, we observe that Ei,1 , when using y ← D1 (i; F(k, i)), is actually functionally equivalent
to Ei+1,0 . Thus, we see that the programs P Ei,1 and P Ei+1,0 are functionally equivalent. By iO
security, we therefore have that Hybrid i.4 and (i+1).0 are indistinguishable except with probability
δiO .
      The proof then follows by observing that Hybrid 1.0 corresponds to iO(1λ , 1s , P D0 (F(k,·)) ) and
Hybrid (N + 1).0 corresponds to iO(1λ , 1s , P D1 (F(k,·)) )


3.2    Information-Theoretical Hardness of Hidden Subspace Detection
One of our central objects in this paper are quantumly accessible classical functions that check
membership in some secret linear subspace S ⊆ Zk2 .

Information-Theoretical Subspace Hiding. We start with a quantum lower bound for detect-
ing a change between two oracles: One allows access to membership check for some given (known)
subspace S, and the other allows access to membership check in a random superspace T of S. This
is an information-theoretical version of the subspace-hiding obfuscation introduced in [Zha19].

Lemma 19. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let OS ′ the oracle that checks membership in S ′ (outputs 1 if and only if the input
is inside S ′ ).
    Then, for every oracle-aided quantum algorithm A making at most q quantum queries, we have
the following indistinguishability over oracle distributions.

                                 {OS } ≈                {O
                                                            T   : T ← Ss } .
                                          O √ q·s
                                               2k−r−s


Proof. We prove the claim by a hybrid argument, increasing the dimension of the random super-
space T by 1 in each step, until we made an increase of s dimensions. In the first step we consider



                                                        31
                k×(k−r)
a matrix B ∈ Z2        , the columns of which form a basis for S ⊥ . Note that the oracle OS can be
described as accepting x ∈ Zk2 iff xT · B = 0k−r .
     Next we sample a uniformly random a ∈ Zk−r2   and consider the oracle OS1 that accepts x ∈ Zk2
iff either xT · B = 0k−r or xT · B = a. Two things can be verified: (1) Due to the randomness of
a, by standard quantum lower bounds, {OS } ≈  q  {OS1 : a ← Z2k−r }, and (2) The set S1
                                                           O √
                                                                 2k−r
is a random superspace of S with dimension r + 1.
    This proves our claim for s = 1. For a general s we can make an s-step hybrid argument, where
at each step we have Si which is a random (r + i)-dimensional superspace of S. Overall we get that
for a q-query algorithm A the distinguishing advantage between {OS } and {OS1 : T ← Ss } is
                             X                              q·s
                                                                 
                                           q
                                   O √              ≤O √              ,
                             i∈[s]
                                       2k−r−(i−1)           2k−r−s

as needed.

    We will also use the following corollary of Lemma 19. The corollary says that it is still hard to
distinguish membership check between S and T , also when we duplicate the oracle access ℓ times.
The corollary follows by a direct simulation reduction.

Corollary 20. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let OS ′ the oracle that checks membership in S ′ (outputs 1 if and only if the input
is inside S ′ ).
    Then, for every oracle-aided quantum algorithm A making at most q quantum queries, we have
the following indistinguishability over oracle distributions.

                      {OS1 , · · · , OSℓ } ≈               {O 1 , · · · , O ℓ
                                                               T             T    : T ← Ss } .
                                          O √ q·ℓ·s
                                                  2k−r−s


    An additional corollary which follows by combining the above, with a standard hybrid argument
on the first statement 19 is as follows. Note that in the below statement, the first oracle distribution
is where each of the ℓ oralces samples an i.i.d. superspace Ti , and the second oracle distribution is
where we sample T once, and then duplicate its oracle.

Corollary 21. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let OS ′ the oracle that checks membership in S ′ (outputs 1 if and only if the input
is inside S ′ ).
    Then, for every oracle-aided quantum algorithm A making at most q quantum queries, we have
the following indistinguishability over oracle distributions.

                                  {OT1 , · · · , OTℓ : ∀i ∈ [ℓ] : Ti ← Ss }

                               ≈                 {O 1 , · · · , O ℓ   : T ← Ss } .
                                                     T             T
                                 O √ q·ℓ·s
                                      2k−r−s


   The below is an information theoretical version of our Lemma 26 and corresponding proof.


                                                           32
Lemma 22. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let OS ′ the oracle that checks membership in S ′ (outputs 1 if and only if the input
is inside S ′ ).
    Assume there is an oracle-aided quantum algorithm A making at most q quantum queries and
outputting a vector u ∈ Zk2 at the end of its execution, such that
                                   h                           i
                                Pr AOT ∈ T ⊥ \ {0} : T ← Ss ≥ ϵ .

                                                               t· 1                    2
Also, denote t := k − r − s, ℓ := k(t+1)
                                     ϵ   and assume (1) 2s−t
                                                          ϵ
                                                              ≤ o(1) and (2) q·ℓ√ ·s ≤ o(1). Then, it
                                                                                 2t
is necessarily the case that
                           h                         i             ϵ
                        Pr AOT ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥ : T ← Ss ≥                         .
                                                             16 · k · (t + 1)
Proof. We start with defining the following reduction B, that will use the circuit A as part of its
machinery.

The reduction B. The input to B contains ℓ := k·(t+1)           samples of oracles O(1) , · · · , O(ℓ) , for
                                                                                                      
                                                            ϵ
                                                   (i)
t := k − r − s. Given the ℓ oracles, execute AO for every i ∈ [ℓ] and obtain ℓ vectors {u1 , · · · , uℓ }.
Then, take only the vectors {v1 , · · · , vm } that are inside S ⊥ , and then compute the dimension of
their span, D := dim (Span (v1 , · · · , vm )). Note that the number of queries that B makes is q · ℓ.

Executing B on the oracle distribution D1 . Consider the following distribution D1 : Sample
ℓ i.i.d superspaces T1 , · · · , Tℓ , and for each of them, give access to its membership check oracle:
OT1 , · · · , OTℓ . Let us see what happens when we execute B on a sample from the distribution D1 .
     Consider the ℓ vectors {u1 , · · · , uℓ } obtained by executing A on each of the input oracles. Recall
that ℓ := 1ϵ · k · (t + 1) and consider a partition of the vectors into t + 1 consecutive sequences (or
buckets), accordingly, each of length 1ϵ · k. In order to show that the probability for the reduction
B to have D ≥ t + 1 is high, we show that with high probability, in each bucket j ∈ [t + 1] there
is a vector ui that’s inside the corresponding dual Ti⊥ , but such that also the intersection between
Ti⊥ and each of the previous j − 1 dual subspaces that were hit by A, is only the zero vector 0k .
Note that the last condition indeed implies D ≥ t + 1.
     For every i ∈ [ℓ] we define the probability pi . We start with defining it for the indices in
the first bucket, and then proceed to define it recursively for the rest of the buckets. For indices
i ∈ [ 1ϵ · k] in the first bucket, pi is the probability that given access to OTi , the output of A is
           ⊥
ui ∈ Ti \ {0} , and in such case we define the i-th execution as successful. We denote by T(1) the
first subspace in the first bucket where a successful execution happens (and define T(1) := ⊥ if no
success happened). For any i inside any bucket j ∈          ([t + 1] \ {1}) that is not the first bucket, we
                                                    ⊥
define pi as the probability that (1) ui ∈ Ti \ {0} and also (2) the intersection between Ti and       ⊥

each of the dual subspaces of the previous winning subspaces T(1) , · · · , T(j−1) , is only {0k }. That
is, pi is the probability that the output of the adversary hits the dual subspace, and also the dual
does not have a non-trivial intersection with any of the previous successful duals. Similarly to the
first bucket, we denote by T(j) the first subspace in bucket j with a successful execution.
     We prove that with high probability, all t + 1 buckets have at least one successful execution.
To see this, we define the following probability p′ which we show lower bounds pi , and is defined

                                                     33
                                                                                                       ⊥
as follows. First, let T 1 , · · · , T t any t subspaces, each of dimension r + s, thus the duals T 1 , · · · ,
  ⊥
T t are such that each has dimension t. p′ T ,··· ,T is the probability that (1) when sampling T ⊥ ,
                                                  ( 1    t)
                       ⊥                                          ⊥       ⊥
the intersection of T with each of the t dual subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t was only the zero vector, and
also (2) the output of the adversary A was inside T ⊥ . p′ is defined is the minimal probability taken
over all possible choices of t subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t . After one verifies that indeed for every i we
have p′ ≤ pi , it is sufficient to lower bound p′ .

Lower bound for the probability p′ . The probability p′ is for an event that’s defined as the
logical AND of two events, and as usual, equals the product between the probability p′0 of the first
event (the trivial intersection between the subspaces), times the conditional probability p′1 of the
second event (that A hits a non-zero vector in the dual T ⊥ ), conditioned on the first event.
     First we lower bound the probability p′0 by upper bounding the complement probability, that
is, we show that the probability for a non-trivial intersection is small. Consider the random process
of choosing a basis for a subspace T and note that it is equivalent to choosing a basis for the dual
T ⊥ . The process of choosing a basis for the dual has t steps, and in each step we choose a random
                                                                                        ⊥
vector in S ⊥ that’s outside the span we aggregated so far. Given a dual subspace T of dimension
t, what is the probability for the two subspaces to have only a trivial intersection? It is exactly
the sum over z ∈ [t] (which we think of as the steps for sampling T ⊥ ) of the following event: In
the t-step process of choosing a basis for T ⊥ , index z was the first to cause the subspaces to have
a non-zero intersection. Recall that for each z ∈ [t], the probability that z was such first index to
cause an intersection, equals the probability that the z-th sampled basis vector for T ⊥ is a vector
                                   ⊥
that’s inside the unified span of T and the aggregated span of T ⊥ so far, after z − 1 samples. This
amounts to the probability

                         X |T ⊥ | · 2z−1       X 2t · 2z−1                   X
                                           =                  = 2−s ·                      2z
                                 |S ⊥ |                2k−r
                         z∈[t]                 z∈[t]                    z∈{0,1,··· ,t−1}


                                          = 2−s · 2t − 1 < 2t−s .
                                                        

Since the above is an upper bound on the probability for a non-trivial intersection between T ⊥ and
one more single subspace, by union bound, the probability for T ⊥ to have a non-trivial intersection
                                            ⊥          ⊥
with at least one of the t subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t is upper bounded by t · 2t−s . This means that
p′0 ≥ 1 − t · 2t−s .
    The lower bound for the conditional probability p′1 is now quite easy: Note that since Pr [A|B] ≥
Pr [A] − Pr [¬B], letting A the event that A outputs a vector in the dual T ⊥ and B the event that
T ⊥ has only a trivial intersection with all other t subspaces, we get p′1 ≥ ϵ − t · 2t−s . By our
                     t· 1ϵ
                           ≤ o(1), we have p′1 ≥ 2ϵ . Overall we got p′ := p′0 · p′1 ≥ 1 − t · 2t−s · 2ϵ > 4ϵ .
                                                                                                   
assumption that 2s−t
    Finally, to see why we get an overall high probability for D ≥ t+1 on a sample from D1 , observe
the following. In each bucket there are kϵ attempts, each succeeds with probability at least 4ϵ and
thus the overall success probability in a bucket is ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k) . Accordingly, the probability to
succeed at least once in each of the t+1 buckets (and thus to satisfy D ≥ t+1) is ≥ 1−(t+1)·e−Ω(k) ,
by considering the complement probability and applying union bound. Overall the probability for
D ≥ t + 1 is thus ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k) .



                                                        34
Executing B on the distribution D2 . Consider a different distribution D2 : Sample T once,
                                      (1)          (ℓ)
then allow an ℓ-oracle access to it, OT , · · · , OT . Note that B is a q · ℓ-query algorithm and thus
by Corollary 21 there is the following indistinguishability of oracles with respect to B:
                                        D1 ≈        2
                                                             D
                                                                  2   .
                                              O √ q·ℓ ·s
                                                   2k−r−s


Since given a sample oracle from D1 , the algorithm B outputs D ≥ t+1 with probability ≥ 1−e−Ω(k) ,
by the above indistinguishability,
                                      whenever
                                               weexecute B on a sample from D2 , then with probability
                                  2 ·s                 2 ·s
at least ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k)         q·ℓ
                      − O √ k−r−s ≥ 1 − O √q·ℓ        k−r−s
                                                              we have D ≥ t + 1. By our assumption in
                             2
                                                    2
                         2 ·s
the Lemma that O √q·ℓ   k−r−s
                                 ≤ 12 , with probability at least 21 we have D ≥ t + 1 given a sample
                        2
from D2 . By an averaging argument, it follows that with probability at least 12 · 21 = 14 over sampling
the superspace T , the probability pT for the event where D ≥ t + 1, is at least 12 · 12 = 41 . Let us
call this set of superspaces T , ”the good set” of samples, which by definition has fraction at least
1                                               ⊥ is t, (2) The dimension D aggregates vectors inside
4 . Recall two facts: (1) the dimension of T
  ⊥
S . The two facts together imply that in the event D ≥ t + 1, it is necessarily the case that
                                                                                          ⊥     ⊥
                                                                                                   there
exists an execution index i ∈ [ℓ] in the reduction B where A outputs a vector in S \ T , given
membership check in T .
    For every T inside the  good set we thus know that with probability 41 , one of the output vectors
of A will be in S ⊥ \ T ⊥ . Since these are ℓ i.i.d. executions of A, by union bound, for every T inside
                         

the good set, when we prepare an oracle access to T and execute A, we will get AOT ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥
                   1
with probability 4·ℓ . We deduce that for a uniformly random T which we then prepare oracle access
to, the probability for AOT ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥ is at least the probability for this event and also that T is
inside the good set, which in turn is at least
                                 1   1     1               ϵ
                                   ·   =        :=                  ,
                                 4 4·ℓ   16 · ℓ    16 · k · (t + 1)
which finishes our proof.

3.3   Cryptographic Hardness of Hidden Subspace Detection
In this subsection we prove the cryptographic analogues of the information theoretical lower bounds
from the previous section.
    We start with stating the subspace-hiding obfuscation property of indistinguishability obfusca-
tors from [Zha19].
Lemma 23. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let CS ′ some canonical classical circuit that checks membership in S ′ , say be
Gaussian elimination. Let iO an indistinguishability obfuscation scheme that is (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure,
and assume that (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure injective one-way functions exist.
    Then, for every security parameter λ such that λ ≤ k − r − s and sufficiently large p := p(λ)
polynomial in the security parameter, we have the following indistinguishability,
                                                   
                         {OS : OS ← iO 1λ , 1p , CS } ≈(f (λ)−poly(λ), s·ϵ(λ))
                                                                 
                              {OT : T ← Ss , OT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT } .

                                                   35
   The following generalization of Lemma 23 is derived by a random self-reducibility argument
and is formally proved by using an additional layer of indistinguishability obfuscation.
Lemma 24. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let
Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any
subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let CS ′ some canonical classical circuit that checks membership in S ′ , say be
Gaussian elimination. Let iO an indistinguishability obfuscation scheme that is (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure,
and assume that (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure injective one-way functions exist.
    Then, for every security parameter λ such that λ ≤ k − r − s and sufficiently large p := p(λ)
polynomial in the security parameter, we have the following indistinguishability,
                                                                
             {O1S , · · · , OℓS : ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OiS ← iO 1λ , 1p , CS } ≈(f (λ)−ℓ·poly(λ), (2·ℓ+s)·ϵ(λ))
                                                                                  
                      {O1T , · · · , OℓT : T ← Ss , ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OiT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT } .

Proof. We first observe that as long as the circuit size parameter 1p is sufficiently large, and specifi-
cally, larger than the size of an obfuscated version of the plain circuit C, then it is indistinguishable
to tell whether said circuit is obfuscated under one or two layers of obfuscation. More precisely,
due to the perfect correctness of obfuscation, the circuit C and an obfuscated OC ← iO 1λ , 1p , C
have the same functionality (for every sample out of the distribution of obfuscated versions           of
C), and thus, as long as p ≥ |OC |, then the distributions D0 := {OC ← iO 1λ , 1p , C } and
                                                                                                  

D1 := {O2C ← iO 1λ , 1p , D0 } are (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-indistinguishable.
    An implication of the above is that for a sufficiently large parameter p, the distribution
                                                                                
                             {O1S , · · · , OℓS : ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OiS ← iO 1λ , 1p , CS }

is (f (λ), ℓ · ϵ(λ))-indistinguishable from a distribution where CS is swapped with an obfuscation of
it (let us denote this modified distribution with DS ), and the distribution
                                                                                      
                          {O1T , · · · , OℓT : T ← SS , ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OiT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT }

is (f (λ), ℓ · ϵ(λ))-indistinguishable from a distribution where CT is swapped with an obfuscation of
it (let us denote this modified distribution with DT ). To complete our proof we will show that DS
and DT are appropriately indistinguishable, and will get our proof by transitivity of computational
distance.
     The indistinguishability between DS and DT follows almost readily from the the subspace
hiding Lemma 23: One can consider the reduction B that gets a sample O which is either from
D0 := {OS ← iO 1λ , 1p , CS } or from D1 := {OT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT } for an appropriately random
superspace T of S. B then generates ℓ i.i.d obfuscations {O(1) , · · · , O(ℓ) } of the (already obfuscated)
circuit O and executes A on the ℓ obfuscations. One can see that when the input sample O for B
came from D0 then the output sample of the reduction comes from the distribution DS , and when
the input sample O for B came from D1 then the output sample of the reduction comes from the
distribution DT . Since the reduction executes in complexity ℓ · poly(λ), this means that

                                     DS ≈(f (λ)−ℓ·poly(λ), s·ϵ(λ)) DT .

To conclude, by transitivity of computational indistinguishability, we get that the two distributions
in our Lemma’s statement are (f (λ) − ℓ · poly(λ), (2 · ℓ + s) · ϵ(λ))-indistinguishable, as needed.

                                                     36
   A corollary which follows by combining the above Lemma 24, with a standard hybrid argument
on the first lemma 23 is as follows.

Corollary 25. Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r.
Let Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For
any subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let CS ′ some canonical classical circuit that checks membership in S ′ , say be
Gaussian elimination. Let iO an indistinguishability obfuscation scheme that is (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure,
and assume that (f (λ), ϵ(λ))-secure injective one-way functions exist.
    Then, for every security parameter λ such that λ ≤ k − r − s and sufficiently large p := p(λ)
polynomial in the security parameter, we have the following indistinguishability,
                                                                                  
                      {OT1 , · · · , OTℓ : Ti ← Ss ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OTi ← iO 1λ , 1p , CTi }
                                                                                                     
        ≈(f (λ)−ℓ·poly(λ), (2·ℓ·s)·ϵ(λ)) {O1T , · · · , OℓT : T ← Ss , ∀i ∈ [ℓ], OiT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT } .

Improved Results on Hardness of Concentration in Dual of Obfuscated Subspace. As
part of this work we strengthen the main technical lemma (Lemma 5.1) from [Shm22b]. Roughly
speaking, in [Shm22b] it is shown that an adversary A that gets an obfuscation OT for a random
superspace T of S, and manages to output a (non-zero) vector in the dual T ⊥ \ {0} with probability
ϵ, has to sometimes output vectors in S ⊥ \ T ⊥ , i.e. with probability at least Ω ϵ2 /poly(k). Below
we strengthen the probability to Ω (ϵ) /poly(k).

Lemma 26 (IO Dual Subspace Anti-Concentration). Let k, r, s ∈ N such that r + s ≤ k and let
S ⊆ Zk2 a subspace of dimension r. Let Ss the uniform distribution over subspaces T of dimension
r + s such that S ⊆ T ⊆ Zk2 . For any subspace S ′ ⊆ Zk2 let CS ′ some canonical classical circuit that
checks membership
                   in S ′ ,say be Gaussian elimination.
                                                          Let iO an indistinguishability obfuscation
                        1                                      1
scheme that is f (λ), f (λ) -secure, and assume that f (λ), f (λ)  -secure injective one-way functions
exist.
    Let λ ∈ N the security parameter such that λ ≤ k − r − s and let p := p(λ) a sufficiently large
polynomial in the security parameter. Denote by  Oλ,p,s the distribution over obfuscated circuits that
samples T ← Ss and then OT ← iO 1λ , 1p , CT .
    Assume there is a quantum algorithm A of complexity TA such that,
                               h                                   i
                                            ⊥
                            Pr A(OT ) ∈ T \ {0} : OT ← Oλ,p,s ≥ ϵ .

                                                                      t· 1                   ℓ·(k3 +poly(λ)+TA )
   Also, denote t := k − r − s, ℓ := k(t+1)
                                         ϵ  and assume (1) 2s−t
                                                             ϵ
                                                                ≤ o(1) and (2)                       f (λ)       ≤
o(1).
   Then, it is necessarily the case that
                      h                                  i            ϵ
                   Pr A (OT ) ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥ : OT ← Oλ,p,s ≥                        .
                                                                16 · k · (t + 1)

Proof. We start with defining the following reduction B, that will use the circuit A as part of its
machinery.




                                                       37
The reduction B. The input to B contains ℓ := k·(t+1)              samples of obfuscations O(1) , · · · , O(ℓ) ,
                                                                                                              
                                                              ϵ
for t := k − r − s. Given the ℓ obfuscations, execute A O(i) for every i ∈ [ℓ] and obtain ℓ vectors
                                                                     

{u1 , · · · , uℓ }. Then, take only the vectors {v1 , · · · , vm } that are inside S ⊥ , and then compute
the dimension of their span, D := dim (Span (v1 , · · · , vm )). Note that the running time of B is
ℓ · TA + ℓ · k 3 , where ℓ · TA is for producing the ℓ outputs of A and ℓ · k 3 is for (naively) executing
Gaussian elimination ℓ times, to repeatedly check whether the new vector vi adds a dimension i.e.,
whether it is outside of the span Span (v1 , · · · , vi−1 ) of the previous vectors.

Executing B on the distribution D1 . Consider the following distribution D1 : Sample ℓ i.i.d
superspaces T1 , · · · , Tℓ , and for each of them, send an obfuscation of it: OT1 , · · · , OTℓ . Let us see
what happens when we execute B on a sample from the distribution D1 .
    Consider the ℓ vectors {u1 , · · · , uℓ } obtained by executing A on each of the input obfuscations.
Recall that ℓ := 1ϵ · k · (t + 1) and consider a partition of the vectors into t + 1 consecutive sequences
(or buckets), accordingly, each of length 1ϵ ·k. In order to show that the probability for the reduction
B to have D ≥ t + 1 is high, we show that with high probability, in each bucket j ∈ [t + 1] there
is a vector ui that’s inside the corresponding dual Ti⊥ , but such that also the intersection between
Ti⊥ and each of the previous j − 1 dual subspaces that were hit by A, is only the zero vector 0k .
Note that the last condition indeed implies D ≥ t + 1.
    For every i ∈ [ℓ] we define the probability pi . We start with defining it for the indices in the first
bucket, and then proceed to define it recursively for the rest of the buckets. For indices i∈ [ 1ϵ · k]
in the first bucket, pi is the probability that given OTi , the output of A is ui ∈ Ti⊥ \ {0} , and in
such case we define the i-th execution as successful. We denote by T(1) the first subspace in the first
bucket where a successful execution happens (and define T(1) := ⊥ if no success happened). For
any i inside any bucket j ∈ ([t + 1] \ {1}) that is not the first bucket, we define pi as the probability
that (1) ui ∈ Ti⊥ \ {0} and also (2) the intersection between Ti⊥ and each of the dual subspaces
of the previous winning subspaces T(1) , · · · , T(j−1) , is only {0k }. That is, pi is the probability that
the output of the adversary hits the dual subspace, and also the dual does not have a non-trivial
intersection with any of the previous successful duals. Similarly to the first bucket, we denote by
T(j) the first subspace in bucket j with a successful execution.
    We prove that with high probability, all t + 1 buckets have at least one successful execution.
To see this, we define the following probability p′ which we show lower bounds pi , and is defined
                                                                                                      ⊥
as follows. First, let T 1 , · · · , T t any t subspaces, each of dimension r + s, thus the duals T 1 , · · · ,
  ⊥
T t are such that each has dimension t. p′ T ,··· ,T is the probability that (1) when sampling T ⊥ ,
                                                  ( 1    t)
                         ⊥                                        ⊥       ⊥
the intersection of T with each of the t dual subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t was only the zero vector, and
also (2) the output of the adversary A was inside T ⊥ . p′ is defined is the minimal probability taken
over all possible choices of t subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t . After one verifies that indeed for every i we
have p′ ≤ pi , it is sufficient to lower bound p′ .

Lower bound for the probability p′ . The probability p′ is for an event that’s defined as the
logical AND of two events, and as usual, equals the product between the probability p′0 of the first
event (the trivial intersection between the subspaces), times the conditional probability p′1 of the
second event (that A hits a non-zero vector in the dual T ⊥ ), conditioned on the first event.
    First we lower bound the probability p′0 by upper bounding the complement probability, that
is, we show that the probability for a non-trivial intersection is small. Consider the random process


                                                      38
of choosing a basis for a subspace T and note that it is equivalent to choosing a basis for the dual
T ⊥ . The process of choosing a basis for the dual has t steps, and in each step we choose a random
                                                                                       ⊥
vector in S ⊥ that’s outside the span we aggregated so far. Given a dual subspace T of dimension
t, what is the probability for the two subspaces to have only a trivial intersection? It is exactly
the sum over z ∈ [t] (which we think of as the steps for sampling T ⊥ ) of the following event: In
the t-step process of choosing a basis for T ⊥ , index z was the first to cause the subspaces to have
a non-zero intersection. Recall that for each z ∈ [t], the probability that z was such first index to
cause an intersection, equals the probability that the z-th sampled basis vector for T ⊥ is a vector
                                   ⊥
that’s inside the unified span of T and the aggregated span of T ⊥ so far, after z − 1 samples. This
amounts to the probability

                         X |T ⊥ | · 2z−1          X 2t · 2z−1                   X
                                              =                  = 2−s ·                      2z
                                 |S ⊥ |                   2k−r
                         z∈[t]                    z∈[t]                    z∈{0,1,··· ,t−1}


                                            = 2−s · 2t − 1 < 2t−s .
                                                          

Since the above is an upper bound on the probability for a non-trivial intersection between T ⊥ and
one more single subspace, by union bound, the probability for T ⊥ to have a non-trivial intersection
                                            ⊥          ⊥
with at least one of the t subspaces T 1 , · · · , T t is upper bounded by t · 2t−s . This means that
p′0 ≥ 1 − t · 2t−s .
    The lower bound for the conditional probability p′1 is now quite easy: Note that since Pr [A|B] ≥
Pr [A] − Pr [¬B], letting A the event that A outputs a vector in the dual T ⊥ and B the event that
T ⊥ has only a trivial intersection with all other t subspaces, we get p′1 ≥ ϵ − t · 2t−s . By our
                     t· 1ϵ
                           ≤ o(1), we have p′1 ≥ 2ϵ . Overall we got p′ := p′0 · p′1 ≥ 1 − t · 2t−s · 2ϵ > 4ϵ .
                                                                                                   
assumption that 2s−t
    Finally, to see why we get an overall high probability for D ≥ t+1 on a sample from D1 , observe
the following. In each bucket there are kϵ attempts, each succeeds with probability at least 4ϵ and
thus the overall success probability in a bucket is ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k) . Accordingly, the probability to
succeed at least once in each of the t+1 buckets (and thus to satisfy D ≥ t+1) is ≥ 1−(t+1)·e−Ω(k) ,
by considering the complement probability and applying union bound. Overall the probability for
D ≥ t + 1 is thus ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k) .

Executing B on the distribution D2 . Consider a different distribution D2 : Sample T once,
                                                                    (1)          (ℓ)
then sample ℓ i.i.d. obfuscations of the same circuit CT , denoted OT , · · · , OT . By Corollary 25,

                                          D1 ≈f (λ)−ℓ·poly(λ), 2·s·ℓ  D2 .
                                                                 f (λ)


Recall that the running time of B is ℓ · TA + ℓ · k 3 and by our Lemma’s assumptions, the complexity
of B is ≤ f (λ) − ℓ · poly(λ). Since given a sample oracle from D1 , the algorithm B outputs D ≥ t + 1
with probability ≥ 1−e−Ω(k) , by the above indistinguishability, whenever we execute B on a sample
from D2 , then with probability at least ≥ 1 − e−Ω(k) − f2·s·ℓ          4·s·ℓ
                                                             (λ) ≥ 1 − f (λ) we have D ≥ t + 1. By our
                                          
assumption in the Lemma that O fs·ℓ            1                              1
                                        (λ) ≤ 2 , with probability at least 2 we have D ≥ t + 1 given a
sample from D2 . By an averaging argument, it follows that with probability at least 21 · 12 = 14 over
sampling the superspace T , the probability pT for the event where D ≥ t + 1, is at least 21 · 12 = 41 .
Let us call this set of superspaces T , ”the good set” of samples, which by definition has fraction


                                                           39
at least 14 . Recall two facts: (1) the dimension of T ⊥ is t, (2) The dimension D aggregates vectors
inside S ⊥ . The two facts together imply that in the event D ≥ t + 1, it is necessarily the case that
there exists an execution index i ∈ [ℓ] in the reduction B where A outputs a vector in S ⊥ \ T ⊥ .
                                                                                                     

    For every T inside thegood set we thus know that with probability 41 , one of the output vectors
of A will be in S ⊥ \ T ⊥ . Since these are ℓ i.i.d. executions of A, by union bound, for every T
inside the good set, when we prepare     an obfuscation OT of T and execute A, we will get a vector
      ⊥
in S \ T     ⊥                     1
                with probability 4·ℓ . We deduce that for a uniformly random   T , the probability for
A (OT ) ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥ is at least the probability for A (OT ) ∈ S ⊥ \ T ⊥ intersecting with the event
                                                                          

that T is inside the good set, which in turn is at least
                                 1   1     1               ϵ
                                   ·   =        :=                  ,
                                 4 4·ℓ   16 · ℓ    16 · k · (t + 1)

which finishes our proof.



4    One-Shot Signatures Relative to a Classical Oracle
In this section we present our construction of non-collapsing collision-resistant hash functions (which
imply OSS) with respect to a classical oracle and proof of security. We first describe our scheme in
27.

Construction 27. Let λ ∈ N the statistical security parameter. Define s := 16·λ and let n, r, k ∈ N
such that r := s · (λ − 1), n := r + 32 · s, k := n.
    Let Π : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n be a random permutation and let F : {0, 1}r → {0, 1}k·(n−r+1) a
random function. Let H(x) denote the first r output bits of Π(x), and J(x) denote the remaining
                                                                                            k×(n−r)
n − r bits, which are interpreted as a vector in Z2n−r . For each y ∈ {0, 1}r , let A(y) ∈ Z2       be
a random matrix with full column-rank, and b(y) ∈ Zk2 be uniformly random, both are generated by
the output randomness of F (y).
    Then, we let P : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}r × Zk2 , P −1 : {0, 1}r × Zk2 → {0, 1}n , D : {0, 1}r × Zk2 →
                                                                                                

{0, 1} be the following oracles:

                     P(x) = ( y , A(y) · J(x) + b(y) ) where y = H(x)
                             (
                              Π−1 (y, z) ∃ z ∈ Z2n−r such that A(y) · z + b(y) = u
               P −1 (y, u) =
                              ⊥            else
                             (
                              1 if vT · A(y) = 0n−r
                 D (y, v) =
                              0 otherwise

We will denote the above distribution of oracles by On,r,k . We define our hash function as H, which
can be easily computed by querying P, considering only the first r bits and discarding the second
output.
                               k×(n−r)
    Note that since A(y) ∈ Z2           is full column-rank, z ∈ Zn−r
                                                                  2   is unique if it exists. Thus,
P (P(x)) = x and P (y, u) = ⊥ if (y, u) is not in the range of P. Thus, P −1 is the uniquely-
 −1                     −1

defined inverse of the injective function P.


                                                  40
Efficient Implementation. Given the description of Construction 27, it is straightforward to
implement it, using pseudorandom functions and pseudorandom permutations, the existence of
both of which follow from the existence of one-way functions [Zha21, Zha16]. Specifically, we swap
the truly random permutation Π with a pseudorandom permutation PRP, and swap the truly
random function F with a pseudorandom function PRF. One can easily verify that under the
security of PRP, PRF for quantum queries, the classical efficient construction is computationally
indistinguishable from the oracle distribution On,r,k described in Construction 27.

Non-collapsing.       We prove that our hash function is non-collapsing.

Proposition 28 (Non-collapsing of H). The hash function H defined in Construction 27 is (always)
non-collapsing, as per Definition 10.

Proof. We explain the non-collapsing property of our scheme by describing the algorithms (SH , DH ).
The first algorithm SH simply computes a uniform superposition |+⟩⊗n over n qubits (where n is
             Pfor H), and outputs it as |ψ⟩. The second algorithm DH , given an unknown n-qubit
the input size
state |ϕ⟩ := x∈Zn αx · |x⟩, acts as follows.
                  2

  1. Execute P in superposition to obtain
                                        X
                                                 αx · |x⟩|yx ⟩|ux ⟩ .
                                          x∈Zn
                                             2



  2. Execute P −1 in superposition to un-compute the input register holding x, to obtain
                                          X
                                             αx · |yx ⟩|ux ⟩ .
                                              x∈Zn
                                                 2



  3. Execute a k-qubit Quantum Fourier Transform over Z2 on the rightmost k-qubit register
     (holding the vectors ux ). This boils down to the execution of parallel Hadamard gates H ⊗k ,
     to obtain                        X                          
                                           αx · |yx ⟩ H ⊗k · |ux ⟩ .
                                       x∈Zn
                                          2


  4. Execute D (·, ·) in superposition on the state and measure the output bit register. The output
     of DH is identical to the output of D(·, ·).

    To finish the explanation for non-collapsing we will show that the pair (SH , DH ) gives a distin-
guishing advantage of ≥ 1−2−Ω(λ) , between the cases of full measurement and partial measurement.

   • In the first case, given |ψ⟩ := |+⟩⊗n , it is measured in the computational basis and the
     algorithm DH gets as input some classical x ∈ Zn2 . At the end of Step 2 of DH the state
     is |yx ⟩|ux ⟩. The execution of QFT in the next step will generate a uniform superposition
     over all elements in Zk2 , at the end of Step 3. The set of elements that are accepted by
     D(yx , ·) (for every classical yx ) is a coset of dimension r and thus in particular a set of size
     2r . The probability that the k-qubit uniform superposition will be accepted by D(yx , ·) is
     2r
     2k
         = 2−(k−r) ≤ 2−Ω(λ) . It follows that the probability that DH outputs 1 in the first case is
     ≤ 2−Ω(λ) .

                                                     41
      • In the second case, given |ψ⟩ := |+⟩⊗n we compute P in superposition and√measure a value
        y on the side. The algorithm DH thus gets as input the state x∈Zn :H(x)=y 2−(n−r) · |x⟩ for
                                                                      P
                                                                            2
        some y. One can easily verify that at the end of Step 2, the state that DH holds is
                                                                               
                                      X       p
                         |y⟩ ⊗                 |ColSpan (A(y)) |−1 · |u + b(y)⟩ .
                                      u∈ColSpan(A(y))

              Next, by standard known properties of QFT applied to a quantum state that is in a uniform
              superposition over a coset, it follows that at the end of Step 3, the state that DH holds is
                                                                                              
                                                   q
                                                      |ColSpan (A(y))⊥ |−1 · (−1)⟨b(y),v⟩ · |v⟩ .
                                        X
                          |y⟩ ⊗ 
                                  v∈ColSpan(A(y))⊥

              It follows that the probability that DH outputs 1 in the second case is 1.



Security. Most of this section will be devoted to proving security. There are two main steps
to our security proof. The first part of the proof will show Theorem 32 (Proved in Sections 4.1
and 4.2), which   says that an adversary A that manages to find a collision in H given access to
      −1
            
  P, P , D sampled from On,r,k , can be transformed to anadversary B that finds a collision in H
in the dual-free setting, i.e., having only access to P, P −1 and no access to the dual verification
oracle D. The second part of security will show Theorems 34 and 35 (both proved in Section 4.3),
which together, show how a collision finder for the dual-free case can be turned into a collision
finder for plain 2-to-1 random functions. We obtain the following main security theorem.

Theorem 29 (Collision Resistance of H). Let On,r,k the distribution over oracles defined in Con-
struction 27. Let A an oracle aided q-query (computationally unbounded) quantum algorithm.
Then,

                                        P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k
                                                                        3 3 3
                                                                          λ ·k ·q
                                                                  
        Pr x0 ̸= x1 ∧ H(x0 ) = H(x1 ) :                  P,P −1 ,D   ≤O                 .
                                           (x0 , x1 ) ← A                     2λ

Proof. Assume towards contradiction that there is an oracle aided quantum algorithm A, making
q queries, that given a sampleoracle P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k outputs a collision (x0 , x1 ) in H with
                                           3    3   3
probability ϵ, such that ϵ ≥ ω λ ·k2λ ·q .
    Note that by our parameter
                                      choices in Construction 27 and by our assumption towards contra-
                λ3 ·k3 ·q 3
diction ϵ ≥ ω       2λ
                              , one can verify through calculation that (1) for s − (n − r − s) := s′ we have
k3 ·q 3 · 12                          k9 ·q 7 · 1
                                      ϵ4
   2 s′  ≤ o(1) and also (2) √ n−r−s
          ϵ
                                         ≤ o(1). This means that the conditions of Theorem 32 are
                                  2
satisfied, and it follows there is a q-query algorithm B that gets access only to P, P −1 , sampled
                                                                                          

from P, P −1 , D ← Or+s, r, k−(n−r−s) that finds collisions in H with probability ≥ 26ϵ·k2 .
     By Theorem 34, it follows there is a q-query algorithm B ′ that given oracle access to any
Q : {0, 1}r+s → {0, 1}r an (r + s, r, s)-coset partition function (as per Definition 33), finds a
collision in Q with probability 26ϵ·k2 .


                                                        42
    The above is in particular true for any distribution Q ← Q over (r + s, r, s)-coset partition
functions. Since our parameter choices in Construction 27 imply s | (r + s), we can consider the
distribution Q over (r + s, r, s)-coset partition functions generated by Theorem 35. It follows by
Theorem 35 that                                     3 3
                                          ϵ          s ·q
                                        6   2
                                              ≤O               ,
                                       2 ·k            (r+s)
                                                     2 s
which in turn implies                          2 3 3
                                                k ·λ ·q
                                       ϵ≤O                   ,
                                                    2λ
                          3 3 3
in contradiction to ϵ ≥ ω λ ·k2λ ·q .

4.1       Bloating the Dual
      ′
Let On,r,k,s denote the following distribution over P, P −1 , D′ . The primal oracles P, P −1 are defined
identically to On,r,k . However, now, for s ≤ n − r, we let A(y)(0) ∈ Zs2 denote the first s columns
of A(y) ∈ Zn−r
             2   and A(y)(1) ∈ Zn−r−s
                                  2      denote the remaining n − r − s columns. Then, define D′ as
the oracle:                               (
                                            1 if vT · A(y)(1) = 0n−r−s
                              D′ (y, v) =
                                            0 otherwise

Observe that if vT · A(y) = 0n−r , then vT · A(y)(1) = 0n−r−s . Thus D′ accepts all points that are
accepted by D, but also accepts additional points as well, namely those for which vT · A(y)(0) ̸= 0s
but vT · A(y)(1) = 0n−r−s . We call this action, of moving from D to a more relaxed oracle D′ ,
”bloating the dual”.

Lemma 30. Suppose there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm A such that

                                            P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k
                                                                   
                                                                  −1
             Pr (y0 = y1 ) ∧ (x0 ̸= x1 ) :    (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P ,D  ≥ ϵ .
                                                (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )

                                                                                 k3 ·q 3 · 12
Also, let s ≤ n − r such that (1) for s − (n − r − s) := s′ we have                  2s′
                                                                                           ϵ
                                                                                                ≤ o(1) and (2)
k9 ·q 7 · 14
√        ϵ
               ≤ o(1). Then,
 2n−r−s

                                                              P, P −1 , D′ ← On,r,k,s
                                                                                ′
                                                                                       
                    (y0 = y1 := y) ∧                                                −1 ′     ϵ
           Pr                                       :            (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P ,D  ≥ 6 2 .
                               / ColSpan A(y)(1)
                                                 
                    (u0 − u1 ) ∈                                                           2 ·k
                                                                  (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )

                            / ColSpan A(y)(1) means in particular that u0 , u1 , and hence x0 , x1 ,
                                                
    Note that (u0 − u1 ) ∈
are distinct (this follows because for every y ∈ Zr2 , the mapping between preimages x and vectors
ux ∈ (ColSpan (A(y)) + b(y)) is bijective). Thus, the second expression means that A is finding
collisions, but these collisions satisfy an even stronger requirement.

Proof. Assume  there is an oracle-aided q-query quantum algorithm A that given oracle access to
 P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k outputs a pair (x0 , x1 ) of n-bit strings. Denote by ϵ the probability that
            


                                                         43
x0 , x1 are both distinct and collide in H(·) (i.e., their y-values are identical). We next define a
sequence of hybrid experiments, outputs and success probabilities for them, and explain why the
success probability in each consecutive pair is statistically close.

    • Hyb0 : The original execution of A.

The process Hyb0 is the above execution of A on input oracles P, P −1 , D . We define the output
                                                                            

of the process as (x0 , x1 ) and the process execution is considered as successful if x0 , x1 are both
distinct and collide in H(·). By definition, the success probability of Hyb0 is ϵ.

    • Hyb1 : Simulating the oracles using only a bounded number of cosets (A(y), b(y)), by using
      small-range distribution.

Consider the function F which samples for every y ∈ Zr2 the i.i.d. coset description (A(y), b(y)).
These cosets are then used in all three oracles P, P −1 and D. The difference between the current
hybrid and the    2previous    hybrid is that we swap F with F ′ which is sampled as follows: We set
                     7 ·k 2
               3
R := 300 · q · ϵ           and for every y ∈ Zr2 we  sample a uniformly random iy ← [R], then sample for
                                     k×(n−r)
                                             , bi ∈ Zk2 as usual. For y ∈ Zr2 we define F ′ (y) := Aiy , biy .
                                                                                                            
every i ∈ [R] a coset Ai ∈ Z2
    By Theorem A.6 from [AGQY22], it follows that for every quantum algorithm making at most
q queries and tries to distinguish between F and F ′ , the distinguishing advantage is bounded by
300·q 3
  R     < 8ϵ , which means in particular that the outputs of this hybrid and the previous one has
statistical distance bounded by 8ϵ . It follows in particular that the success probability of the current
hybrid is := ϵ1 ≥ ϵ − 8ϵ = 7·ϵ   8 .

    • Hyb2 : Relaxing dual verification oracle to accept a larger subspace, by information-theoretical
      subspace hiding.

The difference between the current hybrid and the previous hybrid is that in the current hybrid
we make the dual verification oracle D more relaxed,   and accept more strings. Specifically, recall
that as part of samplingour oracles P, P −1 , D  we sample the function F ′ and in particular we
                                                
                                             k×(n−r)
sample R i.i.d. cosets: Ai ∈ Z2           , bi ∈ Zk2       . Recall that in the previous hybrid, given
                                                     i∈[R]
                                                                       ⊥
input y ∈ Zr2 , v ∈ Zk2 , the oracle D accepts iff v ∈ ColSpan Aiy . The change we make to the
                       

current hybrid is the following and applies only to the dual verification oracle D: For each i ∈ [R],
we sample Ti⊥ which is a uniformly random, (k −n+r +s)-dimensional superspace of ColSpan (Ai )⊥
(which has dimension k − n + r). When we execute D we check membership in Ti⊥ rather than in
the more restrictive, (k − n + r)-dimensional ColSpan (A)⊥ .
    By Lemma 19, due to k − (k − (n − r)) − s = n − r − s, for every        i ∈ [R], changing D to
                              ⊥                          ⊥            q·s
check for membership in Ti instead of ColSpan (Ai ) , is O         √         -indistinguishable, for any
                                                                     2n−r−s                          
                                                                                                  q·s
q-query algorithm. Since we use the above indistinguishability R times, we get R · O √ n−r−s            -
                                                                                                2
indistinguishability. It follows    the success probability of the current hybrid is := ϵ2 ≥ ϵ1 − R ·
                                 that
                            k2 ·q 4 ·s· 1ϵ
                        
    √ q·s      ≥ 7·ϵ                          , which in turn (by our Lemma’s assumptions) is at least 3·ϵ
O                 8 −O                                                                                  4 .
                            √
     2n−r−s                   2n−r−s

    • Hyb3 : Asking for the sum of collisions to be outside of Ti , by using dual-subspace anti-
      concentration.

                                                           44
In the current hybrid we change the success predicate of the experiment. Recall that as part of
sampling the oracles in the previous hybrid, we sample R i.i.d. cosets (Ai , bi )i∈[R] which are used
in all three oracles P, P −1 , D . We then
                                
                                                         (k − n + r + s)-dimensional superspaces
                                          sample R i.i.d.
 Ti⊥ i∈[R] of the R corresponding duals ColSpan (Ai )⊥
     
                                                             . The change we make to the success
                                                                    i∈[R]
predicate is the following: At the end of the execution we get a pair (x0 , x1 ) from A. We define the
process as successful if y0 = y1 := y and also (u0 − u1 ) ∈ / Tiy , rather than only asking that x0 ̸= x1 .
    Let ϵ3 be the success probability of the current hybrid and note that A finds collisions with
probability ϵ2 in the previous hybrid Hyb2 (and since this hybrid is no different, the same goes for
                                                                (i)
the current hybrid). For every value i ∈ [R] denote by ϵ2 the probability to find a collision in
index i, or formally, that y0 = y1 := y, x0 ̸= x1 and also iy = i. Observe that in such an event
                                                P       (i)
we also have (u0 − u1 ) ∈ Siy . We deduce i∈[R] ϵ2 = ϵ2 . Let L be a subset of indices i ∈ [R]
            (i)    ϵ2                         (i)                                                      (i)
                      and note that i∈L ϵ2 ≥ ϵ22 . For every value i ∈ [R] also denote by ϵ3 the
                                      P
such that ϵ2 ≥ 2·R
                                                                                  P      (i)
probability that y0 = y1 := y, (u0 − u1 ) ∈ / Tiy and also iy = i. We deduce i∈[R] ϵ3 = ϵ3 .
    We would now like to use Lemma 22, so we make sure that we satisfy its requirements. Let any
                                     (i)    ϵ2                                                 3 · 27 ·k2 and
                                                 and also recall that ϵ2 ≥ 3·ϵ
                                                                                                
i ∈ L, we know that by definition ϵ2 ≥ 2·R                                   4 , R := 300  · q       ϵ
thus                                                           2 
                                (i)      ϵ2     3·ϵ 1               ϵ
                               ϵ2 ≥         ≥        · ≥Ω 3 2              .
                                      2·R         8   R          q ·k
                                                             2
                                                                       4 3
Let s′ := s − (n − r − s) and for any i ∈ L let ℓi := k(i) ≤ O k ϵ·q     2    . Note that by our Lemma
                                                               ϵ2
                                                        1
                                               (n−r−s)· (i)
                                                          ϵ2                       q·ℓ2 ·s
30 statement’s assumptions, we have (1)            2s′
                                                               ≤ o(1) and (2) √ n−r−s
                                                                                 i
                                                                                      ≤ o(1). Since this
                                                                                   2
                                                                             (i)
                                                                       (i)   ϵ
satisfies Lemma 22, it follows that for every i ∈ L we have ϵ3 ≥ 16·k  2
                                                                         2 . It follows that


                           X (i) X (i) X ϵ(i)                   ϵ2
                                                                   
                                                     2           2          3·ϵ
                     ϵ3 =      ϵ3 ≥      ϵ3 ≥             2
                                                            ≥        2
                                                                       ≥ 7 2 .
                                                   16 · k     16 · k      2 ·k
                            i∈[R]       i∈L        i∈L

                                                                                                       (1)
   • Hyb4 : For every i ∈ [R], de-randomizing Ti and defining it as the column span of Ai ∈
      k×(n−(r+s))
     Z2           , the last n − (r + s) columns of the matrix Ai , by using the random permutation
     Π and random function F .

This hybrid is the same as the previous, with one change: For every i ∈ [R], after sampling the coset
(Ai , bi ), we will not continue to randomly sample Ti⊥ (which, previously, was a uniformly random
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                        (1)
((k −(n−r))+s)-dimensional superspace of ColSpan (Ai )⊥ ) and simply define Ti := ColSpan Ai
             (1)    k×(n−r−s)                                                                       k×(n−r)
such that Ai ∈ Z2           is defined to be the last n − r − s columns of the matrix Ai ∈ Z2                 .
We will define an intermediate hybrid Hyb3.1 and then explain why Hyb3 ≡ Hyb3.1 ≡ Hyb4 .

   • Using the random permutation Π. For every i ∈ [R] consider the superspace Ti⊥ , which
     has (k − n + r) + s dimensions. Accordingly, the dual Ti has k − ((k − n + r) + s) dimensions,
     which equals n − r − s. For i ∈ [R], j ∈ [n − r − s], denote by ti,j ∈ Zk2 the j-th basis vector
                                                                 (n−r)×(n−r)
     for the subspace Ti . Now, for every i ∈ [R] let Mi ∈ Z2                 a full-rank matrix that
     represents the coordinates vectors of the basis vectors of Ti . Formally, Mi is such that the
     j-th column of Mi , denoted Mi,j ∈ Z2n−r , satisfies Ai · Mi,j = ti,j ∈ Zk2 .

                                                     45
      In Hyb3.1 , we define the permutation Γ over {0, 1}n defined as follows: For an input s ∈ {0, 1}n ,
      it takes the left r bits denoted y ∈ Zr2 , computes iy ∈ [R], then applies matrix multiplication
      by Miy to the remaining right n − r bits. Observe that since Mi is full rank for all i, then
      Γ is indeed a permutation. The change we make from Hyb3 to Hyb3.1 is that in the current
      hybrid we apply Γ to the output of Π inside the execution of a query to P, and apply Γ−1 to
      the input of Π−1 inside the execution of a query to P −1 . Note that for a truly random n-bit
      permutation Π, concatenating any fixed permutation Γ like this is statistically equivalent to
      just computing Π and Π−1 , thus the outputs (and in particular success probabilities) between
      Hyb3 and Hyb3.1 are identical.

   • Using the random function F . In Hyb4 , we stop applying the permutation Γ to the
     output of Π (and likewise stop applying Γ−1 to the input of Π−1 ), and also stop sampling
                                              (1) ⊥
                                                
     Ti⊥ and simply define it as ColSpan Ai         . Note that for every choice of Π, the following
     two distributions over oracles are statistically equivalent. (1) for every i ∈ [R] sample Ai
     uniformly at random, then sample the superspace Ti⊥ uniformly at random, and then set Γ
     accordingly and concatenate it with Π as we did in the above Hyb3.1      . (2)  Just sample Ai
                                                                                 (1)
     uniformly at random for every i ∈ [R], and then set Ti := ColSpan Ai . It follows that
     due to the fact that F is a random function (or more precisely, because for every i ∈ [R] we
     choose a uniformly random coset (Ai , bi )) then the outputs of Hyb3.1 and Hyb4 are statistically
     equivalent and in particular the success probability in both cases is the same.

It follows that the success probability ϵ4 in Hyb4 equals the success probability ϵ3 in Hyb3 .

   • Hyb5 : Moving back to using an exponential number of cosets, by using small-range distribu-
     tion again.

We rewind the process of sampling an R-small range distribution version of F , and use F as a
standard random function. By the same argument for the indistinguishability between Hyb0 and
                                                                                     3
Hyb1 , the output of the current process has statistical distance bounded by 300·q R   = 27ϵ·k2 , which
means in particular that the outputs of this hybrid and the previous hybrid has statistical distance
bounded by 27ϵ·k2 . It follows that the success probability of the current hybrid is

                                           ϵ            3·ϵ              ϵ              ϵ
                         := ϵ5 ≥ ϵ4 −              ≥              −              =              .
                                        27 · k 2       27 · k 2       27 · k 2       26 · k 2
   To conclude, note thatthe process Hyb5 is exactly the process where A executes on input oracle
sampled from P, P −1 , D′ ← On,r,k,s
                                ′    . This finishes our proof.

4.2   Simulating the Dual
In this section we prove the following lemma.

Lemma 31. Suppose there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm A such that

                                                  P, P −1 , D′ ← On,r,k,s
                                                                    ′
                                                                           
             y0 = y1 := y,                                              −1 ′
       Pr                                  :        (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P ,D  ≥ ϵ .
                        / ColSpan A(y)(1)
             (u0 − u1 ) ∈
                                                      (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )

                                                        46
Then, there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm B such that
                                                          
                                                    −1                           
                                                P, P , D     ← Or+s, r, k−(n−r−s)
                                                                     −1
             Pr (y 0 = y 1 ) ∧ (x0 ̸= x1 ) :                                     ≥ϵ .
                                                                                 
                                                    (x , x ) ← B P,P
                                                     0   1
                                                   (y b , ub ) ← P (xb )

Proof. We first describe the actions of the algorithm B (which will use the code of A as part of
its machinery) and then argue why it breaks collision
                                                   resistance
                                                            with the appropriate probability.
                           −1                          −1
Given oracle access to P, P which comes from P, P , D ← Or+s, r, k−(n−r−s) , the algorithm
B does the following:

   • Sample a random function FC that outputs some sufficient (polynomial) amount of random
     bits on an r-bit input, and sample a random n-bit permutation Γ. Define the following oracles.

   • y ∈ Zr2 , u ∈ Zk2 ← P (x ∈ Zn2 ):
                         

        – x ∈ Zr+s       e ∈ Zn−r−s
                                    
                   2 , x       2       ← Γ(x).
                                       
                             k−(n−r−s)
        – y ∈ Zr2 , u ∈ Z2                 ← P(x).
                                            
        – C(y) ∈ Zk×k  2   , d(y) ∈ Z n−r−s
                                      2        ← FC (y).
                                   
                               u
        – u ← C(y) ·                   .
                           x
                           e + d(y)

   • ( x ∈ Zn2 ) ← P −1 y ∈ Zr2 , u ∈ Zk2 :
                                             

                                            
        – C(y) ∈ Zk×k  2   , d(y) ∈ Zn−r−s
                                      2        ← FC (y).
                                   k−(n−r−s) 
              u                          0
        –          ← C(y)−1 · u −                    .
              x
              e                             d(y)
                              −1
        – x ∈ Zr+s
                       
                   2     ← P (y, u).
       – x ← Γ−1 (x, x e).

   • D′ y ∈ Zr2 , v ∈ Zk2 ∈ {0, 1}:
                          

                                         
       – C(y) ∈ Zk×k 2   ,  d(y) ∈ Zn−r−s
                                    2       ← FC (y).

         – A(1) (y) := last n − r − s columns of C(y).
         – Output 1 iff vT · A(1) (y) = 0n−r−s .
                                                                            −1   ′
   The remainder of the reduction is simple: B executes (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P ,D and then (xb , x   eb ) ←
Γ(xb ) and outputs (x0 , x1 ). Assume that the output of A satisfies y0 = y1 := y and also (u0 − u1 ) ∈
                                                                                                      /
               (1)
                                        (1)    k×(n−r−s)
ColSpan A(y) , and recall that A(y) ∈ Z2                  are the last n − r − s columns of the matrix
          k×(n−r)
A(y) ∈ Z2           , which is generated by the reduction. We explain why it is necessarily the case
that x0 ̸= x1 .



                                                   47
                                                                                                
                                                                                  A(y)
   First note that due to how we defined the reduction, A(y) := C(y) ·                            , where
                                                                               In−r−s
        (k−(n−r−s))×s                                            −1             (n−r−s)×(n−r−s)
A(y) ∈ Z2             is the matrix arising from the oracles P, P and In−r−s ∈ Z2
is the identity matrix of dimension n − r − s. Also note that  because C(y), A(y) are full rank then
A(y) is full rank. Now, since (u0 − u1 ) ∈ / ColSpan A(y)(1) and since A(y)(1) are the last n − r − s
columns of A(y), it follows that if we consider the coordinates vector x ∈ Z2n−r of (u0 − u1 ) with
respect to A(y), the first s elements are not 0s . By linearity of matrix multiplication it follows that
if we look at each of the two coordinates vectors x0 , x1 (each has n − r bits) for u0 , u1 , respectively,
somewhere in the first s bits, they differ. Now, recall how we obtain the first s bits of xb – this
                                                                                            −1
is exactly by applying Π (the permutation on {0, 1}r+s arising from the oracles P, P ) to xb and
taking the last s bits of the output. Since these bits differ in the output of the permutation, then
the preimages have to differ, i.e., x0 ̸= x1 .
    Define ϵB as the probability that the output of A indeed satisfies y0 = y1 := y and also
(u0 − u1 ) ∈/ ColSpan A(1) (y) , and it remains to give a lower bound for the probability ϵB . We
do this by a sequence of hybrids, eventually showing that the oracle which B simulates to A is
                                                     ′
indistinguishable from an oracle sampled from On,r,k,s     . More precisely, each hybrid describes a
process, it has an output, and a success predicate on the output.
                                                       −1
   • Hyb0 : The above distribution P, P −1 , D′ ← B P,P , simulated to the algorithm A.
                                               


The first hybrid is where B executes A by the simulation described above. The output of the
process is the output (x0 , x1 ) of A. The process execution is considered as successful if y0 = y1 := y
and (u0 − u1 ) ∈/ ColSpan A(y)(1) .
                                                                                                  −1
   • Hyb1 : Not applying the inner permutation Π (which comes from the oracles P, P                    ), by
     using the random permutation Γ.

Let Π the permutation on {0, 1}r+s that’s inside P. In the previous hybrid we apply the n-bit
permutation Γ to the input x ∈ Zn2 and then proceed to apply the inner permutation Π to the first
(i.e. leftmost) r + s output bits of the first permutation Γ (we also apply Γ−1 to the output of the
inverse of the inner permutation, in the inverse oracle P −1 ). The change we make to the current
hybrid is that we simply apply only Γ and discard the inner permutation and its inverse. Since
a random permutation concatenated with any permutation distributes identically to a random
permutation, the current hybrid is statistically equivalent to the previous and in particular the
output of this process distributes identically to the output of the previous, and so does the success
probability.

   • Hyb2 : For every y ∈ Zr2 , taking A(y) to be the direct output of F , by using the randomness
     of the random function.

In order to describe the change between the current and previous hybrid we first recall the structure
of the oracles from the previous
                                 hybrid: Observe
                                                   that in the previous hybrid, for every y ∈ Zr2
                                A(y)
we defined A(y) := C(y) ·                       , where C(y) ∈ Zk×k
                                                                  2   is the output of FC (y) and
                                      In−r−s
          (k−(n−r−s))×s
A(y) ∈ Z2                 is the output of the inner random function F (which comes from the inside
                      −1
of the oracles P, P          ). In the current hybrid we are going to ignore the inner random function

                                                    48
F , its generated matrix A(y) and also the pair C(y), d(y), sample a fresh random function FA at
                                                                                         k×(n−r)
the beginning of the process, and on query y generate (A(y), b(y)) ← FA (y), for A(y) ∈ Z2       ,
b(y) ∈ Zk2 .
     To see why the two distributions are indistinguishable, note that the following two ways to
sample A(y), are statistically equivalent: (1) For every y ∈ Zr2 , the matrix A(y)
                                                                                is generated by
                                                                                              
                                               k×k                               A(y)
sampling a random full-rank matrix C(y) ∈ Z2 and letting A(y) be C(y) ·                          .
                                                                                       In−r−s
                                                                    k×(n−r)
(2) For every y ∈ Zr2 just sample a full-rank matrix A(y) ∈ Z2       . Since we are using random
functions and in the previous hybrid we are sampling A(y) according to (1) and in the current
hybrid we are sampling A(y) according to (2), the outputs of the two hybrids distribute identically.

Finalizing the reduction. Observe that the distribution generated in the above Hyb2 is exactly
                           ′
an oracle sampled from On,r,k,s . From the lemma’s assumptions, the success probability for Hyb2
is thus ϵ. Since we also showed that the hybrids have identical success probabilities, it follows that
ϵB = ϵ, which finishes our proof.

   We conclude this section by stating the following Theorem, which is obtained as a direct corollary
from Lemmas 30 and 31.

Theorem 32. Suppose there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm A such that

                                              P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k
                                                                     
            Pr x0 ̸= x1 ∧ H(x0 ) = H(x1 ) :                        −1    ≥ϵ .
                                                  (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P ,D

                                                                               k3 ·q 3 · 12
Also, let s ≤ n − r such that (1) for s − (n − r − s) := s′ we have                2s′
                                                                                         ϵ
                                                                                              ≤ o(1) and (2)
k9 ·q 7 · 14
√        ϵ
               ≤ o(1). Then, there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm B such that
 2n−r−s

                                                  P, P −1 , D ← Or+s, r, k−(n−r−s)
                                                                                   
                                                                                          ϵ
                Pr x0 ̸= x1 ∧ H(x0 ) = H(x1 ) :                               P,P −1   ≥ 6 2 .
                                                               (x0 , x1 ) ← B           2 ·k

4.3       Hardness of the Dual-free Case from 2-to-1 Collision-Resistance
We start with defining coset partition functions, which are an object we will use in order to show
that collision finding in the dual-free case is at least as hard as finding collisions in 2-to-1 random
functions.

Definition 33 (Coset Partition Functions). For n, ℓ ∈ N such that ℓ ≤ n we say a function
Q : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m is a (n, m, ℓ)-coset partition function if, for each y in the image of Q, the
pre-image set Q−1 (y) has size 2ℓ and is a coset of a linear space of dimension ℓ. We allow different
pre-image sets to be cosets of different linear spaces.

From Dual-free to Coset Partition Functions. We next show that finding collisions in the
dual-free case is no easier than finding collisions in worst-case coset partition functions.




                                                      49
Theorem 34. Let k ≥ n ≥ r. Suppose there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm A such
that
                                              P, P −1 , D ← On,r,k
                                                                     
                                                                    −1
               Pr (y0 = y1 ) ∧ (x0 ̸= x1 ) :    (x0 , x1 ) ← AP,P  ≥ ϵ .
                                                  (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )
Then there is an oracle aided q-query quantum algorithm B that given any (n, r, n−r)-coset partition
function Q, satisfies

                     Pr (Q(w0 ) = Q(w1 )) ∧ (w0 ̸= w1 ) : (w0 , w1 ) ← B Q ≥ ϵ .
                                                                         

Proof. B works as follows. Given oracle access to some (n, r, n − r)-coset partition function Q, it
chooses a random permutation Γ : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n , and for each y, it chooses a random full-
column-rank matrix Cy ∈ Zk×n  2    (which is possible since we assume k ≥ n) and random vector
dy ∈ Zk2 . It then runs A, simulating the oracles P, P −1 as follows:

The oracle P(x):
   • y ← Q(Γ(x)).

   • Output (y, Cy · Γ(x) + dy ).
We now claim that P is correctly distributed. To do so, we will first define an augmented function
Q′ : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n . On input z, the n-bit output of Q′ (z) consists of two parts. The first r bits
are set to y = Q(z). The preimage set Q−1 (y) is then a coset, which can be described as the set
{Ay · r + by } as r ranges over Zn−r 2   (where Ay , by are both unknown to the reduction algorithm
                     n×(n−r)
B). Here, Ay ∈ Z2            has full column-rank and b ∈ Zn2 . Define the function J(z) that outputs
the unique vector in Zn−r     such that z = Ay · J (z) + by . Then define Q′ (z) = Q (z) , J (z) . Note
                                                                                                
                         2
that Q′ is not efficiently computable without knowing Ay ,by , but here we will not need it to be.
Intuitively, the reason that we do not need J(·) to be efficiently computable is because whenever we
simulate the oracles P, P −1 , D , the value J(·) is never output, it is only the connector between
preimages x and vectors ux in the coset ColSpan (A(y)) + b(y). Notice that Q′ is a function from
Zn2 to Zn2 , and it is moreover a permutation with (Q′ )−1 (y, r) = Ay · r + by .
    Observe that B’s simulation of P is implicitly setting the following parameters

           Π(x) = Q′ (Γ(x)) ,            H(x) = Q(Γ(x)) ,                   J(x) = J(Γ(x)) ,
             Ay = Cy · Ay ,                 by = Cy · by + dy .

Thus, we must check that these quantities have the correct distribution. Indeed, for every Q, which
is in turn defines Ay , by y∈{0,1}r , the function Q′ (x) is a permutation: Given y ∈ {0, 1}r , r ∈ Zn−r
                                                                                                     2   ,
one can recover z ∈ {0, 1}n as z = Ay · r + by . Hence Π is a permutation since it is the composition
of two permutations. Moreover, since one of the two permutations (Γ) is uniformly random, so is
Π.
                                                                      n×(n−r)
    Now we look at the distribution of Ay , by . Recall that Ay ∈ Z2           is a full-column-rank
                     k×n                                                                    k×(n−r)
matrix, and Cy ∈ Z2       is a random full-column-rank matrix. Thus, Ay = Cy · Ay ∈ Z2              is
also a random full-column-rank matrix.
    Then we have that by = Cy · by + dy where dy is random, meaning by is random. Thus, P has
an identical distribution to that arising from On,r,k .

                                                   50
The oracle P −1 (y, u):
        (
          Γ−1 (w) ∃w ∈ Zn2 such that Cy · w + dy = u
  • x←
          ⊥             if no such w exists
            (
              x     if x ̸= ⊥ and Q (Γ(x)) = y
  • Output
              ⊥ if x = ⊥ or Q(Γ(x)) ̸= y

    Observe that P −1 (P(x)) = x, and for all pairs y ∈ {0, 1}r , u ∈ Zk2 that are not in the image
                                                                         

of P, we have P −1 (y, u) = ⊥. Thus, P −1 is the uniquely-defined inverse of P. Thus, since the
distribution of P simulated
                          by B exactly matches the distribution arising from On,r,k , the same is
true of the pairs P, P −1 .

Finishing touches. Thus we saw that for every input (n, r, n − r)-coset partition function Q,
the algorithm B perfectly simulates the view of A, which consists of the pair of oracles P, P −1 that
distribute according to On,r,k . Hence, with probability ϵ, the algorithm A will produce a collision
x0 ̸= x1 such that H(x0 ) = H(x1 ). It remains to explain what B does in order to obtain a collision
in Q, for every collision in the simulated H. Given (x0 , x1 ), the reduction B will then compute and
output (w0 = Γ(x0 ), w1 = Γ(x1 )). Observe that if x0 ̸= x1 , then w0 ̸= w1 since Γ is a permutation.
Moreover, if H(x0 ) = H(x1 ), then

                   Q(w0 ) = Q (Γ(x0 )) = H(x0 ) = H(x1 ) = Q (Γ(x1 )) = Q(w1 ) .

Hence, with probability at least ϵ, B will output a collision for Q. Notice that for each query that
A makes to P(·), the reduction B needs to make exactly one query to Q and the same goes for the
inverse P −1 (·). Thus B makes exactly q queries to Q. This completes the proof.

Collision-resistant Coset Partition Functions. We now show how to construct a collision
resistant coset partition functions relative to an oracle. Our main theorem for this subsection is
the following.
Theorem 35. For any n, ℓ ∈ N such that ℓ | n, there exists a distribution over (n, n − ℓ, ℓ)-coset
partition functions H, suchthat any algorithm making q queries to H can only find collisions in H
                             3 3
with probability at most O ℓ ·qn .
                             2ℓ

Proof. We will start with a much weaker goal of constructing distributions of collision-resistant
2-to-1 functions, that are shrinking by a single bit.
Lemma 36. A random 2-to-1 function H : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n−1 is collision resistant given quantum
queries to H. In particular, any quantum algorithm making q queries has a O(q 3 /2n ) probability
of producing a collision.

Proof. The original work to lower-bound the quantum query complexity of collision resistance
was [AS04]. That work proves that random 2-to-1 functions are collision-resistant, provided that
the range is at least as large as the domain. They need the large range since their proof works
via showing that the function is indistinguishable from a 1-to-1 function. But of course, a 1-to-1
function must have a range at least as large as domain. This is not quite good enough for us, as
we insist on our H “losing” one bit.

                                                 51
    Instead, we first point out that H can be extended into a permutation as follows. First let
J : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} be an arbitrary function which for any collision (x0 , x1 ) of H, assigned random
but distinct values to J(x0 ) and J(x1 ). Since H is 2-to-1, such a J only needs a 1-bit range. Then
Π(x) = (H(x), J(x)) is a permutation, and if H is a random 2-to-1 function, then Π is a random
permutation.
    We will argue that H is collision-resistant even given queries to Π (but not Π−1 ). Note that
this is potentially stronger than giving access to H, as an algorithm can always ignore J. Suppose
there is an oracle aided algorithm A which given oracle access to Π, finds a collision in H (that is,
a collision in the first n − 1 output bits of Π) with probability ϵ.
    To argue for the collision resistance given Π, we recall that for every q-query
                                                                                  3 quantum
                                                                                             algorithm
                                                                                   q
having access to Π (but not its inverse), Π being a random permutation is O 2n -indistinguishable
from Π being a random function [Zha15]. So now let H be the first n − 1 bits of a random function
Π : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n , and J bethelast bit. Then we have that AΠ still finds a collision in this H
                                     3
with probability at least ϵ − O 2qn .
    But now we observe that H and J are simply just independent random functions, and J can be
simulated without making any queries to H (this can even be made efficient, but that is irrelevant
since we only care about query counts). Thus, we obtain an algorithm B H which     finds a collision in
                               n          n−1                                   q3
a random function H : {0, 1} → {0, 1}         with probability at least ϵ − O 2n . But we know that
random functions are collision resistant, regardless of the relationship between domain
                                                                                       3 and range.
                                                                                                     3
                                                                                         q
In particular, the probability of finding a collision in such random H is at most O 2n−1      = O 2qn
                                           3
by [Zha15]. Thus, we can bound ϵ ≤ O 2qn .

Extending to coset partition functions. Observe that a 2-to-1 function is trivially a coset
partition function. Indeed, since the pre-image set always is a pair {x0 , x1 }, which is a coset of the
1-dimensional linear space {0, x0 ⊕ x1 } ⊆ Zn2 over the field Z2 . To conclude what we saw so far, a
random 2-to-1 function H : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}n−1 (that is shrinking by one bit) is collision resistant
by Lemma 36, and is also a (n, n − 1, 1) coset partition function, which proves Theorem 35 for the
case ℓ = 1.
    We extend to (an almost) general ℓ as follows. We can let H ℓ : {0, 1}n·ℓ → {0, 1}(n−1)·ℓ be the
function such that
                              H ℓ (x1 , · · · , xℓ ) := (H(x1 ), · · · , H(xℓ )) .
It is straightforward that any collision for H ℓ immediately gives a collision for H. Moreover, we
can simulate any query to H ℓ given ℓ queries to H. Thus,  3any   algorithm making q queries to H
                                                                                                    ℓ
                                                                 3
can only find collisions in H ℓ with probability at most O ℓ 2·qn .
    Lastly, parallel repetition preserves coset partitions, since the pre-image sets of H ℓ are just the
direct sums of ℓ of the pre-image sets of H. Thus, we obtain the theorem by replacing n · ℓ with
n.


5    Permutable PRPs and Applications
In this section we develop a new concept of pseudo-random permutations, that will be useful for our
obfuscation-based construction and may also be of independent interest. Quite roughly, our notion


                                                   52
of a permutation will allow us to compose the permutation with another (fixed) permutation, while
maintaining indistinguishability between the cases for whether the permutation was applied or not.
Definition 37. Let G = {GN }N ∈N be a collection where each GN is a set of permutations over [N ].
An output-permutable PRP (OP-PRP) for G is a tuple of algorithms Π, Π−1 , Permute, Eval, Eval−1
with the following properties.
   • Efficient Permutations: For any key k ∈ {0, 1}λ and any desired “block size” N , Π(k, ·)
     is an efficiently computable permutation on [N ] with Π−1 (k, ·) being its efficiently computable
     inverse.

   • Output Permuting: Permute (k, Γ, c) is a deterministic polynomial-time procedure which
     takes as input a key k ∈ {0, 1}λ , the circuit description of a permutation Γ in GN , and a bit
     c. It outputs a permuted key k Γ,c .

   • Output Permuted Correctness:              For all λ ∈ N, k ∈ {0, 1}λ , c ∈ {0, 1}, Γ ∈ GN and
     x, z ∈ [N ],
                                                (
                                      Γ,c
                                                Π(k, x)     if c = 0
                               Eval k       ,x =
                                                 Γ (Π(k, x)) if c = 1
                                                (
                                                 Π−1 (k, z)        if c = 0
                             Eval−1 k Γ,c , z =
                                             
                                                   −1     −1
                                                 Π (k, Γ (z))) if c = 1

     We call k Γ,c a permuted key.

   • Security: For any interactive quantum polynomial-time adversary A, there exists a negligible
     function ϵ(λ) such that the following experiment with A outputs 1 with probability at most
     1
     2 + ϵ (λ):

        – A 1λ produces a block size N (in binary) and the description of a permutation Γ ∈ GN .
                

        – The experiment chooses a random k ← {0, 1}λ and a random bit c ∈ {0, 1}. It gives
          k Γ,c ← Permute(k, Γ, c) to A.
        – A produces a guess c′ for c. The experiment outputs 1 if c′ = c.

On the relations between parameters. Observe that λ, N ∈ N can be arbitrary, which means
in particular that we can fix the block size N and vary the security parameter λ, or alternatively
fix λ and vary N . This lets us construct permutable PRPs for small domains with high security,
for example. We will often overload notation, and use the same symbol for both Π and Eval
(and corresponding symbols for Π−1 and Eval−1 ), when clear from context whether we are using a
permuted or normal key. In this case, an OP-PRP would be a triplet Π, Π−1 , Permute .

Sub-exponential
                  Security. For arbitrary functions f0 , f1 : N → N, we say that an OP-PRP
        1
is f0 , f1 -secure if in the above the security part of the definition, we ask that the indistin-
guishability holds for every adversary of size ≤ f0 (λ) and we swap ϵ(λ) with f11(λ) . Concretely,
a sub-exponentially secure OP-PRP scheme
                                        δ would  be one such that there exists a positive real
                                          λ    1
constant δ > 0 such that the scheme is 2 , λδ -secure.
                                               2


                                                   53
From output-permutable to arbitrarily permutable. We say that a PRP is an input per-
mutable (IP-) PRP if we apply Γ to the inputs rather than the outputs of Π (and accordingly apply
Γ−1 to the output, and not the input, of Π−1 ). Note that by exchanging the roles of Π and Π−1
(and likewise Eval and Eval−1 ), we can turn any OP-PRP into an IP-PRP and vice versa. Also, for a
PRP of the form Πout (kout , Πin (kin , · )), that’s the composition of an IP-PRP Πin and an OP-PRP
Πout , both properties are simultaneously satisfied. We simply call such a PRP a permutable PRP
(P-PRP).

Decomposable Permutations. In this work the class G of permutations that we will be inter-
ested in, is the class of decomposable permutations, defined next.
Definition 38 (Decomposable Permutations). Let N ∈ N, let Γ a permutation on [N ] and let
T, s : N → N. We say that Γ is (T (N ), s(N ))-decomposable if there exists a sequence of permutations
Γ0 , Γ1 , · · · , ΓT (N ) such that:
   • Γ0 is the identity.
   • ΓT (N ) = Γ.

   • Each Γi , Γ−1
                i  has circuit size at most s(N ).
   • For each i, either (1) Γi = Γi−1 or (2) there exists a zi ∈ [N ] such that Γi = Γi−1 ◦
     (zi zi + 1). Here (zi zi + 1) is the neighbor-swap permutation for zi , which swaps between zi
     and (zi + 1 mod N ), and acts as the identity on all other elements in [N ].
In the uniform setting, we will additionally ask that there is a uniform polynomial-time (quantum)
algorithm which given the description of Γ and i constructs both zi and the circuits for Γi , Γi−1 .

Examples of Decomposable Families of Permutations. Whenever we ask that the circuit
size parameter s(N ) is polynomial (in log(N )), we do not know whether any efficiently computable
(in both directions) permutation Π, Π−1 is decomposable. Intuitively, the reason is that while any
permutation can be written as a concatenation of neighbor swaps, it may very well be the case
that somewhere along the (likely exponentially-long) sequence of permutations Γi , Γ−1  i , some of
them will not have an efficient circuit implementation. This leads to our Question 8 regarding
the ability to efficiently decompose permutations. Despite our lack of complete understanding
of the decomposability of permutations, we mention some examples of decomposable families of
permutations.

   • Naive composition of decomposable permutations. Let Γ that can be decomposed into
     a polynomial-length sequence Γ = Γ1 ◦ · · · ◦ Γr such that for every i ∈ [r], the permutation Γi
     is (T, s)-decomposable. Then Γ is (rT, rs)-decomposable.
   • Linear cycles. Linear cycles (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1 ℓ) swapping j and j + 1, then j + 1
     and j + 2 and eventually ℓ − 1 and ℓ. Equivalently, j goes to position ℓ and all other elements
     in the range are subtracted by 1. Linear cycles as well as their inverses, are (N, polylog(N ))-
     decomposable. To see this one can consider a straightforward decomposition of the cycle
     into neighbor swaps, and furthermore the efficient implementation of each of the intermediate
     permutations is given by a circuit that simply check if z is in the range of the cycle, if so,
     decrements by 1 (mod N ) or if the element is j, sends it to position ℓ.

                                                 54
• Transpositions. Transpositions (j ℓ), or (non-neighboring) swaps, are (O(N ), polylog(N ))-
  decomposable using the decomposition
            (j ℓ) = (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1) (ℓ − 1 ℓ) (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1)−1
                  = (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1 ℓ) (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1)−1 ,
  To see the (O(N ), polylog(N )) decomposition, we use the above rule of composition of decom-
  posable permutations, for the two decomposable permutations (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1 ℓ)
  and (j j + 1 j + 2 · · · ℓ − 1)−1 .
• Permutations that are decomposable to transpositions, rather than neighbor
  swaps. Let Γ a permutation on [N ] that’s (T, s)-decomposable, but to transpositions rather
  than neighbor swaps. Specifically, in the T -length sequence of permutations that Γ de-
  composes to (and each of such permutation Γi , Γ−1  i  has implementation of complexity ≤
  s), each consecutive pair is either identical or differs in one transposition. Then, Γ is
  (T · O(N ), s + polylog(N ))-decomposable into neighbor swaps.
• Scalar addition. x 7→ x + s mod N is (N, polylog(N ))-decomposable, as adding s is decom-
  posable into a linear chain of transpositions:
                 (0 s) ◦ (1 1 + s) ◦ · · · (N − 2 − s N − 2) ◦ (N − 1 − s N − 1) ,
  where each point in the chain is efficiently computable (and invertible), because it effectively
  moves all elements in some (efficiently computable) domain s steps forward, and the largest s
  elements in the domain become the smallest s elements in the domain, in an order-preserving
  manner. Thus scalar addition is (N, polylog(N ))-decomposable. Similarly, vector addition
  x 7→ x + s mod ZnN is thus (N · n, polylog(N ) · n)-decomposable, by performing the addition
  per coordinate, and deducing decomposability by naive composition of decomposable permu-
  tations.
• Scalar multiplication. x 7→ ax mod N for any polynomial a which has an inverse in N
  is (N, polylog(N ))-decomposable, though this seems to require a bit of work. Under the
  Extended Riemann Hypothesis (ERH), all a are N 2 , polylog(N ) -decomposable. If discrete
  logarithms mod N had small circuits, we could use the conjugation example above to reduce
  multiplication to addition, decomposing multiplication by any a. However, since discrete
  logarithms are presumably classically hard, we have to do something else. In Remark 47
  following the proof of Theorem 46, we explain how to decompose multiplications by small a,
  or more generally any a ∈ Z∗N that is generated by small integers. Assuming ERH, all a are
  generated by small integers [Bac90], giving a conditional decomposability for all a.
• Involutions. Involutions are permutations where Γ ◦ Γ is the identity.         Involutions that
  are computable by circuits of size s are O(N 2 ), s + polylog(N ) -decomposable. We will
                                                                       

  decompose Γ into a (N, s)-decomposition of transpositions, which will imply our wanted
  decomposition to neighbor swaps. Intuitively, we will visualize Γ as the applications of disjoint
  transpositions, and then the way we are going to decompose Γ is by adding each of the
  (possibly exponentially many) transpositions, only when both of its elements are smaller
  than some index. Formally,
                                     (
                                      Γ(x) if x ≤ i and Γ(x) ≤ i
                           Γi (x) :=                                   .
                                      x       otherwise

                                              55
  Each permutation in the sequence is of complexity ≤ s+polylog(N ), we have Γ0 is the identity
  and ΓN := Γ. Also, Γi = Γi−1 if Γ(i) ≥ i and otherwise Γi (x) = Γi−1 ◦ (i Γ(i)).

• Affine transformations. Affine permutations x         7→ A · x + b mod r where A ∈ Zrn×n is
  invertible and b ∈ Znr , are O(rn × n2 ), poly(r, n) -decomposable. Note that
                                                      
                                                                              the circuit size
  depends polynomially on r; we can improve this O(r2n × n2 ), poly(log r, n) -decomposability
  under ERH. We leave it as an interesting open question to handle general r unconditionally.
  We observe that we can handle addition by b as above. To multiply by A, we decompose
  A into O(n2 ) elementary row operations. Row Swaps are involutions and Row Sums are
  controlled additions, which are both decomposable by the above results. Finally, since r is
  small, we can handle Scalar Multiplications by the above.

• Conjugations. If Γ = Λ−1 ◦ Γ′ ◦ Λ where Λ, Λ−1 are permutations with circuits of size U
  and Γ′ is (T, S)-decomposable, then Γ is (T, O(S + U ))-decomposable, by simply conjugating
  the decomposition of Γ by Λ. Note that Λ does not need to be decomposable.

• Applying a decomposable permutation to a subset of the bits. If N = N0 · N1 , and
  Γ0 is a (T, s)-decomposable permutation on domain [N0 ], we can extend it to a permutation
  Γ with domain [N ] ∼= [N0 ] × [N1 ], that applies Γ0 to [N0 ] and the identity to [N1 ]. Then Γ is
  also (T, s)-decomposable.

• Applying a conditional decomposable permutation. If N = N0 · N1 , and Γ0 is a (T, s)-
  decomposable permutation on domain [N0 ], we can extend it to a permutation Γ with domain
  [N ] ∼
       = [N0 ] × [N1 ] where Γ applies Γ0 to [N0 ] conditioned on some target value v ∈ [N1 ], and
  the identity otherwise. Then Γ is (T, s + polylog(N ))-decomposable.

• Applying a controlled decomposable permutation. If N = N0 · N1 , and for every
  v ∈ [N1 ], Γv is a (T, s)-decomposable permutation on domain [N0 ], we can extend to a
  permutation Γ with domain [N ] ∼= [N0 ] × [N1 ] where Γ applies Γv to [N0 ] conditioned on the
  element in [N1 ] being v. Then Γ is (T · N1 , s + polylog(N ))-decomposable.

• Injective functions (and permutations) with an ancilla. We do not know how to
  generically decompose an arbitrary permutation Γ, though we can do it if we are willing to
  use ancilla bits. Slightly more generally then permutations with an ancilla, we will show how
  to compose with an efficiently computable and invertible injective function Γ : [N ] → [M ] that
  computes with an ancilla (this in particular implies for efficiently computable and invertible
  permutations).
  Suppose Γ : [N ] → [M ] is an injective function such that (1) Γ is computable in size s and (2)
  Γ−1 : [M ] → [N ] is computable in size s (and on elements in [M ] that are not in the image of Γ
  the output
          can be arbitrary
                              in [N ]). We construct
                                                      a permutation Γ′ on ([N ] × [M ]) ∼= [N · M ]
                        2
  that is O (N · M ) , s × polylog (N · M ) -decomposable, such that

                           ∀x ∈ [N ] : Γ′ x, 0[M ] = Γ (x) ∈ [M ], 0[N ] ,
                                                                       


  and for cases where the second input is not 0[M ] , the permutation Γ′ may act arbitrarily.
  We show how to decompose Γ′ into 2 controlled scalar addition permutations, and 1 involution
  (which are all decomposable, as we know by now), which will make Γ′ also appropriately

                                              56
      decomposable. Let
                                    Γ1 (x, y) := (x, y + Γ(x) mod M ) ,
                                    Γ2 (x, y) := x − Γ−1 (y) mod N, y ,
                                                                      

                                    Γ3 (x, y) := (y, x) ,
      Then, let Γ′ = Γ3 ◦ Γ2 ◦ Γ1 . Since each of Γ1 , Γ2 , Γ3 are involutions (since our arithmetic is
      over Z2 ) then the composed Γ′ is accordingly decomposable using the involution case.
   Our main theorem of this section is the following:
Theorem 39. Let T be any exponential function and p any polynomial. Assuming the existence
of sub-exponentially-secure one-way functions and sub-exponentially-secure iO, there exists an OP-
PRP for the class of (T, p)-decomposable permutations. Moreover, the OP-PRP is itself (T, p)
decomposable.
    This theorem will be proved in Sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4. Before proving it, however, we will
give some example applications.

5.1    How to use OP-PRPs with Indisitnguishability Obfuscation
Here, we explain how OP-PRPs are useful for constructions involving indistinguishability obfusca-
tion.
                                                                           −1
Composing with fixed permutations.             Consider a program P O,O         which makes queries to an
oracle O. We show the following:
Lemma 40. Let Γ be a permutation, and let Π, Π−1 , Permute be an OP-PRP
                                                          
                                                                       for a class of per-
                                                                                                  −1
mutations which includes Γ. Then for a sufficiently large polynomial s, iO 1λ , 1s , P Π(k,·),Π (k,·)
                                                                             
is computationally indistinguishable from iO 1λ , 1s , P Γ(Π(k,·)),Π (k,Γ (·)) , where k ← {0, 1}λ is
                                                                    −1   −1


uniformly random.
   In other words, we can compose Π(k, ·) with any fixed permutation Γ applied to the output of
Π. This is analogous to the oracle case, where composing a random permutation with any fixed
permutation gives a random permutation.
Proof. We prove security through a sequence of hybrids:
                                                      −1
Hyb0 : Here, the adversary is given iO(1λ , 1s , P O,O ) where O(·) = Π(k, ·) and O−1 (·) = Π−1 (k, ·).
Hyb1 : Now we sample k Γ,0 ← Permute(k, Γ, 0) and switch to O(·) = Π(k Γ,0 , ·) and O−1 (·) =
                                                                                        −1
Π−1 (k Γ,0 , ·). By the correctness of the permuted key k Γ,0 , O, O−1 , and hence P O,O , is unchanged
                                                                                           −1
by this modification. Therefore, as long as s is larger than the maximum size of P O,O in Hybrids
0 and 1, by iO security the two hybrids are indistinguishable.
Hyb2 : Now we switch to k Γ,1 ← Permute(k, Γ, 1) and set O(·) = Π(k Γ,1 , ·) and O−1 (·) = Π−1 (k Γ,1 , ·).
Indistinguishability from Hybrid 1 follows from OP-PRP security.
Hyb3 : Now we move to O(·) = Γ(Π(k, ·)) and O−1 (·) = Π−1 (k, Γ−1 (·)). Observe that these oracles
O, O−1 are functionally identical to those in Hybrid 2, and therefore so is the program P . Thus,
indistinguishability from Hybrid 2 follows from iO security.
    Thus, we have that Hybrids 0 and 3 are indistinguishable, proving Lemma 40.

                                                    57
Trapdoor permutations from iO and one-way functions. Here, we show that obfuscating
an OP-PRP gives a trapdoor permutation.
Construction 41. Let Π, Π−1 be a PRP, and iO an indistinguishability obfuscator. Then define
                                  

the trapdoor permutation Gen, F, F −1 as:
    • Gen 1λ : Sample k ← {0, 1}λ . Let P : {0, 1}λ → {0, 1}λ defined as P (x) := Π(k, x), setting
              

      the block size n = λ. Let s be a sufficiently large function of λ. Output pk = P̂ ← iO 1λ , 1s , P
                                                                                                         

      and sk = k.

   • F (pk, x): Interpret pk as a program P̂ , and output P̂ (x).

   • F −1 (sk, y): Interpret sk as a key k, and output Π−1 (k, y).
Theorem 42 (Trapdoor One-Way Permutations from iO and       One-Way Functions). Assume the
existence of one-way functions. Assume Π, Π−1 , Permute is an OP-PRP for some class that
includes all transpositions, and iO is a secure iO. Then, if we instantiate Construction 41 with
 Π, Π−1 , Permute as the PRP, we get a secure trapdoor permutation.
                 

Proof. We need to show that there is no algorithm A which, given P̂ ← iO(1λ , 1s , P ) and a random
y ∗ ← {0, 1}λ , outputs x∗ such that P (x∗ ) = y ∗ . Assume toward contradiction that there is such
an A with success probability ϵ. We will show that ϵ is negligible through a sequence of hybrid
experiments.
Hyb0 : Here, A is given P̂ ← iO(1λ , 1s , P ) and y ∗ , where y ∗ ← {0, 1}λ and P (·) = Π(k, ·) for a
random key k ← {0, 1}λ . A wins if it outputs x such that Π(k, x) = y ∗ , which by assumption is
with non-negligible probability.
Hyb1 : Now we additionally sample a random y ′ ← {0, 1}λ , and switch to P̂ ← iO(1λ , 1s , P1 ) where
                                      (
                                       y∗        if Π (k, x) = y ′
                             P1 (x) =                              .
                                       Π (k, x) otherwise

A still wins if it outputs x such that Π(k, x) = y ∗ . Indistinguishability from Hybrid 0 follows from
Lemma 17.
                                  ∗   y ′ ),0 ← Permute(k, (y ∗
Hyb2 : Now we sample k ∗ ← k (y                                    y ′ ), 0), change P̂ ← iO(1λ , 1s , P2 ), where
                                        (
                                         y∗                  if Π (k ∗ , x) = y ′
                               P2 (x) =                                           .
                                         Π (k ∗ , x)         otherwise

Now, we switch to A winning if it produces an x such that Π(k ∗ , x) = y ∗ . Since the programs
                  ∗ ′
Π(k, ·) and Π(k (y y ),0 , ·) := Π(k ∗ , ·) are functionally equivalent, the obfuscations of the programs
P1 and P2 are indistinguishable by the security of the outer iO. Also, the success condition of the
adversary is functionally equivalent. Overall, indistinguishability from Hybrid 1 follows from iO
security.
                                                    ∗   ′
Hyb3 : Now we switch to sampling k ∗ = k (y y ),1 ← Permute (k, (y ∗ y ′ ), 1) and use this key in
the program P2 and also for the win condition. Indistinguishability from Hybrid 2 follows from
                                                             ∗  ′
OP-PRP security. Now observe that the win condition is Π(k (y y ),1 , x) = y ∗ , which is equivalent
to Π(k, x) = y ′ .

                                                        58
Hyb4 : Now we switch back to giving A the program P̂ ← iO(1λ , 1s , P1 ), but keeping the winning
                                                                         ′                 ′
condition as Π(k, x)) = y ′ . Observe that switching from k ∗ = k (y y ),0 to k ∗ = k (y y ),1 in P2
actually did not change the functionality at all: the change permuted the values of y ∗ and y ′ in
the output of Π, but since both values cause P2 to output y ∗ , swapping them does not change the
functionality. Therefore, the functionality of P2 using either permuted key remains equivalent to
P1 . Thus, A outputs x such that Π(k, x) = y ′ with non-negligible probability.
    Now, observe that if we additionally give the adversary k, it can compute y ′ = Π(k, x) for itself,
with non-negligible probability. Thus, we obtain an adversary B which is given the description
of P (namely, the key k) and iO(1λ , 1s , P1 ), and guesses y ′ with non-negligible probability. But
this contradicts the computational unpredictability guarantee from Lemma 17. Hence the original
advantage of A in inverting the one-way permutation must be negligible.

Fixed sparse triggers. Lemma 17 allows for “puncturing” a program if a certain random trigger
is hit, in which case the program may behave completely differently from the original program. Here,
we show that the trigger can even be fixed, as long as it is appropriately scrambled by OP-PRPs.
Concretely, consider the program P (x) with hard-coded OP-PRP keys k0 , k1 that works as follows
(and is also described in Figure 7):

  1. Apply some polynomial-sized circuit P0 (x), obtaining a pair x1 , w1 .

  2. Run Π (k0 , x1 ), and parse the output as (x2 , w2 ).

  3. Apply some polynomial-sized circuit P1 (w1 , w2 ), obtaining w3 , w4 .

  4. Then run Π−1 (k1 , (x2 , w3 )), obtaining x3 .

  5. Finally feed x3 , w4 into some polynomial-sized circuit P2 , and output the result.

The key structural property of the program P is that x2 is the output of Π (k0 , ·) and is fed into
Π−1 (k1 , ·) without modification and without affecting any other part of the circuit.
   Now consider a different program P ′ (x), which is identical except that we modify Step 3 into
Step 3’ by embedding a trigger:

  3’. Apply some polynomial-sized circuit R(x2 ) with single-bit outputs. If R (x2 ) = 0, then let
      (w3 , w4 ) ← P1 (w1 , w2 ) as in program P . However, if R (x2 ) = 1, we instead let (w3 , w4 ) ←
      P1′ (w1 , w2 ), for some different polynomial-sized circuit P1′ .

Extending the above template to a pair of circuits instead of a single circuit. In the
above, the program P is defined as a function of the programs P0 , P1 , P2 and the program P ′ is
defined as a function of the programs P0 , P1 , P2 in addition to the programs R, P1′ .
    We next extend the above template in a way that the single program P is extended to a pair of
programs P , Q, and the single program P ′ is extended to a pair of programs P ′ , Q′ , in the following
way:

   • Let Q0 , Q1 , Q2 , P0 , P1 , P2 arbitrary programs. The program Q is defined as a function of
     Q0 , Q1 , Q2 in the exact same way that P is defined as a function of P0 , P1 , P2 . The programs
     P, Q are sampled for the same pair of keys k0 , k1 , with the only change that the roles of the
     keys are reversed between P and Q.


                                                      59
   • Let R, Q′1 , P1′ some arbitrary programs, and let Q0 , Q1 , Q2 , P0 , P1 , P2 the programs defining
     the above P , Q. The program Q′ is defined as a function of Q0 , Q1 , Q2 , R, Q′1 in the same
     way that the program P ′ is defined as a function of the programs P0 , P1 , P2 , R, P1′ .
Thus, we can consider a sampling mechanism that either samples the pair P , Q together (by having
the programs P0 , P1 , P2 , Q0 , Q1 , Q2 fixed and sampling the keys k0 , k1 ) or samples the pair P ′ ,
Q′ together (by having the programs P0 , P1 , P2 , Q0 , Q1 , Q2 fixed and also the programs R, P1′ ,
Q′1 fixed, and sampling the keys k0 , k1 ). We will show that obfuscating the un-primed and primed
versions give computationally indistinguishable programs, for certain choices of R. In the following,
we will interpret x2 as an element in [0, N ) for some N ∈ N.
Lemma 43 (Permuted Fixed Sparse Triggers). Let P0 , P1 , P2 , Q0 , Q1 , Q2 , R, P1′ , Q′1 arbitrary
programs and let P , Q (or P ′ , Q′ ) the derived pair of programs, as the template above. Assume
that R(x2 ) outputs 1 if and only if x2 ∈ [a, b), for some integers 0 ≤ a < b < N such       that the ratio
 N                                                                          −1
                                                                                         
b−a is exponential in λ ∈ N, the security parameter. Assuming Π, Π , Permute the permutation
used inside the programs, is an OP-PRP for any class that includes all involutions and iO is
a secure indistinguishability obfuscator, for random choices of the keys k0 , k1 , for a sufficiently
large polynomial s, we have that the obfuscated pair iO  1λ , 1s , P , iO 1λ , 1s , Q is computationally
indistinguishable from the obfuscated pair iO 1λ , 1s , P ′ , iO 1λ , 1s , Q′ .
Proof. We prove indistinguishability through a sequence of hybrids.
Hyb0 : Here, we obfuscate P, Q.
                                            N
Hyb1 : Here, we choose a random y ∈ [0, ⌈ b−a  ⌉), and obfuscate the programs P ′ , Q′ , but where we
replace the relation R in both programs with the relation R′ where R′ (x2 ) outputs 1 if and only
if x2 ∈ [y(b − a), (y + 1)(b − a)). This is the same as saying that (x2 − [x2 mod (b − a)]) / (b −
a) = y. Observe that the range of (x2 − [x2 mod (b − a)]) / (b − a) is contained in ⌈N/(b − a)⌉.
Indistinguishability of Hybrid 0 and Hybrid 1 follows from the indistinguishability guarantee of
Lemma 17 and the fact that y is uniform in an exponential-sized domain.
Hyb2 : Here, we switch to a random y ∈ [0, ⌊N/(b − a)⌋). Since N/(b − a) is exponential, this is a
negligible change in the distribution of y, hence Hybrid 1 and Hybrid 2 are indistinguishable.
Hyb3 : Let π be the involution on x2 , which exchanges the ranges [a, b) and [y(b − a), (y + 1)(b − a)).
Notice that these intervals have the same size, and the latter interval is contained in [0, N ) since
y ≤ N/(b − a) − 1. We can easily extend π to be an involution mapping (x2 , w2 ) 7→ (π(x2 ), w2 ) or
(x2 , w3 ) 7→ (π(x2 ), w3 ).
     Now instead of obfuscating the program P ′ , we switch to obfuscating the program P ′′ which
replaces Π(k0 , ·) with π(Π(k0 , ·)) and Π−1 (k1 , ·) with Π−1 (k1 , π −1 (·)) (still using the relation R′ ).
We likewise switch from Q′ to the analogous program Q′′ . Since this is just composing the PRP
applications with the fixed involution π, Hybrids 1 and 2 are indistinguishable by Lemma 40.
     Observe that in P ′′ we now we apply π to the output of Π(k0 , ·) and to the input to Π−1 (k1 , ·)
(and the analogous statements for Q′′ ). Thus, the two applications of π cancel out, except that the
trigger is checked between applications of π. Since π exchanges the roles of [a, b) and [y(b − a), (y +
1)(b − a)), if were to test the output of Π(k0 , ·) itself, the trigger value would in fact be the interval
[a, b).
Hyb4 : Now we switch to obfuscating P ′ , Q′ without π but with the correct relation R. This is
functionally equivalent to our modified P ′′ , Q′′ , since the permuted keys changes the trigger (when

                                                     60
interpreted as an output of Π(k0 , ·) or Π(k1 , ·)) to be [a, b). Thus, by iO security, Hybrid 2 and
Hybrid 3 are computationally indistinguishable. This completes the proof of Lemma 43.

5.2   ONS-Merges
We now gradually build up to our proof of Theorem 39. Here, we start from a seemingly much
weaker object called an Output Neighbor Swap Merge (ONS-Merge).
    A neighbor swap is a permutation which exchanges some j with j + 1 and otherwise is the
identity. In cycles notation, a neighbor swap would be written as (j j + 1).
    A Merge is a permutation with the added correctness requirement. The domain [N ] is inter-
preted as pairs (b, x) for b ∈ {0, 1} and x ∈ Nb , where N0 + N1 = N . The range [N ] remains [N ].
We let L = {(0, x)} ∼ = [N0 ] and R = {(1, x)} ∼
                                               = [N1 ]. A Merge is then a permutation preserves the
ordering of elements in L, and also preserves the ordering of elements in R. An Output Neighbor
Swap Merge can be thought of as an OP-PRP for the simple class of neighbor swaps. However,
many such swaps will actually break the strong order-preserving property of the merge, and hence
will be illegal. We therefore need to modify the definition (both correctness and security) to account
for this.

Definition 44. An Output Neighbor Swap (ONS-) Merge is at tuple of five algorithms (M, M−1 ,
Permute, Eval, Eval−1 ) with the following properties:

   • Efficient Permutations: For any key k ∈ {0, 1}λ , any desired block-sizes N0 , N1 , M(k, ·)
     is an efficiently computable permutation on [N = N0 + N1 ] with with M−1 (k, ·) being its
     efficiently computable inverse.

   • Order-Preserving: For any key k ∈ {0, 1}λ , any block sizes N0 , N1 , and any two inputs x0 <
     x1 ∈ [N0 ] (resp. x0 < x1 ∈ [N1 ]), then M(k, (0, x0 )) < M(k, (0, x1 )) (resp. M(k, (1, x0 )) <
     M(k, (1, x1 ))). If b0 ̸= b1 , there is no restriction on the ordering of M(k, (b0 , x0 )) and
     M(k, (b1 , x1 ))

   • Output Neighbor Swapping: Permute(k, Γ, c) is a deterministic polynomial-time proce-
     dure which takes as input a key k ∈ {0, 1}λ , a neighbor swap (z z + 1), and a bit c. If
     M−1 (k, z) = (b0 , x0 ) and M−1 (k, z + 1) = (b1 , x1 ) with b0 ̸= b1 , it outputs a swapped key
     k (z z+1),c . Otherwise if b0 = b1 , the input is considered illegal and the output is ⊥.

   • Output Swapping Correctness: For all λ ∈ Z, k ∈ {0, 1}λ , all legal neighbor swaps
     (z z + 1), and all x, z ′ ∈ [N ],
                                                    (
                                                     Π(k, x)               if c = 0
                          Eval(k (z z+1),c , x) =
                                                     (z z + 1) ◦ (Π(k, x)) if c = 1
                                                    (
                                                     Π−1 (k, z ′ )           if c = 0
                      Eval−1 (k (z z+1),c , z ′ ) =    −1               ′
                                                     Π (k, (z z + 1)(z ))) if c = 1

   • Security: For any interactive QPT adversary A, there exists a negligible function function
     ϵ(λ) such that the following experiment with A outputs 1 with probability at most 1/2 + ϵ(λ):

        – A(1λ ) chooses a neighbor swap (z z + 1) for z ∈ [N − 1].

                                                 61
        – The experiment chooses a random k ← {0, 1}λ and a random bit c ∈ {0, 1}. It computes
          (b0 , x0 ) ← M−1 (k, z) and (b1 , x1 ) ← M−1 (k, z + 1). It checks that b0 ̸= b1 ; if b0 = b1
          the experiment immediately aborts and returns a random bit. If b0 ̸= b1 , it returns
          k (z z+1),b ← Permute(k, (z z + 1), c) to A.
        – A produces a guess c′ for c. The experiment outputs 1 if c′ = c.

   Note that the abort condition is necessary: in these cases, permuting the output by (z z + 1)
actually reverses the order of two strings belonging to the same set L or R. But this breaks the
order-preserving property of the permuted key, which allows for easy distinguishing. However, if
M−1 (k, z) and M−1 (k, z + 1) have are in different sets L and R, then the order between them is
arbitrary, and so we can hope that the permuted keys are indistinguishable.

Hypergeometric Distribution. Let DN,t,s the following distribution: let U be an arbitrary
subset of [N ] of size s. Choose a random set V of [N ] of size exactly t, and output the number
of elements in V ∩ U . This distribution is known as the hypergeometric distribution and can be
                                                                          κ
efficiently sampled. More specifically, there is a sequence of functions DN,t,s with domain {0, 1}κ
              κ
such that DN,t,s (r) for random coins r approximates a distribution that is O(N × 2−κ )-close to
DN,t,s .

Tally Trees. In order to describe our construction, we introduce the notion of a tally tree.
Consider a merge M. Assign to each range element z a bit b indicating the first bit of the pre-image
of z. Thus, we obtain a sequence V of N bits, which determines the images of the sets L and R.
The number of 0’s is exactly N0 and the number of 1’s is exactly N1 . Observe that V is in bijection
with the merge M. This is because once you choose the set of images of L (resp. R), the actual
mapping from L (resp. R) to those images is fixed by the ordering.
    Now, notice that V alone does not actually allow for efficient computation of M (nor M−1 ),
since to determine the image of, say, (0, x), you would need to find the position in V of the x-th 0.
But this presumably requires scanning exponentially-many bits in V to find the right location.
    We can, however, speed this up by supplying more information, which is exactly the tally tree. A
tally tree T is a binary tree with N leaves, one for each element of the range N . We will think of T
as having a fixed topology that depends on N , with the goal of making T shallow. We will associate
two quantities to each node z. The first is s(z), which si the number of leaves of the subtree rooted
at z. s(z) is solely a function of the topology of T and will just be used for notational convenience.
    The second value is v(z), which is the total of all Vu values for all leaves u in the subtree rooted
at z. Equivalently, v(z) = Vz for all leaves, and v(p) for any internal node is equal to the sum
v(p) = v(u) + v(w) where u, w are the left and right children of p. Observe that for the root ε,
v(ε) = N1 .
    Observe that we can equivalently sample a tally tree in reverse, starting from the root. We
start by setting v(ε) = N1 . Then suppose we have set v(p) = t for a node p with left child u and
right child w. Setting v(p) = t stipulates that among the s(p) leaves of the tree rooted at p, t of
them are set to 1. But as we haven’t set any of the descendents of p yet, just the total of them, the
distribution over the positions of those t 1’s in the subtree rooted at p is uniformly random. We
then have that v(u) is exactly distributed according to Ds(p),t,s(u) . We then set v(w) = v(p) − v(u).
    Notice that by sampling from appropriate hypergeometric distributions, we can sample the
nodes of T in basically any order. For example, let C be a cover of T , meaning a set of nodes whose


                                                  62
subtrees are disjoint and jointly include all of the leaves of T . We can sample v(u) for all u ∈ C
in any order as follows. Let N ′ denote the portion of the domain yet to be determined (initially
N ′ = N ) and S the number of 1’s remaining to allocate (initially S = N1 ). Then in any order, we
choose an element u ∈ C, sample v(u) ← DN ′ ,s(u),S , and then update N ′ 7→ N ′ −s(u), S 7→ S −v(u).
Notice that setting v(u) for u ∈ C determines v(u′ ) for all u′ that are “above” the cover.
                                                                                         P Observe
that through this process, the distribution of v(u) for any u ∈ C depends on the total u′ v(u′ ) of
all v(u′ ) sampled so far, but is otherwise independent of the actual values v(u′ ).
    Given a tally tree T , we evaluate (b, x) ← M−1 (z) as follows. First set b = Vz by looking the
value stored at the leaf labeled z. Now by the ordering property of a merge, x is just a count of
the number of z ′ < z with M−1 (z) having the first bit b. We cannot directly count such z ′ in V
(since there will be exponentially-many), but we can instead use the internal nodes of the tree T .
Namely, let UP  L = {u} be the set of nodes that are left siblings of nodes on the path from root to
z. Then x = u∈UL v(u). Observe that this process only visits a single path from root to leaf and
its siblings, and therefore only O(d) nodes where d is the depth of the tree.
    To evaluate M(x) given T , we simply do a binary search, exploiting the ordered property and
our ability to compute M−1 (x).

Our Construction. To give our construction, we will show how to implicitly generate a tally
tree, which will then generate a merge. Rather than build the tally tree from the leafs toward the
roots, our construction use the top-down generation, but pseudorandonly generate the values in
the tree.

Construction 45. Let F : {0, 1}λ × {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}κ , and suppose it has a puncturing algorithm
Punc. Given a key k ∈ {0, 1}λ , the tally tree T is implicitly defined as follows. We deterministically
choose a topology that has depth O(log N ), which determines s(z) for all nodes z. We set v(ε) = N1 .
Then we recursively internal nodes as follows. For a node u that is a left child of some node p (which
                                             κ
already has s(p) defined), define v(u) = Ds(p),v(p),s(u) (F(k, p)). We then let v(w) for the right child
w to be v(p) − v(u). Note that these values are not explicitly computed, but rather left implicitly
determined by k.
    To permute a key k according to a legal swap (z z + 1) and bit c, collect into a set H all nodes
in the paths from root to z or z + 1, together with all the siblings of nodes on this path. Here,
H stands for “hard-coded”. Let S denote the nodes just on the paths, excluding z, z + 1. Here, S
stands for “punctured” nodes. Assume without loss of generality that v(z) = 0 and v(z + 1) = 1.
     S
Let k ← Punc (k, S). Then do the following:
                                      S
   • If c = 0, output k (z z+1),0 = (k , {(u, v(u))}u∈H .
                                      S
   • If c = 1, output k (z z+1),1 = (k , {(u, v ′ (u))}u∈H where
                                 
                                 v(u) + 1 if u is an ancestor of z but not z + 1
                                 
                         ′
                       v (u) = v(u) − 1 if u is an ancestor of z + 1 but not z
                                 
                                   v(u)        otherwise
                                 


To evaluate v(u) for some node u, we first look up if there is a pair (u, v) ∈ H, and if so produce
                                    S
the value v. Otherwise, we can use k to compute the remaining nodes.


                                                  63
Theorem 46. Suppose (F, Punc) is a secure puncturable PRF. Assume κ ≥ λ + log N . Then
the protocol given in Construction 45 is an ONS Merge. In particular, if (F, Punc) is ϵ-secure,
then Construction 45 is O(ϵ + N 2 × 2−κ )-secure. Moreover, the permutations M(k, ·), M−1 (k, ·) are
(O(N 2 ), polylog(N ))-decomposable.

Proof. We first argue decomposability. Consider a tally tree T . The “identity” tally tree T0 simply
has all the leaves of value 1 as the rightmost leaves. Define Tr,i as the tree which has the first
(left-most) r − 1 1’s in the leaves in the correct position, the right-most N1 − r pushed all the way
to the right, and the r-th 1 at position N − (N1 − r) − i. Let ir be such that the N − (N1 − r) − ir
is the correct position of the rth 1. The tally trees Tr,i can all be succinctly represented: let Cr be
the cover of the leaves containing the left-most r − 1 1’s. Then v(u) for u descendant from Cr is
determined exactly as in T . Let Cr′ be a cover for the N1 − r leaves that have all the right-most
1’s. Then any u descendant from Cr′ has v(u) = s(u). Finally, let Cr′′ be a cover for the remaining
nodes. Since there is at most 1 leaf descendant from Cr′′ that contains a 1, we can easily compute
v(u) for any u descendant from Cr′′ , by simply deciding whether that 1 is a descandant of u.
    Then T0 = T1,0 , Tr,ir = Tr+1,0 , and TN1 +1,0 = T . Going from Tr,i to Tr,i+1 corresponds to
a neighbor swap. This gives a sequence of length O(N 2 ) connecting T0 to T , showing that T is
(O(N 2 ), polylog(N ))-decomposable.
    We now prove security through a sequence of hybrids.
                                                  S
Hyb0 : Here, the adversary sees k (z z+1),0 = (k , {(u, v0 (u))}u∈S ) where v0 (u) is defined as v0 (u) =
                                                             κ
v(u), which for the left child u of a parent p is equal to Ds(p),v(p),s(u) (F(k, p)). Observe that we only
need to consider the left children, as the right children are determined by their parent and sibling.
The hybrid outputs a random bit at rejects if v0 (z) = v0 (z + 1).
                                            S
Hyb1 : Here, we replace k (z z+1),0 with (k , {(u, v1 (u))}u∈S ) where for left-children u, v1 (u) is defined
     κ
as Ds(p),v(p),s(u) (ru ) for independent random coins ru ← {0, 1}κ . The hybrid outputs a random bit
and rejects if v1 (z) = v1 (z +1). By a straightforward reduction to punctured PRF security, Hybrid’s
0 and 1 are indistinguishable except with probability ϵ.
                              S
Hyb2 : We now move to (k , {(u, v2 (u))}u∈S ), where v2 (u) is sampled as a fresh random sample
from Ds(p),v(p),s(u) . The hybrid outputs a random bit and rejects if v2 (z) = v2 (z + 1). Each such
sample is at most O(N × 2κ )-close to the distribution Ds(p),v(p),s(u)
                                                        κ              sampled in Hybrid 1, and there
are at most O(N ) such samples. Therefore, Hybrids 1 and 2 are at most O(N 2 × 2−κ )-close.
                                                                               S
Hyb3 : Here, we define v2 as in Hybrid 2, but give the adversary (k , {(u, v3 (u))}u∈S ), where,
assuming v2 (z) = 0 and v2 (z + 1) = 1, we define
                            
                            v2 (u) + 1 if u is an ancestor of z but not z + 1
                            
                     ′
                   v2 (u) = v2 (u) − 1 if u is an ancestor of z + 1 but not z
                            
                              v2 (u)      otherwise
                            

We now argue that the views {(u, v2 (u))}u∈S and {(u, v2′ (u))}u∈S are actually distributed identically,
             S
even given k . To do so, observe that an equivalent way to sample v2 is as follows. Let C be the
cover of T defined as H \ P , obtained by taking all the nodes in S that are not on the paths from
root to z or z + 1, and additionally include z, z + 1 themselves. This is given by the red squares
and yellow pentagons in Figure 4. Then sample v2 (u) for u ∈ C according to the algorithm for


                                                      64
sampling covers of tally trees described above, starting with z, z + 1 and moving to the rest of C.
Then compute internal nodes “above” the cover by adding the values of the node’s children, which
gives all pairs (u, v2 (u)) for u ∈ S. The nodes “below” the cover C are then implicitly generated
by F as before. The hybrid then rejects if v2 (z) = v2 (z + 1).
    Since the values of T for the cover C is distributed exactly as in the case of a random merge, we
see that conditioned on not rejecting, v2 (z) and v2 (z + 1) are distributed as random distinct bits.
    Hybrid 3 then is identical, except that we swap the values of at z and z + 1. But since
v(z), v(z + 1) were random distinct values anyway, this distributions are identical. Moreover, the
rest of the cover C is sampled only depending on the total v(z) + v(z + 1), which we know is 1 in
both Hybrid 3 and Hybrid 2. Thus, the distribution of the entire cover C, and therefore the entire
tree, is identical in Hybrid 2 and Hybrid 3.
Hyb4 and Hyb5 : These are analogs of Hybrids 1,0 (respectively), except that we use the values
v1′ , v0′ , which are derived from v1 , v0 analogous to v2′ . Hybrids 3 and 4 are indistinguishable by an
identical argument to the indistinguishability of Hybrids 1 and 2. Hybrids 4 and 5 are likewise
indistinguishable by an identical argument to that of Hybrids 0 and 1.
      Then we observe that Hybrid 5 uses v0′ = v ′ , and is therefore exactly the case k (z z+1),1 . This
finishes the proof.

Remark 47. The decomposition of merges actually allows us to perform scalar multiplication for
small scalars. We observe that x 7→ 2x mod N for odd N is actually a merge: indeed,it preserves
the ordering for x ∈ [0, (N − 1)/2] as well as for x ∈ [(N + 1)/2, N − 1]. Moreover, we can compute
the associated tally tree rather trivially. Thus we can decompose it as in Theorem 46. We can
likewise handle x 7→ ax mod N for N relatively prime to a, as long as a is polynomial. The idea is
to generalize the concept of a merge where the input domain is partitioned into a buckets and the
order-preserving property holds for each bucket. We can then moreover generate x 7→ ax mod N
for any a which can be decomposed as the product of “small” (polynomial in log N ) a′ . Note that
if the Extended Riemann Hypothesis is true, such small a′ generate al a [Bac90].

5.3   From ONS-Merge to ONS-PRP
An Output Neighbor Swappable PRP is an OP-PRP for the class of neighbor swaps(z z + 1). We
now show that an ONS-Merge can be used to construct an ONS-PRP. The construction is based
on the small-domain PRP of [GP07], though (1) we will use it in the large-domain setting, and (2)
we will be implicitly implementing the underlying PRF with a puncturable PRF.
    The construction can be thought of as performing a merge-sort in reverse, where we first parti-
tion the domain into a left and right set, of sizes N0 and N1 respectively. Then all the left elements
are recursively shuffled using a smaller PRP, and all the right elements are shuffled using an inde-
pendent smaller PRP. This step is the opposite of sorting the left and right parts separately. Then
the two halves are randomly inserted into their final positions using a merge, which preserves the
order of each half. The keys for the smaller PRPs and the merge will be derived pseudorandomly
from the overall key.

Construction 48. Let M, M−1 , Permute′ be an ONS-Merge. Let PRG be a length-tripling PRG.
                                             

Then let (Π, Π−1 , Permute) be defined as follows. For N = 2 (x is a single bit), we will simply
have Π(k, x) = k ⊕ x. The only permutation is (0 1), which is the same as x 7→ 1 ⊕ x. We
can permute the key information-theoretically as Permute(k, (0 1)) = k ⊕ 1. For larger N , we let


                                                   65
N0 = ⌊N/2⌋ and N1 = N0 − N1 . We interpret the domain as [N ] ∼      = {(b, x)}b∈{0,1},x∈[Nb ] . We use
this interpretation both for the input to Π(k, ·) as well as for the input to M. For the outputs of
Π(k, ·) and M, we will interpret the range as [N ]. Then we define the algorithms as follows:
   • Π(k, (b, x)): Run (k0 , k1 , k2 ) ← PRG(k), y ← Π(kb , x), and output z ← M(k2 , (b, y)). Here,
     Π(kb , x) is called recursively.
   • Π−1 (k, z): Run (k0 , k1 , k2 ) ← PRG(k), (b, y) ← M−1 (k2 , z) and Compute x ← Π−1 (kb , y) and
     output (b, x). Here, Π−1 (kb , y) is called recursively.
   • Permute(k, (z z + 1), c): Let (k0 , k1 , k2 ) ← PRG(k). Compute (b0 , x0 ) ← Π−1 (k, z) and
     (b1 , x1 ) ← Π−1 (k, z + 1). We break into two cases:
                                                                          (z z+1),c            (z z+1),c
        – If b0 ̸= b1 output the permuted key k (z z+1),c = (k0 , k1 , k2             ) where k2           ←
          Permute′ (k2 , (z z + 1), c).
        – If b0 = b1 = b, output the permuted key k (z z+1),c = (k0 , k1 , k2 ) where k1−b = k1−b and
                 (y y+1),c
          kb = kb          ← Permute(kb , (y y + 1), c) where (b, y) ← M−1 (k2 , z). Here, Permute is
          recursively called.
   • Π(k (z z+1),c , x): Run Π(k, x) exactly as above but swapping out k0 , k1 , k2 with their permuted
     versions if necessary. Likewise define Π−1 (k (z z+1),c , x).
Theorem 49. If PRG is a secure PRG and (M, M−1 , Punc′ ) is a secure ONS-Merge, then the
tuple (Π, Π−1 , Punc) in Construction 45 is a secure ONS-PRP. In particular, if PRG is ϵPRG -secure
and (M, M−1 , Punc′ ) is ϵM -secure, then (Π, Π−1 , Punc) is ϵΠ -secure where ϵΠ (λ, n) ≤ O((ϵPRG (λ) +
ϵM (λ, N )) × log N ). Moreover, the permutations Π(k, ·) and Π−1 (k, ·) are (O(N 4 ), polylog(N ))-
decomposable.
Proof. First, we argue efficiency. A call to Π on block-size N makes a call to PRG, a call to M
on block-size N , and a recursive call to Π on block-size at most ⌉N/2⌉. Solving the recurrence, Π
makes O(log N ) calls to PRG and O(log N ) calls to M on block-sizes no more than N . Since PRG
nad M are polynomial time, this is efficient. We can likewise analyze the other algorithms.
    Next we need to argue the correctness guarantees. In particular, we need to argue that Permute
makes called to Permute′ on neighbor swaps where the pre-images of the swapped points have
different initial bits. Moreover, we need to verify that Π using a punctured key computes the
correct function.
    For the case n = 1, Π is just XORing with the key k. the only available neighbor swap is (0 1),
which is the same as XORing with 1, which is equivalent to XORing the key with 1. Thus, the
n = 1 case achieves perfect security. Now we handle the n > 1 case.
    Consider running Permute(k, (z z + 1), c). Recall that Permute′ (k2 , (z z + 1), c) is called ex-
actly when the first bits of Π−1 (k, z) and Π−1 (k, z + 1) are different. Notice that this is equivalent
to the case where M−1 (k2 , z) and M−1 (k2 , z + 1) have different first bits, which means that this is a
valid call to Permute′ . In this case, the correctness of the permuted key follows immediately from
the correctness of the underlying M.
    Now consider the case where Π−1 (k, z) and Π−1 (k, z + 1) (or equivalently, M−1 (k2 , z) and
M (k2 , z + 1)) share the same first bit. This implies that M−1 (k2 , z) and M−1 (k2 , z + 1) are
  −1

adjacent (any supposed string between them would share the same first bit, and by order pre-
serving, its image under M(k2 , ·) would need to lie between z, z + 1, which is impossible). Thus,

                                                   66
when Permute(kb , (y y + 1), c) is recursively called where (b, y) ← M−1 (k2 , z), we have that (b, y +
1) = M−1 (k2 , z + 1). Thus, the neighbor swap (y y + 1) is actually transposing M−1 (k2 , z) and
M−1 (k2 , z + 1). From this, correctness of the permuted key following immediately from the (induc-
tively justified) correctness of the underlying Π for block-size N/2.
    Now we argue decomposability. To decompose, we simply decompose M(k2 , ·), and then recur-
sively decompose Π(k0 , ·) and Π(k1 , ·). Solving the recurrence gives the decomposition statement
in Theorem 49.
   Finally, we prove security. Let A be a supposed adversary for (Π, Π−1 , Permute) with winning
probability 1/2+ϵΠ (λ, n). Let k ∈ {0, 1}λ denote the experiments random key k, and let k0 , k1 , k2 ←
PRG(k) denote the keys used to evaluate Π, Π−1 , Punc, and let z0 , z1 denote A′ s chosen pair. We
consider the following sequence of hybrids:
Hyb0 : This is the ONS-PRP security experiment. By assumption, the winning probability is at
least 1/2 + ϵΠ (λ, N ).
Hyb1 : This is the same experiment, except we switch to k0 , k1 , k2 being uniformly random keys,
and using them in all algorithms. By a straightforward reduction to the PRG security of PRG, we
have that A still wins with probability at least 1/2 + ϵΠ (λ, N ) − ϵPRG (λ).
Hyb2 : This is the same as Hybrid 1, except that we change the win condition. Namely, if the
punctured key k Γ,c contains a punctured k2 , then the experiment aborts and outputs a random bit,
independent of A. By a straightforward reduction to the ONS-Merge security of (M, M, Punc′ ), we
have that A still wins with probability at least 1/2 + ϵΠ (λ, N ) − ϵPRG (λ) − ϵM (λ, N ).
Hyb3 : This is the same as Hybrid 1, except that we further change the win condition to always
output a random bit. The only difference from Hybrid 2 is that when k Γ,c contains a punctured kb ,
in Hybrid 2 the experiment outputs a bit dependent on A’s output, whereas in Hybrid 3 it outputs
a random bit. By a straightforward reduction to the ONS-Security of (Π, Π−1 , Punc) with block-
size at most ⌈N/2⌉, we have that A still wins with probability at least 1/2 + ϵΠ (λ, N ) − ϵPRG (λ) −
ϵM (λ, N ) − ϵΠ (λ, ⌈N/2⌉). But observe that in Hybrid 3, the winning probability is exactly 1/2.
Thus we have that
                           ϵΠ (λ, N ) ≤ ϵPRG (λ) + ϵM (λ, N ) + ϵΠ (λ, ⌈N/2⌉)
For the base case, observe that when N = 2, Π is a random permutation and the punctured
key contains no information, so we trivially have ϵΠ (λ, 2) = 0. Solving the recurrence gives the
statement of the theorem.

5.4   Achieving OP-PRPs for Decomposable Permutations Using Obfuscation
Construction 50. Let (Π, Π−1 , Permute′ ) be an ONS-PRP (that is, an OP-PRP for the family of
neighbor swaps (z z + 1)). Let G = (Gn )n be a family of efficiently computable permutations, and
s a parameter. Then let (Π, Π−1 , Permute) be a new PRP where Permute does the following:




                                                  67
    • Permute(k, Γ, b): Let
                                            (
                                             iO(1λ , 1s , Π(k, ·))    if b = 0
                                       P =       λ    s
                                             iO(1 , 1 , Γ(Π(k, ·))) if b = 1
                                            (
                                             iO(1λ , 1s , Π−1 (k, ·))    if b = 0
                                     P −1 =      λ    s          −1
                                             iO(1 , 1 , Π(k, Γ (·))) if b = 1

       Output k Γ,b = (P, P −1 ).

Then we augment Π, Π−1 so that Π( (P, P −1 ) , x) = P (x) and Π−1 ( (P, P −1 ) , z) = P −1 (z).

    Observe that this construction preserves the decomposability of Π, Π−1 , since the algorithms
are exactly the same.

Theorem 51. Suppose iO is ϵ-secure and (Π, Π−1 , Permute′ ) is δ-secure as an ONS-PRP. Suppose
G = (Gn )n is (T, s′ )-decomposable. Let t be the maximum circuit size of Π, Π−1 after hardcoding
the key (including permuted keys from Permute′ ). Then as long as s ≥ s′ + t, (Π, Π−1 , Permute) is
O(T (ϵ + δ))-secure as an OP-PRP for G.

Proof. Let Γ0 , · · · , ΓT = Γ be the sequence of permutations where Γi = Γi−1 ◦ (zi zi + 1) and Γ0 is
the identity. Our goal is to show that the pair iO(1λ , Π(k, ·)), iO(1λ , Π−1 (k, ·)) is indistinguishable
from iO(1λ , Γ(Π(k, ·))), iO(1λ , Π−1 (k, Γ−1 (·))). Do do so, we will introduce a sequence of hybrids:
Hybi : iO(1λ , 1s Γi (Π(k, ·))), iO(1λ , Π−1 (k, Γ−1
                                                  i (·))). In particular, Hybrid 0 is the case where we have
iO(1 , Π(k, ·)), iO(1 , Π (k, ·)) and Hybrid T is the case iO(1λ , Γ(Π(k, ·))), iO(1λ , Π−1 (k, Γ−1 (·))).
    λ                  λ    −1

Hyb(i−1).1 : iO(1λ , , 1s , Γi (Π(k {(zi zi +1),0} , ·))), iO(1λ , , 1s , Π−1 (k {(zi zi +1),0} , Γ−1
                                                                                                   i (·))). Here, we sam-
     {(z z  +1),0}                ′
ple k i i          ← Permute (k, (zi zi + 1), 0).
Hyb(i−1).2 : iO(1λ , 1s , Γi (Π(k (zi zi +1),1 , ·))), iO(1λ , 1s , Π−1 (k (zi zi +1),1 , Γ−1
                                                                                           i (·))). Here, we sample
  (z    z   +1),1           ′
k    i    i       ← Permute (k, (zi zi + 1), 1).
       Observe that Π(k (zi zi +1),0 , ·) is functionally equivalent to Π(k, ·)), and this equivalence is pre-
served by composing both sides with Γi−1 . Likewise for the Π−1 functions. The sizes of the
programs being obfuscated are at most s′ + t, where t is the maximum size of the circuit Π after
hardcoding the key (inclunding permuted keys by Permute′ ). Thus, by iO security, Hybrids i − 1
and (i − 1).1 are indistinguishable, except with probability at most ϵ.
       The only difference between Hybrids (i − 1).1 and (i − 1).2 is that we switch from k (zi zi +1),0
to k (zi zi +1),1 . By the ONS-security of (Π, Π−1 , Permute′ ), these two hybrids are indistinguishable
except with probability at most δ.
       Finally, observe that Π(k (zi zi +1),1 , ·)) is functionally equivalent to (zi zi + 1)◦Π(k, ·). Therefore
Γi−1 ◦ Π(k (zi zi +1),1 , ·)) is functionally equivalent to Γi−1 ◦ (zi zi + 1) ◦ Π(k, ·), which in turn is
equivalent to Γi ◦ Π(k, ·). Thus, by iO security, Hybrids (i − 1).2 and i are indistinguishable except
with probability at most ϵ.
       Thus we obtain a chain of hybrids 0 → 0.1 → 0.2 → 1 → 1.1 → 1.2 → 2 → · · · → T − 1 →
(T − 1).1 → (T − 1).2 → T where each transition is indistinguishable. The triangle inequality then
gives the theorem.




                                                           68
6    One-Shot Signatures in the Standard Model
Following our construction in an oracle model from Section 4, we present our standard model
construction of non-collapsing collision resistant hash functions, which imply OSS.

Construction 52. Let λ ∈ N the statistical security parameter. Define s := 16·λ and let n, r, k ∈ N
such that r := s · (λ − 1), n := r + 32 · s, k := n. Let d := polyd (λ) ∈ N the expansion parameter and
κ := polyκ (λ) ∈ N the cryptographic security parameter, for some sufficiently large polynomials in
the statistical security parameter.
    Let iO an iO scheme, (F, Punc) a puncturable PRF, and Π, Π−1 , Permute a permutable PRP
                                                                                    

for the class of all 2poly(κ) , poly (κ) -decomposable permutations. Then we construct a hash function
                                        

(Gen, Hash) as follows:

    • Gen 1λ : Sample kin , kout , klin ← {0, 1}κ . Π (kin , ·) is a permutation with domain {0, 1}n ,
               

      Π (kout , ·) is a permutation with domain {0, 1}d , and F (klin , ·) is a PRF with inputs in {0, 1}d
      that outputs some polynomial number of bits. Let H(·) denote the first r output bits of Π (kin , ·)
                                                                                             k×(n−r)
      and J(·) denote the remaining n − r bits. For each y ∈ {0, 1}d , let A(y) ∈ Z2                 be a
                                                      k
      matrix with full column-rank and b(y) ∈ Z2 a vector, both are generated pseudorandomly by
      the output of F (klin , y).
                                                                  −1 , D where P ← iO (1κ , P ), P −1 ←
                                                                        
      As the common        reference  string output CRS  =   P, P
      iO 1κ , P −1 , D ← iO (1κ , D) such that
                    

                                                                                          
                    P (x) = y , A(y) · J(x) + b(y) where y ← Π−1 kout , H(x)||0d−r
                                                      
                             (
                               Π−1 (w||z) ∃ w, z : Π (kout , y) = w||0d−r ∧ (A(y) · z + b(y) = u)
                                                                            
               −1
             P (y, u) =
                               ⊥             else
                             (
                               1 if vT · A(y) = 0n−r
                D (y, v) =
                               0 otherwise

    • Hash (CRS, x): Compute (y, u) ← P(x) and output y.

Changes made from the oracle to standard model construction. The two first obvious
differences between the oracle model Construction 27 and the standard model Construction 52
are that (1) The standard model construction pseudorandomly generates the permutation Π and
matrices Ay , by rather than truly at random, and (2) the standard model construction obfuscates
the programs rather than putting them in oracles. The third, less obvious change, is that the
standard model construction additionally pads H(x) with 0’s and then applies Π−1 (kout , ·) in order
to get y ∈ {0, 1}d , rather than simply setting y = H(x) ∈ {0, 1}r , which was done in the oracle
construction.
    The rationale behind expanding y (the input to F (klin , ·)) from r to d bits, comes from the
adaptation of the last step of the oracle construction’s security proof (Section 4.3 in the oracle
construction), to the last step of the the standard model construction’s security proof (Section 6.3
in the standard model construction). Specifically, one can recall that in the oracle security proof, in
the last step, we showed that collision finding in the dual-free case can be used for collision finding in
2-to-1 random functions. Here, in the standard model, our replacement for 2-to-1 collision resistant

                                                   69
hash functions will be LWE-based and approximate, as elaborated in Section 6.3, and the expansion
of y is intended to deal with that.
    Finally, note that our choice to use the inverse Π−1 (kout , ·) in P (i.e., rather than computing
the permutation in the forward direction Π (kout , ·)) may seem arbitrary. However, our choice corre-
sponds to us ultimately using the second permutation as an input-permutable permutation, which
is in turn equivalent to treating the inverse as the permutation, and then asking that it is output-
permutable. We accomplish this exactly by using the inverse of Π as our forward-computation
of the permutation. While in Section 5 we show that output-permutable and input-permutable
PRPs are in fact equivalent (and also bilaterally-permutable PRPs), the explicit use of the inverse
Π−1 (kout , ·) intends to give insight to the security proof.

Non-collapsing. The non-collapsing property of our standard model construction is identical to
the oracle model non-collapsing procedure, shown in Proposition 28.

Security in the Standard Model. The rest of this section is for dedicated for showing security
in the standard model. The results in Sections 6.1 (Lemma 54), 6.2 (Lemma 55) and 6.3 (Theorem
56) together, eventually prove the below theorem.
Theorem 53 (Collision Resistance of Hash). Let Gen 1λ the generation algorithm from Construc-
                                                          

tion 52. Then, for every quantum polynomial-time algorithm A there exists a negligible function
negl such that,

                                                P, P −1 , D ← Gen 1λ
                                                                              
     Pr (x0 ̸= x1 ) ∧ (Hash(x0 ) = Hash(x1 )) :                                    ≤ negl (λ) .
                                                    (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 , D
                                                                               


6.1    Bloating the Dual
For n′ , r′ , k ′ ∈ N, s ∈ N ∪ {0} such that r′ + s ≤ n′ ≤ k ′ , we define the modified generator
g 1λ , n′ , r′ , k ′ , s , as follows. It samples a distribution over P, P −1 , D′ , where the values of n, r, k
                        
Gen
                                                                                               ′
in Construction 52 are replaced by n′ , r′ , k ′ respectively. For s we let A(0) (y) ∈ Zk2 ×s denote the
                            k′ ×(n′ −r′ )                 k′ ×(n′ −r′ −s)
first s columns of A(y) ∈ Z2              and A(1) (y) ∈ Z2                denote the remaining n′ − r′ − s
                                                                 g 1λ , n, r, k, 0 . The functionality of
                                                                                    
columns. Note that the standard generator is defined as Gen
P, P −1 stays the same and we define D′ (y, v) as an indistinguishability obfuscation of the following
function:                                   (                            ′  ′
                               ′             1 if vT · A(1) (y) = 0n −r −s
                            D (y, v) =
                                             0 otherwise

Observe that if vT · A(y) = 0n−r , then vT · A(0) (y) = 0n−r−s . Thus D′ accepts all points that are
accepted by D, but also accepts additional points as well, namely those for which vT · A(0) (y) ̸= 0s
          (1)
but vT · Ay = 0n−r−s . We call this bloating the dual.
Lemma 54. Let λ, n, r, k ∈ N, and assume there is a quantum algorithm A with complexity TA
such that,

                                          P, P −1 , D ← Gen
                                                                            
                                                           g 1λ , n, r, k, 0
                                                      

                                             (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 , D
                                                                        
           Pr (y0 = y1 ) ∧ (x0 ̸= x1 ) :                                     ≥ϵ .
                                              (yb , ub ) ← P (xb )

                                                      70
                                                                   
Assume that the primitives used in Construction 52 are f (·), f 1(·) -secure for some sub-exponential
                  δ                                                         δ
f (λ) := 2λ for some constant real number δ > 0. Also, for w := λ 2 , s′ := s − (n − r − s), assume
all of the following:
              2
       2r · kϵ
  1.    f (κ)         ≤ o(1),

        k2
  2. f (w)
        ϵ
           ≤ o(1),
             2w
  3. f (n−r−s) ≤ o(1),
              ϵ


                        w
       (n−r−s)· 2ϵ
  4.       2s′
                            ≤ o(1), and
       2w
          ·   (k5 +poly(n−r−s)+TA )
  5.    ϵ
                       f (n−r−s)          ≤ o(1).

Then, it follows that,

                                                        P, P −1 , D′ ← Gen(1
                                                                                          
                                                                         g λ , n, r, k, s)
                                                                    
           y0 = y1 := y,                                                                         ϵ
                                                            (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 , D′
                                                                                        
   Pr                                              :                                      ≥           .
                       / ColSpan A(1) (y)
                                          
           (u0 − u1 ) ∈                                                                       512 · k 2
                                                            (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )

                        / ColSpan A(1) (y) means in particular that u0 , u1 , and hence x0 , x1 , are
                                          
    Note that u0 − u1 ∈
distinct. Thus, the second expression means that A is finding collisions, but these collisions satisfy
an even stronger requirement.

Proof. Let λ ∈ N            there is a TA -complexity algorithm A and a probability ϵ such that A
                 and assume
gets P, P −1 , D ← Gen 1λ and outputs a pair (x0 , x1 ) of n-bit strings such that with probability
ϵ we have x0 ̸= x1 and y0 = y1 . We next define a sequence of hybrid experiments. Each hybrid
defines a computational process, an output of the process and a predicate computed on the process
output. The predicate defines whether the (hybrid) process execution was successful or not.

   • Hyb0 : The original execution of A.

The process Hyb0 is the above execution of A on input a sample from the distribution P, P −1 , D ←
                                                                                                   

g 1λ , n, r, k, 0 . We define the output of the process as (x0 , x1 ) and the process execution is
                 
Gen
considered as successful if x0 , x1 are both distinct and collide in their y values. By definition, the
success probability of Hyb0 is ϵ.

   • Hyb1 : Preparing to switch to a bounded number of cosets (A(y), b(y)), by using an obfuscated
      puncturable PRF and injective mode of a lossy function.
                                                                                                       δ
Let (LF.KeyGen, LF.F) a f (·), f 1(·) -secure lossy function scheme (as in Definition 16). Set w := λ 2
                 δ
where f (λ) := 2λ . Sample pkLF ← LF.KeyGen 1d , 0, 1w and let LF.F (pkLF , ·) : {0, 1}d → {0, 1}m
                                                            

the induced injective function.
   We now consider two circuits in order to describe our current hybrid. E0 (klin , ·) is the circuit
                                                                                     ′ , ·) is the circuit
that given an input from {0, 1}d applies F (klin , ·) to get A(y), b(y). E1 (pkLF , klin

                                                         71
that for a LF key pkLF and P-PRF key klin   ′ for a P-PRF with input size m rather than d, given a

d-bit input y, applies the lossy function with key pkLF and then the P-PRF to get A′ (y), b′ (y).
    Note that in the previous hybrid, the circuit E0 is used in all three circuits P , P −1 , D in
order to generate the cosets per input y, and furthermore, each of these three circuits access E0
only as a black box. The change that we make to the current hybrid is that we are going to use
            ′ , ·) for a freshly sampled pk , k ′ , instead of E . Since we are sending obfuscations
E1 (pkLF , klin                            LF   lin             0
 P, P −1 , D of the three circuits and due to the three circuits accessing the samplers E0 , E1 only
             

as black boxes,
                   it follows
                             by Lemma 18 that the output of the previous hybrid and the current
                       |X |
hybrid are f (κ), f (κ) -indistinguishable, where X is the set of al possible values of y, which has
size 2r (recall that while the y ′ s are of length d >> r, the are a sparse set inside {0, 1}d because
are padding with zeros), and we also recall that κ, the cryptographic security parameter is some
polynomial in the statistical security parameter λ. It follows in particular the success probability
                                          r
of the current process is := ϵ1 ≥ ϵ − f2(κ) ≥ ϵ − 32ϵ
                                                      = 31·ϵ
                                                         32 .

   • Hyb2 : Switching to a bounded number of cosets (A(y), b(y)), by using the lossy function.

The change from the previous hybrid      to the current hybrid is that we are going to sample a lossy
key pk1LF ← LF.KeyGen 1d , 1, 1w and use it inside E1 from the previous hybrid, instead of using
                                  

an injective key pk0LF ← LF.KeyGen 1d , 0, 1w , which was used in the previous hybrid. Note that
in this hybrid, there are at most 2w cosets (that is, some different values of y will have the same
coset), by the correctness of the
                               lossy function
                                                scheme. By the security of the lossy function scheme,
                                        1
the output of this hybrid is f (w) , f (w) -indistinguishable from the previous hybrid. It follows in
particular the success probability of the current process is
                                        1     31 · ϵ     1     30 · ϵ   15 · ϵ
                       := ϵ2 ≥ ϵ1 −         ≥        −       ≥        =        .
                                      f (w)    32      f (w)    32       16

   • Hyb3 : Using obfuscated (instead of plain) circuits for membership checks inside D, by using
     the security of the obfuscator that obfuscates D.

Recall that in the previous hybrid, the circuit D executes as follows: D (y, v) computes A(y)
by access to F (klin , ·), and then checks membership in the dual of ColSpan (A(y)) := Sy . In the
current hybrid we make the following change to D: We sample an additional P-PRF key kS at the
beginning of the hybrid. Given A(y),     we apply F (kS , ·) to obtain pseudorandomness and generate
an obfuscation OSy⊥ ← iO 1κ , Sy⊥ of the circuit that checks membership inside Sy⊥ . The circuit D
                                    

decides on the membership check of v using the obfuscated circuit OSy⊥ instead of the plain circuit
Sy⊥ .
     Note that by the correctness of the obfuscation scheme (specifically, the inner obfuscation scheme
that was used to obfuscate the circuit Sy⊥ , for every y), we did not change the functionality of D.
It follows
          by the security of the iO that obfuscates D, that the obfuscations between the two cases
              1
are f (κ) , f (κ) -indistinguishable, and thus the same can be said of the outputs of the hybrids. It
follows in particular the success probability of the current process is
                                              1     15 · ϵ    ϵ   29 · ϵ
                             := ϵ3 ≥ ϵ2 −         ≥        −    =        .
                                            f (κ)    16      32    32


                                                   72
     • Hyb4 : Relaxing dual verification inside D to accept a larger subspace Ty⊥ for every y, by using
       an obfuscated puncturable PRF over subspace hiding.

We now consider two circuits in order to describe our current hybrid, both of which are used only
inside the circuit D. The first circuit ES (kS , ·) is the circuit that given an inputA(y) applies F (kS , ·)
to obtain pseudorandomness and generate an obfuscation OSy⊥ ← iO 1κ , Sy⊥ . The second circuit
ET (kT , ·) is the circuit that given an input A(y) applies F (kT , ·) to obtain pseudorandomness for
two things: (1) to sample Ty⊥ ⊆ {0, 1}k a superspace that contains Sy⊥ and has s more dimensions
(recall that Sy has n − r dimensions, Sy⊥ has k − (n − r) dimensions and thus Ty⊥ has k − (n − r) + s
dimensions), and (2) to generate an obfuscation OTy⊥ ← iO 1κ , Ty⊥ .
                                                                            

    For concreteness, the way we use the randomness from F (kT , ·) is by generating a pseudorandom
                            (n−r)×(n−r)                               k×(n−r)
full rank matrix My ∈ Z2                , multiplying by A(y) ∈ Z2             to get A(y) := A(y) · My ∈
 k×(n−r)                                                                                                (1)
Z2        . We then take the last n − r − s columns of A(y), denote this sub-matrix by A ∈
                                     (1) ⊥
                                       
  k×(n−r−s)
Z2           and define ColSpan A           := Ty⊥ .
     Let X the set of all possible cosets that arise from the scheme, which has size ≤ 2w by the lossy
function. We would first like to note the indistinguishability, per coset i ∈ X , between OS ⊥ and
                                                                                                i
OT ⊥ , for a known Si and uniformly random appropriate superspace Ti . Specifically, we look at the
   i
indistinguishability for truly random bits for sampling T and for sampling the obfuscation in either
of the cases. For this, we would like to use Lemma 23. We would like to make sure the lemma’s
requirements are met so we note the dimensions with ′. Note that in our case, k,
                                                                                 k−n+r and s, take
              ′  ′      ′                                                  1
the role of k , r and s respectively, and thus we get f (n − r − s) , f (n−r−s) -indistinguishability.
     Note that in the previous hybrid, the circuit ES is used in D, and furthermore, the access of
D to ES is only as a black box. The change that we make to the current hybrid is that we are
going to use ET (kT , ·) for a freshly sampled P-PRF key kT instead of ES (which is also sampled
for a freshly sampled P-PRF key kS ). Since we are sending an obfuscation D of D and due to D
accessing the samplers ES , ET only as black boxes, it follows by Lemma
                                                                            18 that the output of the
                                                                  |X |
previous hybrid and the current hybrid are f (n − r − s) , f (n−r−s) -indistinguishable, where X is
the set of all cosets, which has size ≤ 2w by the lossy function. It follows in particular that the
success probability of the current process is
                                              2w         29 · ϵ    ϵ   28 · ϵ
                          := ϵ4 ≥ ϵ3 −                 ≥        −    =        .
                                         f (n − r − s)    32      32    32

     • Hyb5 : Asking for sum of collisions to be outside of Ty , by an obfuscated puncturable PRF
       over dual-subspace anti-concentration.

This hybrid is the same as the previous in terms of execution, but we change the definition of a
successful execution, that is, we change the predicate computed on the output of the process. We
still ask that (y0 = y1 := y), but instead of only asking the second requirement to be (x0 ̸= x1 ), we
ask for a stronger condition: (u0 − u1 ) ∈ (Sy \ Ty ). Note that we are not going to need to be able
to efficiently check for the success of the condition, but we’ll prove that it happens with a good
probability nonetheless.
     Let ϵ5 be the success probability of the current hybrid and note that A finds collisions with
probability ϵ4 in the previous hybrid Hyb4 (and since this hybrid is no different, the same goes for
the current hybrid). Let X ⊆ {0, 1}m the image of the lossy function LF.F (pkLF , ·) which we use

                                                     73
to map our images y to cosets (A(y), b(y)), that is, there are |X | cosets and by the lossyness we
                                                              (x)
know that |X | ≤ 2w . For every value x ∈ X denote by ϵ4 the probability to find a collision on
                                                                                        P      (x)
value x, or formally, that y0 = y1 := y, x0 ̸= x1 and x = LF.F (pkLF , y). We deduce x∈X ϵ4 = ϵ4 .
                                     (x)    ϵ4                  P        (x)  ϵ4                     (x)
Let L be a subset of X such that ϵ4 ≥ 2·|X     | and note that      x∈L ϵ4 ≥ 2 . We further define ϵ5
as the probability to find a strong (as in the notion of ϵ5 ) collision on value x, or formally, that
y0 = y1 := y, (u0 − u1 ) ∈ (Sy \ Ty ) and x = LF.F (pkLF , y). Note that Sy , Ty are really functions of
                                                                        P       (x)
x rather than of y, so (u0 − u1 ) ∈ (Sx \ Tx ) and also observe that x∈X ϵ5 = ϵ5 .
    We would now like to use Lemma 26, so we make sure that we satisfy its requirements. Let any
                                      (x)    ϵ4                              28·ϵ         w
x ∈ L, we know that by definition ϵ4 ≥ 2·|X      | and also recall that ϵ4 ≥ 32 , |X | ≤ 2 and thus

                                 (x)   ϵ4      28 · ϵ 1       ϵ 
                                ϵ4     ≥     ≥       · w ≥Ω w .
                                    2 · |X |    64    2       2
                                                         2
                                                                2 w
Let s′ := s − (n − r − s) and for any x ∈ L let ℓx := k(x) ≤ O k ·2ϵ  . Note that by our Lemma
                                                              ϵ4
                                                       1
                                             (n−r−s)· (x)
                                                        ϵ4              ℓx ·(k3 +poly(n−r−s)+TA )
54 statement’s assumptions, we have (1)           2s′
                                                             ≤ o(1) and (2)      f (n−r−s)          ≤ o(1).
                                                                                  (x)
                                                                        (x)      ϵ4        1
Since this satisfies Lemma 26, it follows that for every x ∈ L we have ϵ5 ≥ 16·k     2 − f (κ) , because for
each x ∈ X , in order to use Lemma 26, we need the randomness for the experiment to be genuinely
random, which will necessitate us to invoke the security of the iO and puncturable PRF, which
                     1
incurs the loss of f (κ) . It follows that

        X (x) X (x) X ϵ(x)              ϵ4              28·ϵ
                                                            
                       4       |X |      2      |X |     64      |X |      ϵ
   ϵ5 =  ϵ5 ≥  ϵ5 ≥          −      ≥         −      ≥         −      ≥          .
                     16 · k 2 f (κ)   16 · k 2 f (κ)   16 · k 2 f (κ)   64 · k 2
         x∈X         x∈L        x∈L


   • Hyb6 : For every y, de-randomizing Ty and defining it as the column span of A(y)(1) ∈
       k×(n−r−s)
     Z2          , the last n − r − s columns of the matrix A(y), by using permutable PRPs,
     security of iO and an obfuscated puncturable PRF.

This hybrid is the same as the previous, with the following change. Recall how we compute dual
membership check inside the circuit D: Given y, we compute x = LF.F (pkLF , y) we take the P-
PRF key kin and compute A(x) = A(y), then use the additional P-PRF key kT to generate the
random superspace Ty⊥ of Sy⊥ and additional randomness, and use both to generate an obfuscation
OTy⊥ ← iO 1κ , Ty⊥ . Also recall that the subspace Ty⊥ is generated as follows: Generate the matrix
                  

My using the P-PRF, then multiply it by A(y) to get A(y), and then take the last n−r −s columns
of it as a basis for Ty , and Ty⊥ is defined as the dual of that space. In the current hybrid we will
not sample My and simply define Ay := Ay . This means that Ty is defined to be the column span
of A(y)(1) . We will also not obfuscate the membership check for Ty⊥ inside the circuit D, and check
membership by using a basis of Ty⊥ in the plain. We next define hybrid experiments (which go
in the direction from the previous hybrid Hyb5 to the current hybrid Hyb6 ) and explain why each
consecutive pair are appropriately indistinguishable.

   • Using the security of the permutable PRP. Assume we sample all components of our
     scheme, excluding the key kin for the initial permutation Π on {0, 1}n , and define the following

                                                    74
  permutation Γ on {0, 1}n . Denote by h the first r bits of the input and by j the last n − r
  bits of the input to the permutation Γ. Recall that in the circuits P, P −1 , D, the value y, the
                                                                                (n−r)×(n−r)
  coset A(y), b(y), the superspace Ty⊥ and the associated matrix My ∈ Z2                    , are all
  computed as a function of r bits, which in the construction take the role of H(x). In fact, all
  of the above variables can be written as a function of h ∈ {0, 1}r instead of as a function of y.
  The permutation Γ takes h and computes Mh (the matrix for computing Th from the matrix
  A(h)), interprets j as a vector in Zn−r
                                        2   , and applies Mh to j. Note that this change means we
  are taking the puncturable PRF key kT which is used to sample Ty⊥ (and formally, is used to
  sample the pseudorandomness for generating the matrix My and for obfuscating membership
  check for Ty⊥ ), which previously only existed inside the circuit D, and putting it also inside
  the circuits P , P −1 , because this key is needed in order to compute the permutation Γ.
  Recall the examples of decomposable permutations in Section 5. For every value h ∈ {0, 1}r
  observe that multiplication by Mh is a permutation (and moreover an affine permutation,
  which is decomposable efficiently). Then, Γ is a controlled permutation as described in the
  examples of decomposable permutations in Section 5, which is controlled on decomposable
  permutations. Overall, we deduce that Γ is a 2poly(λ) , poly(λ) -decomposable permutation.
  We use the permutable PRP Π, and switch to a setting where we use the key kin Γ that applies Γ
                            −1
  to the output of Π (and Γ to the input of Π), instead of just 
                                                                applying Πand its inverse. By
                                                                         1
  the security of the permutable PRP (Lemma 40), this change is f (κ), f (κ) -indistinguishable.

• Using the security of outside iO. For every h ∈ Zr2 , we make the following change to
  P, P −1 . Instead of composing the permutation Γ to the output of Π, it applies Π as it is.
  However, when generating the matrix A(y), it multiplies by My to get A (y) := A (y) · My .
  An additional change we will make not to P, P −1 but to the circuit D, is that we will not
  obfuscate the membership check circuit for Ty⊥ and simply use its available basis. One can
  observe that we did not change the functionality of P, P −1 , D in any of the above changes and
                                                                                            κ
  thus by the security of the indistinguishability obfuscation
                                                                that obfuscates P ← iO (1 , P ),
  P −1 ← iO 1κ , P −1 , D ← iO (1κ , D), this change is f (κ), f (κ)
                                                                 1
                      
                                                                      -indistinguishable.

• Using an obfuscated puncturable PRF argument over the choice of the matrix
  A(y), for every y. Note that after we did the last step, our process for generating the cosets,
  in all tree circuits P, P −1 , D is the following: Given y we compute x with the lossy function,
  and then apply two different puncturable PRFs (that is, with i.i.d keys, klin and kT ) to obtain
                                              (n−r)×(n−r)
  (A(x), b(x)) and the matrix Mx ∈ Z2                     . We then multiply to get the matrix that
  we are actually using, i.e., A(x) := A(x) · Mx . The change we next make is to have one
  fresh puncturable PRF key klin   ′ and use it to generate the coset (A(x), b(x)), without further

  generating the matrix Mx .
  By a standard argument using an obfuscated puncturable PRF like we used numerous times
  in this proof (i.e., we use lemma 18 and the fact that when using real randomness,
                                                                                         the two
                                                                                        w    1
  ways to sample A(y) are statistically equivalent), we get that this change is f (κ), 2 · f (κ)   -
  indistinguishable.

Observe that after the last change we are exactly in the setting of Hyb6 , and we started in Hyb5 .



                                               75
It follows in particular that the success probability of the current process is
                                         2w        ϵ          ϵ           ϵ
                         := ϵ6 ≥ ϵ5 −         ≥        2
                                                         −         2
                                                                     =           .
                                        f (κ)   64 · k     128 · k     128 · k 2
   • Hyb7 : Going back to using 2r cosets rather than ≤ 2w , by moving from lossy mode to injective
     mode in the lossy function.
We make the exact same change we made between Hyb1 to Hyb2 , but in the opposite direction. That
is we sample an injective key pk0LF ← LF.KeyGen 1d , 0, 1w and use it instead of the previous lossy
key pk1LF ← LF.KeyGen 1d , 1, 1w , which is used in the previous hybrid. By the exact same
                                                                                        argument 
                                                                                              1
(which relies on the security of the lossy function), the output of this hybrid is f (w), f (w) -
indistinguishable. It follows in particular the success probability of the current process is
                                        1         ϵ           ϵ           ϵ
                        := ϵ7 ≥ ϵ6 −        ≥          2
                                                         −         2
                                                                     =           .
                                      f (w)    128 · k     256 · k     256 · k 2
   • Hyb8 : Stop using the lossy function, by an obfuscated puncturable PRF.
We make the exact same change we made between Hyb0 to Hyb1 , but in the opposite direction.
That is, we drop the lossy function LF.F altogether and apply the PRF to y directly and not to x,
the output of the lossy function on
                                   input y.  By the exact same argument (which relies on Lemma
                                          |X |
18), the output of this hybrid is f (κ), f (κ) -indistinguishable, where X is the set of al possible
values of y, which has size 2r (recall that while the y ′ s are of length d >> r, the are a sparse set
inside {0, 1}d because are padding with zeros). It follows in particular the success probability of
the current process is
                                         2r        ϵ           ϵ           ϵ
                         := ϵ8 ≥ ϵ7 −         ≥         2
                                                          −         2
                                                                      =           .
                                        f (κ)   256 · k     512 · k     512 · k 2
    To conclude, note that the generated obfuscations in the final hybrid Hyb8 form exactly the
distribution P, P −1 , D′ ← Gen
                            g 1λ , n, r, k, s . This finishes our proof.
                                            


6.2    Simulating the Dual
Our next step is to show that an adversary which has access to the dual-free setting can simulate
the CRS for an adversary in the restricted setting, where the dual verification check is bloated.
Lemma 55. Let λ, n, r, k ∈ N and assume there is a quantum algorithm A running in time TA
such that,
                                                            P, P −1 , D′ ← Gen(1
                                                                                              
                                                                             g λ , n, r, k, s)
                                                                        
               y0 = y1 := y,
                                                                (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 , D′
                                                                                            
       Pr                                             :                                      ≥ϵ .
               (u0 − u1 ) ∈   / ColSpan A(1) (y)
                                                                (yb , ub ) ← P(xb )
                                                                                                2r
Assume that the primitives used in Construction 52 are f (·), f 1(·) -secure, and assume f (κ)     ϵ
                                                                                                     ≤ o(1).
Then, there is a quantum algorithm B running in time TA + poly (λ) such that
                                                      
                                               −1
                                                                                               
                                          P, P , D          g 1λ , r + s, r, k − (n − r − s), 0
                                                          ← Gen
                                                                                               ϵ
    Pr (y   = y   ) ∧ (x   ̸
                            =   x   ) :                               −1                         ≥
          0     1        0       1           (x   ,
                                                 0 1 x  ) ← B   P, P                              2 .
                                              (y b , ub ) ← P(xb )

                                                     76
Proof. We first describe the actions of the algorithm B (which will use the code of A as part of
its machinery) and then argue why it breaks collision resistance with the appropriate probability.
           −1                         −1                λ
                                                                                   
Given P, P which comes from P, P , D ← Gen 1 , r + s, r, k − (n − r − s), 0 , the algorithm
                                                  g
B does the following:

   • Sample a P-PRF key kC that outputs some sufficient (polynomial) amount of random bits on
     an d-bit input, and sample a permutable PRP key kΓ for a PRP on domain {0, 1}n . Define
     the following circuits.

   • y ∈ Zd2 , u ∈ Zk2 ← P (x ∈ Zn2 ):
                        

        – x ∈ Zr+s      e ∈ Zn−r−s
                                   
                   2 , x      2       ← Π (kΓ , x).
                                      
                            k−(n−r−s)
        – y ∈ Zd2 , u ∈ Z2                ← P(x).
                                           
        – C(y) ∈ Zk×k 2   , d(y) ∈ Z n−r−s
                                     2        ← F (kC , y).
                                  
                              u
        – u ← C(y) ·                  .
                          x
                          e + d(y)

   • ( x ∈ Zn2 ) ← P −1 y ∈ Zd2 , u ∈ Zk2 :
                                            

                                           
        – C(y) ∈ Zk×k 2   , d(y) ∈ Z n−r−s
                                     2        ← F (kC , y).
                                  k−(n−r−s) 
              u                         0
        –          ← C(y)−1 · u −                   .
              x
              e                            d(y)
                             −1
        – x ∈ Zr+s
                      
                   2    ← P (y, u).
       – x ← Π−1 (kΓ , (x, xe)).

   • D′ y ∈ Zd2 , v ∈ Zk2 ∈ {0, 1}:
                          

                                        
       – C(y) ∈ Zk×k 2   , d(y) ∈ Zn−r−s
                                   2       ← F (kC , y).

        – A(1) (y) := last n − r − s columns of C(y).
        – Output 1 iff vT · A(1) (y) = 0n−r−s .

     • Use indistinguishability
                               ′ obfuscation      in order to generate the input for A: P ← iO (1κ , P ),
           −1
        P ← iO 1 , P  κ    −1              κ
                               , D ← iO (1 , D ).′


     The remainder of the reduction is simple: B executes (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 , D′ and then
                                                                                               

      eb ) ← Π (kΓ , xb ) and outputs (x0 , x1 ). Assume that the output of A satisfies y0 = y1 := y and
(xb , x
                                                                         k×(n−r−s)
                  / ColSpan A(y)(1) , and recall that A(y)(1) ∈ Z2
                                       
also (u0 − u1 ) ∈                                                                   are the last n − r − s
                                  k×(n−r)
columns of the matrix A(y) ∈ Z2             , which is generated by the reduction. We explain why it is
necessarily the case that x0 ̸= x1 .                                                           
                                                                                 A(y)
   First note that due to how we defined the reduction, A(y) := C(y) ·                           , where
                                                                            In−r−s
        (k−(n−r−s))×s                                 −1               (n−r−s)×(n−r−s)
A(y) ∈ Z2             is the matrix arising from P, P    and In−r−s ∈ Z2               is the
identity matrix of dimension n − r − s. Also note that because C(y), A(y) are full rank then A(y)

                                                    77
                                      / ColSpan A(y)(1) and since A(y)(1) are the last n − r − s
                                                          
is full rank. Now, since (u0 − u1 ) ∈
columns of A(y), it follows that if we consider the coordinates vector x ∈ Z2n−r of (u0 − u1 ) with
respect to A(y), the first s elements are not 0s . By linearity of matrix multiplication it follows that
if we look at each of the two coordinates vectors x0 , x1 (each has n − r bits) for u0 , u1 , respectively,
somewhere in the first s bits, they differ. Now, recall how we obtain the first s bits of xb – this is
                                                                            −1
exactly by applying Π (the permutation on {0, 1}r+s arising from P, P ) to xb and taking the last
s bits of the output. Since these bits differ in the output of the permutation, then the preimages
have to differ, i.e., x0 ̸= x1 .
    Define ϵB as the probability  that the output of A indeed satisfies y0 = y1 := y and also
(u0 − u1 ) ∈/ ColSpan A(1) (y) , and it remains to give a lower bound for the probability ϵB . We
do this by a sequence of hybrids, eventually showing that the view which
                                                                    λ
                                                                                B simulates to A is
computationally indistinguishable from a sample from Gen 1 , n, r, k, s . More precisely, each
                                                             g
hybrid describes a process, it has an output, and a success predicate on the output.
                                                                  
                                                                −1
    • Hyb0 : The above distribution P, P −1 , D′ ← B P, P
                                                   
                                                                     , simulated to the algorithm A.

The first distribution is defined in the reduction above. The output of the process is the output
(x0 , x1 ) of A. The
                   process execution is considered as successful if y0 = y1 := y and (u0 − u1 ) ∈
                                                                                                 /
ColSpan A(y)(1) .
                                                                                                   −1
   • Hyb1 : Not applying the inner permutation Πin (which comes from the circuits P, P                  ), by
     using the security of an obfuscated permutable PRP.

Let Πin the (first) permutable PRP that’s inside P (which is the obfuscation of the circuit P ). In
                                                                                           n
the previous hybrid we apply the n-bit permutable     PRP Π (kΓ , ·) to the input x ∈ Z2 and then
proceed to apply the inner permutation Πin k in , · to the first (i.e. leftmost) r + s output bits of
the first permutation Π (kΓ , ·). The change we make to the current hybrid is that we simply apply
only Π (kΓ , ·).                                                                    
    Recall two details: (1) By Theorem 39, the inner permutable PRP Πin k in , · is in and of itself
 2poly(λ) , poly(λ) -decomposable, and (2) the circuits P , P −1 which apply the permutations are both
                   

obfuscated by iO to be generate the obfuscations P, P −1 . We can treat it as a fixed permutation
that acts on the output of the permutation Π (kΓ , ·) and thus it follows by Lemma 40 that the
                                                                                                   1
current and previous hybrids are computationally indistinguishable, with indistinguishability f (κ)   .

   • Hyb2 : For every y ∈ Zd2 , taking A(y) to be the direct output of the PRF F, by using an
     obfuscated punctured PRF.

In order to describe the change between the current and previous hybrid we first recall the structure
of the circuits from
                   the previous   hybrid: In the previous hybrid, for every y ∈ Zr2 we defined
                     A(y)
A(y) := C(y) ·                        , where C(y) ∈ Zk×k2       comes from the output F (kC , y) and
                             In−r−s
          (k−(n−r−s))×s                                          
A(y)
     ∈ Z 2            is the output  of the inner PRF F  k lin   (which in turn comes from the inside
         −1                                                                                      
of P, P       ). In the current hybrid we are going to ignore the PRFs F (kC , y) and F k lin and
their generated values C(y), d(y) and A(y) and instead, sample a fresh key kA , and on query y
                                        k×(n−r)
generate A(y) ← F (kA , y), for A(y) ∈ Z2       .

                                                    78
    First, note that the following two ways to sample A(y), are statistically equivalent for every
                                                                                          k×k
y: (1) The matrix A(y)   is generated bysampling a random full-rank matrix C(y) ∈ Z2         and
                           A(y)
letting A(y) be C(y) ·                    . (2) For every y ∈ Zr2 just sample a full-rank matrix
                                  In−r−s
          k×(n−r)
A(y) ∈ Z2         . This means that when truly random bits are used for generating A(y) in the two
cases, the distributions are statistically equivalent.
    To see why the two distributions are computationally indistinguishable, a different description
of the previous hybrid can be given as follows: We can consider a sampler E0 that for every
y ∈ {0, 1}d samples A(y) according to the first algorithm, and another sampler E1 that samples
A(y) according to the second algorithm, and we know that for every y (and recall there are 2r
actual values of y which can appear as the output, and not 2d ) the outputs of E0 and E1 are
statistically indistinguishable.
    Since there are 2r valid values for y, by Lemma 18, the current hybrid is computationally
                                                                  r
indistinguishable from the previous, with indistinguishability f2(κ) .
                                                     
                                                   −1
   • Hyb3 : Discarding the inner obfuscations P, P      completely, by using the security of the
     outer obfuscator.

The change between the current hybrid  and the previous is that in the current hybrid we generate
                 −1  ′                      −1
the circuits P, P , D without using P, P        at all. Note that this is possible, since in the previ-
                                                                                 
                                                                               −1
ous hybrid, we moved to a circuit that did not use access to the circuits P, P      any longer during
the execution of any of the three circuits P, P −1 , D′ , except from using the second permutation
                                                                                                
                                                                                              −1
Πout , which acts on {0, 1}d and does not need to act from inside the inner obfuscations P, P
any more. This means that wecan technically
                                              move the application of the inner permutation Πout
                                    −1
”outside of the inner circuits P, P      ” and the functionality of the circuits P, P −1 , D′ did not
change between the current and the previous hybrids, and thus, by the security of the indistin-
guishability obfuscator that obfuscates the three circuits, the current hybrid is computationally
                                                                        1
indistinguishable from the previous one, with indistinguishability of f (κ) .

Finalizing the reduction. Finally, observe that the distribution generated in the above Hyb3
                          g 1λ , n, r, k, s . Also observe that the outputs of Hyb and Hyb
                                           
is exactly
          a sample from Gen                                                     0        3
          2r
are O    f (κ)-computationally indistinguishable. Recall that by the lemma’s assumptions, with
                                   g 1λ , n, r, k, s , the algorithm A outputs a pair (x0 , x1 ) of
                                                    
probability ϵ, on a sample from Gen
                                                           / ColSpan A(1) (y) . It follows
                                                                                
n-bit strings such that y0 = y1 := y and also (u0 − u1 ) ∈                                rthat
                                                                                                the
probability for the same event when the input to A is generated by Hyb0 , is at least ϵ−O f2(κ) ≥ 2ϵ ,
which finishes our proof.

6.3     Hardness of the Dual-free Case from LWE and iO
Here, we explain how to prove the collision resistance of the dual-free case (where the adversary
sees P, P −1 , but not D). This will follow the blueprint used in Section 4.3 to reduce the dual-free
case to a standard collision-resistance problem (which we recommend going over, before reading


                                                  79
the following standard model security reduction). However, a few technical challenges arise. Some
of these are due to needing certain steps to be efficient, where they are naively inefficient in Sec-
tion 4.3. Another issue is that the underlying 2-to-1 function we use based on LWE [BCM+ 18] is
not uniformly 2-to-1, but rather has some points that have no collisions and are only 1-to-1. By
careful arguments using the novel permutable PRPs as a tool, we are nevertheless able to resolve
these issues and prove security. In the following section all arithmetic is implicitly modulo 2, unless
explicitly noted otherwise (and then the arithmetic modulo or lack thereof will be specified).

The LWE-based hash function L. Here, we recall an approximate 2-to-1 function L based on
LWE which is a simplified version of the noisy claw-free trapdoor function developed in [BCM+ 18].
Let u, v, σ, B, B, q be parameters with the relationships described in Equation 1.


                       σ = uΩ(1) ,                            B = σ × uΩ(1) ,                             (1)
                      B ≥ B × uω(1) ,                         q ≥ B × uΩ(1) ,
                                                                           q    δ
                       v ≥ Ω(u log q),                        ∃δ ∈ (0, 1) : ≤ 2u .
                                                                           σ
   The keys for the hash function have the form pk = (B, c), where B ← Zv×u     q  and c ← B · s +
e mod q where s ← Zuq and the entries of e ∈ Zvq are i.i.d. sampled from discrete Gaussians of width
σ, which in turn are guaranteed (w.h.p) to have entries in (−B, B].
   We define the function L (pk, ·) : Zuq × (−B, B]v × {0, 1} → Zvq as follows.

            B ∈ Zv×u , c ∈ Zvq , t ∈ Zuq , f ∈ (−B, B]v , b ∈ {0, 1} = B · t + f + b · c mod q .
                                                                  
       L         q

By choosing B, q to be powers of 2, we can map the domain and range to bit-strings.

L is collision resistant. Observe that L (pk, ·) is collision resistant, under the LWE assumption.
This is because (with probability exponentially close to 1 in the security parameter, over sampling
pk) a collision is always of the form (t′0 , 0), (t′1 , 1), and subtraction reveals s′ = t0 −t1 , which breaks
the assumption that search LWE with sub-exponential modulus/noise ratio is hard for quantum
polynomial-time algorithms.

L is approximately 2-to-1. Observe that with overwhelming probability over sampling pk, the
function L (pk, ·) is almost 2-to-1. Formally, with overwhelming probability over sampling e, B
we have that for any two different lattice points B · u, B · v, the sets B · u + (−B, B]v mod q,
B · v + (−B, B]v mod q are non-intersecting (this follows because v ≥ Ω (u log q) is known to imply
that the lattice is sparse with high probability). This in turn implies that for any point in the set
S := {B · u + (−(B − ∥e∥), (B − ∥e∥))v | u ∈ Zuq }, the only two points in the domain of L that reach
it are (t′ , 0), (t′ − s′ , 1). Also, due to our parameter choices, (1) From B ≥ σ × uΩ(1) it follows that
with high probability over sampling e, the norm ∥e∥ is bounded by B and (2) From B ≥ B × uω(1)
it follows that B (and thus also ∥e∥) is negligible compared to B, which makes the set S be an
overwhelming fraction of the entire range {B · u + (−B, B]v | u ∈ Zuq }.




                                                     80
L has a trapdoor to find preimage sets. Similarly to the noisy trapdoor claw-free functions
from [BCM+ 18], the function L has a trapdoor that can invert it. Specifically, it is known how to
efficiently sample a pair (pk, td) where pk is statistically indistinguishable from an honestly sampled
public key for L, and given y an element in the image of L (pk, ·) and td, it is possible to efficiently
compute the preimage set of y (which, as we know by now, is of size either 1 or 2).
                                                                n
Theorem 56. Let n, r, k ∈ N such that r < n ≤ k and also n−r       is an integer (which implies that
  r
n−r is also an integer). Suppose the hardness of LWE against quantum polynomial-time algorithms,
for the parameters as set in Equation 1. Note that this in particular implies the collision resistance
of the LWE-based function L defined above.
    Then, for every quantum polynomial-time     algorithm A there exists  a negligible function   negl,
such that the probability to get P, P −1 sampled from P, P −1 , D       g 1λ , n, r, k, 0 , and then
                                                                                        
                                                                     ←Gen
                                                                             n
output a collision in Hash (the function derived from P), is negl           n−r   .

Proof. Suppose there exists an adversary A which, given P, P −1 as sampled from P, P −1 , D ←
                                                                                               

g 1λ , n, r, k, 0 (recall that A gets the sampled circuits without the dual D), finds a collision in
                 
Gen
the associated function Hash(x) := Π−1 kout , H(x)||0d−r with non-negligible probability ϵ. We
                                                           

will describe an adversary B that violates the quantum hardness of LWE, using the adversary A.

The collision resistant, approximate coset partition, trapdoor hash Q. We will use the
above function L in order to construct the function Q. We start with defining an instance of L:
We choose u, q, B, v in a way which satisfies Equation 1 and also such that 2 · q u · (2B)v = 2n/(n−r) .
                                                                                n
In other words, this makes the domain of the hash function L be exactly n−r        bits, and its output
                                                    n
size be v · log2 (q) bits (recall we assume that n−r is an integer and we set q to be a power of 2).
There is one more requirement for our parameters: We take d (recall that d is the number of bits
that the second permutation Π (kout , ·) acts on) to be at least the sum of the sizes (in bits) of the
input and output of L, multiplied by (n − r), that is,
                                                  
                                   n
                      (n − r) ·        + v · log(q) = n + (n − r) · v · log(q) ≤ d .
                                  n−r

    We set Q to be a (n − r)-parallel repetition of L, namely we sample n − r i.i.d. public keys
pk1 , · · · , pkn−r for L, which form the key pk for Q, and compute the n − r outputs of L given n − r
inputs.19 It follows that Q maps n input bits to (n − r) · v · log2 (q) output bits, and furthermore
by our setting of parameters, d is at least the sum of sizes (in bits) of the input and output sizes
of Q – this will come in handy later in the proof.
    As a further specification of the format for computing Q:, the input w ∈ {0, 1}n to Q is
given in two parts: The first, vector part, consists of r bits and is written (w1 , · · · , wn−r ) (note
                                                                          r
  r           n
n−r = n−r − 1) where for each i ∈ [n − r] we have wi ∈ {0, 1}
                                                                         n−r , and the second, coordinates

part, consists of n − r bits (b1 , · · · , bn−r ). For computing Q, for every i ∈ [n − r] we take wi and bi
and apply L (pki , ·). We then take the output ai ∈ {0, 1}v·log(q) and set it as the i-th packet in the
output a ∈ {0, 1}(n−r)·v·log(q) of Q.
    Note the following details about Q:
 19
    The construction of Q from L is almost identical to the oracle construction of a coset partition function from
Theorem 35, where we construct a collision-resistant coset partition function from a random 2-to-1 function.



                                                       81
• Collision resistance. A collision in Q with input size n constitutes a collision in L with
                n
  input size n−r  . It follows that based on the quantum hardness of LWE, for every quantum
  polynomial time adversary there is  a negligible
                                                   function negl such that the probability to find
                                          n
  a collision in Q is bounded by negl n−r .

• Approximate coset partition. Due to L being approximately 2-to-1 and Q being a parallel
  repetition of it, it follows that Q is an approximate coset partition function (Definition 33).
  Specifically, we know that for an overwhelming fraction of the outputs of L, the preimage set
  is a coset of dimension 1, thus it follows that for an overwhelming fraction of the outputs of
  Q, the preimage set is a coset of dimension n − r.
• Existence of a (secret) trapdoor that allows efficient computation of coset de-
  scription. The concatenation of the trapdoors (td1 , · · · , tdn−r ) of the n − r instances of L
  gives us a trapdoor td for Q in the following sense: Given an element a in the image of Q
  and the trapdoor, one can compute a coset description of the preimage set of a.
  To see this, recall that the output of Q is given by the concatenation of the n − r outputs of
  L, and for each of them, the number of preimages is either 1 or 2, and furthermore, these can
  be computed by the independent trapdoors for each of the instances of L. Eventually, the
  computed coset description of a is given as follows: For each i ∈ [n − r] and b ∈ {0, 1}, let
                 n
  wi,b ∈ {0, 1} n−r the preimage of the i-th part ai ∈ {0, 1}v·log(q) (of a ∈ {0, 1}(n−r)·v·log2 (q) ), in
  the function L (pki , ·), such that it ends with b. If there is no such preimage that ends with
                      n
  b we set wi,b = 0 n−r . Note that while it isn’t necessarily the case that there are two images
  (one for each b ∈ {0, 1}), it is guaranteed that at least one of them always exists.
     – The coset shift is set to                       X
                                                                 ′
                                              ba :=             wi,0 ,
                                                      i∈[n−r]
                                                                    n
                            ′ ∈ Zn is derived from w           n−r
       where the vector wi,0       2                    i,0 ∈ Z2   by using the previously described
                                                   ′      n
       input format to Q. Namely, we split wi,0 ∈ Z2 into two parts, first part of r bits and a
                                                        n           r
       second part of n − r bits. We put the first n−r      − 1 = n−r  bits of wi,0 as the i-th packet
                                     ′
       in the first, r-bit part of wi,0 , and the remaining bit of wi,0 we set as the i-th bit in the
       second, n − r-bit part of wi,0 ′ , and the rest of the bits of w′ are set to 0.
                                                                        i,0
     – As for the subspace associated with the coset, denote by Aa ∈ Z2n×n−r the subspace
                                                                             ′ + w′ , where
       basis, and for i ∈ [n − r] we set the i-th column of the basis to be wi,0  i,1
                                                                                    n
                                   ′ ∈ {0, 1}n is derived from w
       for b ∈ {0, 1}, the vector wi,b                          i,b ∈ {0, 1} n−r in the same way
       described above when computing the coset shift.
• Public efficient computation of coordinate vector for preimage element. Q allows
  anyone to efficiently compute coordinate vectors of preimages with respect to its corresponding
  cosets. Given any input w ∈ {0, 1}n to Q, one can take the last n − r bits of w to obtain
  a coordinates
                 vector z ∈ Zn−r
                               2  . Then, if one further gets access to the coset description
   Aa , ba , we have the equality
                                        w = A a · z + ba .
  In that sense, the vector z which is efficiently computable
                                                             from the preimage w is the coor-
  dinates vector of w with respect to the coset Aa , ba .

                                                 82
    Now, given our definition of the hash function Q and its above special properties, we are ready
to describe our reduction.

The reduction B from collision finding in Q to collision finding in Hash. The following
reduction is an adaptation of the oracle reduction from Theorem 34 to the standard model, using
LWE, obfuscation and permutable PRPs. Given pk = pk1 , · · · , pkn−r a public key for Q (where
pki is the i.i.d. sampled public key for L), the reduction B samples permutable PRP keys kin , kout
and a puncturable PRF key klin  ′ . Denote by ℓ := (n − r) · v · log (q) the output size of Q, and we
                                                                    2
next define the functions P , P −1 which we then obfuscate to get the circuits P, P −1 , which we will
feed to A.

   • P (x ∈ {0, 1}n ):

        1. w ← Π (kin , x),
        2. a ← Q (pk, w),
        3. y ← Π−1 kout , a||0d−ℓ ,
                                  
                               
        4. Cy ∈ Zk×n
                  2  , d y ∈ Zk ← F (k ′ , y),
                              2       lin

        5. u ← Cy · w + dy ,
       6. Output y ∈ {0, 1}d , u ∈ Zk2 .
                                         

   • P −1 y ∈ {0, 1}d , u ∈ Zk2 :
                                

              (
                Π−1 (kin , w) ∃w ∈ Zn2 such that Cy · w + dy = u
       1. x ←
                ⊥                 if no such w exists
                  (
                          if x ̸= ⊥ and y = Π−1 kout , a||0d−ℓ , for a ← Q (pk, w)
                                                              
                    x
       2. Output
                    ⊥ otherwise

    B obfuscates the two circuits to get P, P −1 and executes (x0 , x1 ) ← A P, P −1 . The output of
                                                                                           

B is (w0 := Π (kin , x0 ) , w1 := Π (kin , x1 )) as a collision in Q. Let ϵB the probability that B outputs
a collision in Q and we will show that if ϵ is non-negligible then so is ϵB . We next define a sequence
of hybrid experiments. Each hybrid defines a computational process, an output of the process and
a predicate computed on the process output. The predicate defines whether the (hybrid) process
execution was successful or not.

   • Hyb0 : The original execution of the reduction B.

Here, pk is sampled as a public key for the function Q and we execute (w0 , w1 ) ← B (pk). The
output of this hybrid is (w0 , w1 ) and the process is defined as successful if the pair constitutes a
collision in Q (pk, ·). By definition, the success probability of this hybrid is ϵ0 := ϵB . The program
P in this hybrid is described in Figure 8.

   • Hyb1 : Generating u from a coordinates vector z and the coset Aa , ba instead of the preimage
                                                                          

     w, by using the trapdoor of Q and the security of the iO. Also, changing back to asking for
     collisions in the original P.

                                                    83
                                                 0𝑑−ℓ

                                             ′
                                𝐰

                                                                                  𝐰

      Figure 8: The obfuscated program P in Hybrid 0. We simply apply Q to the output
      w of Π (kin , ·). The output u is set to a pseudorandomly-generated affine function of
      w.


Here, the public key pk for Q is sampled together with a trapdoor td. The change we make to
the following hybrid is this: In the previous hybrid, we took a and computed y ∈ {0, 1}d , then
computed (Cy , dy ) ← F (klin ′ , y) and set u ← C · w + d . Here, we compute (C , d ) all the same,
                                                     y        y                        y  y
but instead of using w to compute u, we use the coordinates vector z of w, the output y and
the trapdoor td. In other words, we will maintain the same functionality but move to a circuit
structure that more resembles the original distribution P , P −1 , by (1) having a circuit that given
y ∈ {0, 1}d computes the pseudorandom coset description (Ay , by ), and the vector u is generated
by Ay · z + by where z will be the last n − r output bits of the first permutation Π (kin , ·).
     Specifically, recall that given an image a ∈ {0, 1}(n−r)·v·log(q) of Q (pk, ·) and the trapdoor td,
we can efficiently compute the coset Aa , ba and also, given an input w we can compute z the
coordinates vector of w with respect to the coset        of the output a. Given y we use the key klin  ′ to
                                                   
compute a and then td to compute Aa , ba . Now, we take z the last n − r bits of w and set
u ← Ay · z + dy for Ay := Cy · Aa , dy := dy + Cy · ba .
     The sampling of pk with a trapdoor td is statistically indistinguishable from sampling pk without
one, and furthermore by the correctness of the trapdoor, the functionality of the circuits did not
change. Thus, the circuits given to A in Hyb0 are computationally indistinguishable by the security
of the iO that obfuscates the circuits P , P −1 . It follows in particular that the success probability
of the current process is := ϵ1 such that ϵB ≥ ϵ1 − negl (λ).
     Another change that we make to this hybrid the definition of successful execution: Instead of
asking for collisions in Q, we ask for collisions in the original P. Since we move back and forth
between collisions in Q and P using a permutation, any collision in Q can be translated into a
collision in P. Formally the reduction B changes minimally: After executing A and obtaining
(x0 , x1 ) we do not apply Π (kin , ·) in the end to obtain w0 , w1 . The success probability still satisfies
ϵB ≥ ϵ1 − negl (λ).

   • Hyb2 : Discarding the trapdoor td and computing the coset (Ay , by ) as a function of y alone,
     using an obfuscated puncturable PRF.

The change we will make to the following hybrid is to the circuit that samples the coset (Ay , by ).
Specifically, instead of sampling the coset through
                                                    the process from previous hybrid (setting Ay :=
Cy ·Aa , dy := dy +Cy ·ba for the pair Aa , bb arising from the trapdoor td and the pseudorandomly
                            ′ , y)), we just sample a fresh puncturable PRF key k
generated (Cy , dy ) ← F (klin                                                  lin and sample the
                                           k×(n−r)
coset description from scratch Ay ∈ Z2               , by ∈ Zk2 ← F (klin , y).

                                                        84
                                                0𝑑−ℓ

                                            ′




      Figure 9: The obfuscated program P in Hybrid 2. The output w of Π (kin , ·) is still
      the input to Q. However, instead of generating the output vector u as a function of w,
      it is a pseudorandomly-generated affine function of z, the last n − r bits of w.


     Note that in the first distribution (arising from the sampling process of Hyb1 ), the matrix Aa is
full rank and thus for a truly random (Cy , dy ), the pair (Ay , by ) is a truly random coset. To see why
the two distributions are computationally indistinguishable, a different description of the previous
hybrid can be given as follows: We can consider a sampler E0 that for every y ∈ {0, 1}d samples
A(y) according to the first algorithm, and another sampler E1 that samples A(y) according to the
second algorithm, and we know that for every y (and recall there are at most 2ℓ actual values of y
which can appear as the output, and not 2d ) the outputs of E0 and E1 are statistically equivalent.
     Since there are ≤ 2ℓ valid values for y, by Lemma 18, the current hybrid is computationally
                                                                      ℓ
indistinguishable from the previous, with indistinguishability f2(κ) . It follows in particular that the
success probability of the current process is := ϵ2 such that ϵB ≥ ϵ2 − negl (λ). Note that once
we moved to this hybrid, the program P in the current hybrid applies the original circuit P from
the Construction 52, only applying Q in the middle, between the two permutations Π (kin , ·) and
Π (kout , ·), this is described in Figure 9. The rest of our hybrids are intended to get rid of Q and
gradually embed it into the obfuscated circuits.

   • Hyb3 : Describing a circuit C with equivalent functionality to Q and switching to using it
     instead, by using the security of iO.

We next describe a circuit C : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}ℓ with identical functionality (but different circuit)
than Q. The goal of using C is that (1) we can switch to it securely by the security of the iO that
obfuscates the circuits P , P −1 , and (2) the structure of C will be described in steps, such that each
step is securely removable. Specifically, by the security of an obfuscated permutable PRP (in some
instances using the security of the first PRP Π (kin , ·), and sometimes the second one Π (kout , ·))
we will be able to provably remove it from the insides of the programs P , P −1 , using these steps.
Recall that the only difference between the current hybrid and the original distribution over P, P −1
(from Construction 52) is the circuit C in between the permutations Π (kin , ·) and Π (kout , ·), and
thus, once we remove all of its parts indistinguishably, our proof will be complete.
                                                                               n
    Recall that the original Q is a (n − r)-parallel repetition of L : {0, 1} n−r → {0, 1}v·log(q) , where
for each Li (pki , ·) := Li ((Bi , ci ) , ·) we have ci = Bi · si + ei for the secret vectors si ∈ Zuq ,
ei ∈ (−B, B]v . As we no longer rely on the security of L (nor Q) for the remainder of the hybrids,
we can use this knowledge in the following circuit C, which has the following 4 steps.

   1. Permutation π, correctly acts on almost all inputs. We apply a permutation π which


                                                       85
                                                                                 n
   acts on {0, 1}n , and for each of the n − r slices (each of which takes n−r       bits) acts as follows:
                    r
                                    
       wi ∈ {0, 1} n−r , bi ∈ {0, 1} := ti ∈ Zuq , fi ∈ (−B, B]v , bi ∈ {0, 1}
                                                                               

                                      7→ t′i = ti + bi · si mod q, fi′ = fi + bi · ei mod (−B, B], bi
                                                                                                        
                                                        r
                                                              
                                      := wi′ ∈ {0, 1} n−r , bi ,

   where h mod (−B, B] means the unique integer h′ ∈ (−B, B] such that h − h′ is a multiple
   of 2B. Thanks to the fact that we sum mod (−B, B] in fi′ we can say that π is indeed a
   permutation, but observe that for an exponentially small fraction of the inputs (specifically,
   inputs such that fi′ = fi + bi · ei mod (−B, B] does not equal fi + bi · ei mod q), we are losing
   information in fi′ with respect to the larger range q. Our next two steps of C are intended to
   correct this loss of information.
2. Computing correction signal for faulty inputs. This step maps n bits to n bits in
   the following way, which sometimes erases information. Given n input bits w ∈ {0, 1}n
   first we allocate n − r new bits w ∈ {0, 1}n−r , initially set to value 0n−r . Intuitively, for
   i ∈ [n − r] the bit wi records whether or not the adding of ei to fi modulo (−B, B] from the
   previous step caused an out-of-bounds vector. Formally, we set wi to be 1 iff both bi = 1 and
   (fi′ − ei mod q) ∈    / (−B, B]v (we call such instances   of fi that satisfy this condition, ”bad”).
                                                   ′        ′
   The output of C is (w1 , · · · , wn−r ) , w1 , · · · , wn−r . From hereon the circuit C disregards
   z := (b1 , · · · , bn−r ) the last n − r bits of w.
                                                                                                     
3. Injective function τ , correcting the faulty inputs from π. Let B                 e := 3 · B + B and
   recall n := (n−r)+(n−r)·(u · log(q)      + v · log (2 · B)). This
                                                                       part of the computation injectively
   maps n input bits into (n − r) · u · log(q) + v · log 2 · B       e   > n output bits. τ computes in
   slices and for every i ∈ [n − r] the input is (wi , wi ) where wi := t′i ∈ Zuq , fi′ ∈ [−B, B) and
                                                              ′          ′
                                                                                                     
                                              
   the output is t′′i ∈ Zuq , fi′′ ∈ [−B, e B)e (discarding the bit wi , but enlarging the range of f ′ ).
                                                                                                       i
   Ideally, to compute the correction, all we need to do is
             wi , fi′ 7→ fi′′ = fi′ − wi · ei mod (−B, B] + wi · ei mod (−(B + B), (B + B)] ,
                                                          

   discarding the input bit wi . However one can see that this will sometimes lose information
   and not be injective. Specifically, observe that only when w1 = 1 and it is not the case that
    fi′ − ei mod (−(B + B), (B + B)] ∈    / (−B, B]v , we lose information. So, we simply treat
   these inputs differently, by slightly artificially enlarging the output range of the function.
   Formally, for every i ∈ [n − r] the function τ computes
     • If wi = 0 or fi′ − ei mod (−(B + B), (B + B)] ∈       / (−B, B]v then
                                                           

           wi ∈ {0, 1}, t′i ∈ Zuq , fi′ ∈ (−B, B]v
                                                   

          7→ t′′i = t′i , fi′′ = fi′ − wi · ei mod (−B, B] + wi · ei mod (−(B + B), (B + B)] .
                                                                                           

      • Else, let shift   e ev
                     ∈ (−B, B] the vector such that each of its coordinates has the same value
        2 · B + B . Then, compute
                             wi ∈ {0, 1}, t′i ∈ Zuq , fi′ ∈ (−B, B]v
                                                                     
                                                                          
                            7→ t′′i = t′i , fi′′ = fi′ + shift mod (−B,e B]
                                                                         e   .

                                                  86
                                                0𝑑−ℓ




                                    1       2         3 4

      Figure 10: The obfuscated program P in Hybrid 3. We insert the program C instead
      of the original circuit for Q, which was used in Hybrid 2. There are 4 steps to the
      computation of C: 1 is the permutation π, 2 is the correction signal, 3 and 4 are the
      injective functions τ and γ, respectively. The 4 steps of the computation of C, presented
      in the picture, are formally described in Hybrid 3.


      One can verify that τ is indeed injective and efficiently invertible: If fi′′ ∈ (−B, B]v we
      know wi = 0 and fi′ = fi′′ . Otherwise if fi′′ ∈ (−(B + B), (B + B)]v , we know that wi = 1
      and fi′ = fi′′ − ei mod (−B, B]v . Otherwise, if fi′′ ∈ (−B, e v , we know that wi = 1 and
                                                                e B]
       ′    ′′
      fi = fi − shift mod (−B, B] .v

      One can verify that in terms of correctness, at the end of this step in C, we have

                              t′′i = ti + bi · si mod q, fi′′ = fi + bi · ei mod q .

  4. Injective function γ computing
                                          the final output. The last step of C injectively maps
     (n − r) · u · log(q) + v · log 2 · B
                                        e     bits to (n − r) · v · log (q). The input is w1′′ , · · · , wn−r
                                                                                                          ′′
                                                                            
     and for each i ∈ [n − r] we have wi′′ := t′′i ∈ Zuq , fi′′ ∈ (−B,   e v and the output is
                                                                      e B]

                              Bi · t′′i +fi′′ mod q
                                        = Bi · ti + fi + bi · (Bi · si + ei ) mod q
                                        := Bi · ti + fi + bi · ci mod q
                                        := L ((Bi , ci ) , (ti , fi , bi )) ,

      which implies the correct computation of the original circuit Q.
    The circuit C replaces Q in a specific way: We connect the output w of the permutation
Π (kin , ·) into C (all n bits, including z), then the output a ∈ Zvq is padded with zeros and goes into
Π−1 (kout , ·) to get the value y ∈ {0, 1}d as before, and the value z, which was not changed during
the computation C, goes as usual to be a coordinate vector for the coset (Ay , by ). The circuit P
in the current hybrid is described in Figure 10. One can verify that when C is inserted to replace
Q as described, the functionality of P , P −1 does not change. It follows that the change of the
obfuscated circuits P, P −1 is indistinguishable by the security of the iO. It follows in particular
that the success probability of the current process is := ϵ3 such that ϵB ≥ ϵ3 − negl (λ).

   • Hyb4 : Eliminating layers 1, 3 and 4 from the circuit C (and keeping only layer 2), by using
     permutable PRPs and the security of iO.

                                                       87
In this hybrid we will execute only layer 2 of C instead of the entire circuit C (recall that layer
2 computes the correction bits). To indistinguishably remove layers 1, 3, 4 from C we argue the
following:
   • Both permutations Π (kin , ·), Π (kout , ·) are output-permutable, which means that Π−1 (kout , ·)
     is input-permutable. One can verify that it thus only remains to explain why the permutation
     π (from layer 1 of C) is composable with Π (kin , ·) and why the injective functions τ , γ (from
     layers 3, 4 in C, respectively) are composable with Π−1 (kout , ·). This will invoke Lemma 40
     which uses both the fact that permutations (or permutations that are extensions of injective
     functions that use ancillas of zeros, as explained in Section 5) are decomposable and the fact
     that the entire circuit is obfuscated under iO.
   • π can be described as a controlled permutation, that under the controlled value (i.e., the
     value of z ∈ Zn−r
                    2    ) applies a (modular) addition of a vector. Since a modular addition of
     a vector is decomposable and π is a controlled version of a decomposable permutation it is
     overall decomposable (all of these arguments are explained at the beginning of Section 5).
     Both functions τ and γ are injective as explained as part of the description of C. Also, the
     input to Π−1 (kout , ·) has size d and is padded with zeros. Due to our parameter choices for
     d, one can verify that d is at least as large as the sum of sizes for the input and output
     for both functions τ and γ. This means again that these functions are composable with the
     permutation.
    The above means that we can indeed move to obfuscating only the computation of layer 2
instead of the entirety of C. It follows in particular that the success probability of the current
process is := ϵ4 such that ϵB ≥ ϵ4 − negl (λ).

   • Hyb5 : Eliminating the remaining layer 2 from the circuit C, by using fixed permuted sparse
     triggers and the security of iO.

In this hybrid we will eliminate the final layer 2 of the circuit C. Note that once we do this, the
obfuscated programs that are given to A are identical to the ones given to it in the dual-free setting.
To indistinguishably remove the final part of C let us observe why it matches the setting of Lemma
43, which is also described in Figure 7. Referring to the notations in Lemma 43, in our setting we
do not have the circuits P0 and P2 and also there is no wire w1 . Recall that in previous hybrids
, in our circuit we denoted by (w1 , · · · , wn−r ) the first r output bits of Π (kin , ·) and by z ∈ Zn−r
                                                                                                       2
the remaining bits. Going back to matching to the setting of Lemma 43: The role of x2 is taken
by (w1 , · · · , wn−r ), and the role of w2 is taken by z. Now we will consider two cases for the middle
program P1 (which will accordingly represent the two hybrids Hyb4 and Hyb5 ).
    In one instance, the program in the middle is P1′ and given w2 := z and x2 := (w1 , · · · , wn−r )
uses the trigger program R on x2 , which acts as follows: For every i ∈ [n − r], if wi contains a
”bad” fi , then R is triggered, outputs 1 and then bit i of w3 is set to be the i-th bit of w2 . w4
is always set to be w2 := z regardless. Note that this exactly describes our process in Hyb5 , as
w4 continues to be a coordinates vector for the coset (Ay , by ) and w3 continues as the signal for
correction (which, in the original circuit C, was used in the function τ ).
    In a different instance, the program in the middle is P1 and given w2 := z always outputs
w3 = 0n−r (and similarly to the previous process, w4 is always set to be w2 := z). Note that this
exactly describes our Hyb4 . The program P −1 is changed analogously, just like the program Q in
Lemma 43 is changed to Q′ .

                                                   88
   The above means that we can indeed move to obfuscating the original circuits P, P −1 from
the dual-free setting of Construction 52, and indistinguishably remove the remaining layer 2 of
C. It follows in particular that the success probability of the current process is := ϵ5 such that
ϵB ≥ ϵ5 − negl (λ). To conclude the proof, note that we assume that A succeeds in finding a collision
with a non-negligible probability, i.e., ϵ5 is non-negligible, which makes ϵB non-negligible, which in
turn implies that the quantum polynomial time algorithm B breaks the collision resistance of Q
(and thus search LWE), in contradiction.



References
[Aar03]   S. Aaronson. Quantum certificate complexity. In 18th IEEE Annual Conference on
          Computational Complexity, 2003. Proceedings., pages 171–178, 2003.

[Aar09]   Scott Aaronson. Quantum copy-protection and quantum money. In Proceedings of
          the 2009 24th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, CCC ’09, page
          229–242, USA, 2009. IEEE Computer Society.

[AC12]    Scott Aaronson and Paul Christiano. Quantum money from hidden subspaces. In
          Howard J. Karloff and Toniann Pitassi, editors, 44th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
          of Computing, pages 41–60, New York, NY, USA, May 19–22, 2012. ACM Press.

[AGKZ20] Ryan Amos, Marios Georgiou, Aggelos Kiayias, and Mark Zhandry. One-shot signatures
       and applications to hybrid quantum/classical authentication. In Konstantin Makarychev,
       Yury Makarychev, Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy, editors, 52nd
       Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 255–268, Chicago, IL, USA,
       June 22–26, 2020. ACM Press.

[AGQY22] Prabhanjan Ananth, Aditya Gulati, Luowen Qian, and Henry Yuen. Pseudorandom
       (function-like) quantum state generators: New definitions and applications. In Theory of
       Cryptography Conference, pages 237–265. Springer, 2022.

[AMR22] Navid Alamati, Giulio Malavolta, and Ahmadreza Rahimi. Candidate trapdoor claw-
        free functions from group actions with applications to quantum protocols. In Theory of
        Cryptography Conference, pages 266–293. Springer, 2022.

[ARU14] Andris Ambainis, Ansis Rosmanis, and Dominique Unruh. Quantum attacks on classical
        proof systems: The hardness of quantum rewinding. In 55th Annual Symposium on
        Foundations of Computer Science, pages 474–483, Philadelphia, PA, USA, October 18–
        21, 2014. IEEE Computer Society Press.

[AS04]    Scott Aaronson and Yaoyun Shi. Quantum lower bounds for the collision and the element
          distinctness problems. J. ACM, 51(4):595–605, July 2004.

[AS15]    Gilad Asharov and Gil Segev. Limits on the power of indistinguishability obfuscation
          and functional encryption. In Venkatesan Guruswami, editor, 56th Annual Symposium
          on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 191–209, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 17–20,
          2015. IEEE Computer Society Press.

                                                 89
[AS16]    Gilad Asharov and Gil Segev. On constructing one-way permutations from indistin-
          guishability obfuscation. In Eyal Kushilevitz and Tal Malkin, editors, TCC 2016-A: 13th
          Theory of Cryptography Conference, Part II, volume 9563 of Lecture Notes in Computer
          Science, pages 512–541, Tel Aviv, Israel, January 10–13, 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
          Germany.

[Bac90]   Eric Bach. Explicit bounds for primality testing and related problems. Mathematics of
          Computation, 55:355–380, 1990.

[Bar23]   James Bartusek. Personal communication, and also announced at the ntt research quan-
          tum money workshop, 2023.

[BCM+ 18] Zvika Brakerski, Paul Christiano, Urmila Mahadev, Umesh V. Vazirani, and Thomas
        Vidick. A cryptographic test of quantumness and certifiable randomness from a single
        quantum device. In Mikkel Thorup, editor, 59th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
        Computer Science, pages 320–331, Paris, France, October 7–9, 2018. IEEE Computer
        Society Press.

[BGI+ 01] Boaz Barak, Oded Goldreich, Russell Impagliazzo, Steven Rudich, Amit Sahai, Salil P.
         Vadhan, and Ke Yang. On the (im)possibility of obfuscating programs. In Joe Kilian,
         editor, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2001, volume 2139 of Lecture Notes in Com-
         puter Science, pages 1–18, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 19–23, 2001. Springer Berlin
         Heidelberg, Germany.

[BGI14] Elette Boyle, Shafi Goldwasser, and Ioana Ivan. Functional signatures and pseudorandom
        functions. In Hugo Krawczyk, editor, PKC 2014: 17th International Conference on The-
        ory and Practice of Public Key Cryptography, volume 8383 of Lecture Notes in Computer
        Science, pages 501–519, Buenos Aires, Argentina, March 26–28, 2014. Springer Berlin
        Heidelberg, Germany.

[BGK+ 24] James Bartusek, Vipul Goyal, Dakshita Khurana, Giulio Malavolta, Justin Raizes, and
        Bhaskar Roberts. Software with certified deletion. In Marc Joye and Gregor Leander,
        editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2024, Part IV, volume 14654 of Lec-
        ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 85–111, Zurich, Switzerland, May 26–30, 2024.
        Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[BK23]    James Bartusek and Dakshita Khurana. Cryptography with certified deletion. In Helena
          Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2023,
          Part V, volume 14085 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 192–223, Santa Bar-
          bara, CA, USA, August 20–24, 2023. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[BKP23] James Bartusek, Dakshita Khurana, and Alexander Poremba. Publicly-verifiable deletion
        via target-collapsing functions. In Helena Handschuh and Anna Lysyanskaya, editors,
        Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2023, Part V, volume 14085 of Lecture Notes in
        Computer Science, pages 99–128, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 20–24, 2023. Springer,
        Cham, Switzerland.




                                                90
[BKW17] Dan Boneh, Sam Kim, and David J. Wu. Constrained keys for invertible pseudorandom
       functions. In Yael Kalai and Leonid Reyzin, editors, TCC 2017: 15th Theory of Cryp-
       tography Conference, Part I, volume 10677 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
       237–263, Baltimore, MD, USA, November 12–15, 2017. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[BLVW19] Zvika Brakerski, Vadim Lyubashevsky, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Daniel Wichs.
       Worst-case hardness for LPN and cryptographic hashing via code smoothing. In Yu-
       val Ishai and Vincent Rijmen, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2019,
       Part III, volume 11478 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 619–635, Darm-
       stadt, Germany, May 19–23, 2019. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[BPW16] Nir Bitansky, Omer Paneth, and Daniel Wichs. Perfect structure on the edge of chaos -
        trapdoor permutations from indistinguishability obfuscation. In Eyal Kushilevitz and Tal
        Malkin, editors, TCC 2016-A: 13th Theory of Cryptography Conference, Part I, volume
        9562 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 474–502, Tel Aviv, Israel, January 10–
        13, 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.

[BW13] Dan Boneh and Brent Waters. Constrained pseudorandom functions and their appli-
       cations. In Kazue Sako and Palash Sarkar, editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASI-
       ACRYPT 2013, Part II, volume 8270 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 280–
       300, Bengalore, India, December 1–5, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.

[CL18]    Ran Canetti and Amit Lichtenberg. Certifying trapdoor permutations, revisited. In
          Amos Beimel and Stefan Dziembowski, editors, TCC 2018: 16th Theory of Cryptography
          Conference, Part I, volume 11239 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 476–506,
          Panaji, India, November 11–14, 2018. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[CLG09] Denis X. Charles, Kristin E. Lauter, and Eyal Z. Goren. Cryptographic hash functions
        from expander graphs. Journal of Cryptology, 22(1):93–113, 2009.

[CLTV15] Ran Canetti, Huijia Lin, Stefano Tessaro, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Obfuscation
        of probabilistic circuits and applications. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Jesper Buus Nielsen,
        editors, TCC 2015: 12th Theory of Cryptography Conference, Part II, volume 9015 of
        Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 468–497, Warsaw, Poland, March 23–25, 2015.
        Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.

[CS20]    Andrea Coladangelo and Or Sattath. A quantum money solution to the blockchain scal-
          ability problem. Quantum, 4:297, 2020.

[DH76]    Whitfield Diffie and Martin E. Hellman. New directions in cryptography. IEEE Trans-
          actions on Information Theory, 22(6):644–654, 1976.

[Dra23]   Justin Drake. One-shot signatures. talk given at the programmable cryptography confer-
          ence progcrypto, 2023. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VmqkH3NPG_s.

[DS23]    Marcel Dall’Agnol and Nicholas Spooner. On the Necessity of Collapsing for Post-
          Quantum and Quantum Commitments. In Omar Fawzi and Michael Walter, editors,
          18th Conference on the Theory of Quantum Computation, Communication and Cryp-
          tography (TQC 2023), volume 266 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics

                                               91
         (LIPIcs), pages 2:1–2:23, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
         für Informatik.
[FGH+ 12] Edward Farhi, David Gosset, Avinatan Hassidim, Andrew Lutomirski, and Peter W.
         Shor. Quantum money from knots. In Shafi Goldwasser, editor, ITCS 2012: 3rd In-
         novations in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 276–289, Cambridge, MA, USA, Jan-
         uary 8–10, 2012. Association for Computing Machinery.
[GGH+ 13] Sanjam Garg, Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, Mariana Raykova, Amit Sahai, and Brent Wa-
        ters. Candidate indistinguishability obfuscation and functional encryption for all circuits.
        In 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 40–49, Berkeley,
        CA, USA, October 26–29, 2013. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[GP07]   Louis Granboulan and Thomas Pornin. Perfect block ciphers with small blocks. In Alex
         Biryukov, editor, Fast Software Encryption – FSE 2007, volume 4593 of Lecture Notes
         in Computer Science, pages 452–465, Luxembourg, Luxembourg, March 26–28, 2007.
         Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.
[GPSZ17] Sanjam Garg, Omkant Pandey, Akshayaram Srinivasan, and Mark Zhandry. Breaking
        the sub-exponential barrier in obfustopia. In Jean-Sébastien Coron and Jesper Buus
        Nielsen, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2017, Part III, volume 10212
        of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 156–181, Paris, France, April 30 – May 4,
        2017. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.
[GR13]   Oded Goldreich and Ron D. Rothblum. Enhancements of trapdoor permutations. Journal
         of Cryptology, 26(3):484–512, 2013.
[HMR12] Viet Tung Hoang, Ben Morris, and Phillip Rogaway. An enciphering scheme based on a
        card shuffle. In Reihaneh Safavi-Naini and Ran Canetti, editors, Advances in Cryptology
        – CRYPTO 2012, volume 7417 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1–13, Santa
        Barbara, CA, USA, August 19–23, 2012. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.
[HPPY24] Alexander Hoover, Sarvar Patel, Giuseppe Persiano, and Kevin Yeo. Plinko: Single-
       server PIR with efficient updates via invertible PRFs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
       2024/318, 2024.
[KNY23] Fuyuki Kitagawa, Ryo Nishimaki, and Takashi Yamakawa. Publicly verifiable deletion
        from minimal assumptions. In Guy N. Rothblum and Hoeteck Wee, editors, TCC 2023:
        21st Theory of Cryptography Conference, Part IV, volume 14372 of Lecture Notes in
        Computer Science, pages 228–245, Taipei, Taiwan, November 29 – December 2, 2023.
        Springer, Cham, Switzerland.
[KPTZ13] Aggelos Kiayias, Stavros Papadopoulos, Nikos Triandopoulos, and Thomas Zacharias.
        Delegatable pseudorandom functions and applications. In Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, Virgil D.
        Gligor, and Moti Yung, editors, ACM CCS 2013: 20th Conference on Computer and
        Communications Security, pages 669–684, Berlin, Germany, November 4–8, 2013. ACM
        Press.
[KSS22] Daniel M. Kane, Shahed Sharif, and Alice Silverberg. Quantum money from quaternion
        algebras. Mathematical Cryptology, 2(1):60–83, Oct. 2022.

                                                92
[LAF+ 09] Andrew Lutomirski, Scott Aaronson, Edward Farhi, David Gosset, Avinatan Hassidim,
         Jonathan Kelner, and Peter Shor. Breaking and making quantum money: toward a new
         quantum cryptographic protocol, 2009.

[LLQ22] Jiahui Liu, Qipeng Liu, and Luowen Qian. Beating classical impossibility of position
        verification. In Mark Braverman, editor, ITCS 2022: 13th Innovations in Theoretical
        Computer Science Conference, volume 215, pages 100:1–100:11, Berkeley, CA, USA, Jan-
        uary 31 – February 3, 2022. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs).

[LMZ23] Jiahui Liu, Hart Montgomery, and Mark Zhandry. Another round of breaking and making
        quantum money: How to not build it from lattices, and more. In Carmit Hazay and
        Martijn Stam, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2023, Part I, volume
        14004 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 611–638, Lyon, France, April 23–27,
        2023. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Mor05] Ben Morris. The mixing time of the Thorp shuffle. In Harold N. Gabow and Ronald
        Fagin, editors, 37th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 403–412,
        Baltimore, MA, USA, May 22–24, 2005. ACM Press.

[MR14]    Ben Morris and Phillip Rogaway. Sometimes-recurse shuffle - almost-random permuta-
          tions in logarithmic expected time. In Phong Q. Nguyen and Elisabeth Oswald, editors,
          Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2014, volume 8441 of Lecture Notes in Com-
          puter Science, pages 311–326, Copenhagen, Denmark, May 11–15, 2014. Springer Berlin
          Heidelberg, Germany.

[MY23]    Tomoyuki Morimae and Takashi Yamakawa. Proofs of quantumness from trapdoor per-
          mutations. In Yael Tauman Kalai, editor, ITCS 2023: 14th Innovations in Theoretical
          Computer Science Conference, volume 251, pages 87:1–87:14, Cambridge, MA, USA,
          January 10–13, 2023. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs).

[MZRA22] Yiping Ma, Ke Zhong, Tal Rabin, and Sebastian Angel. Incremental Offline/Online
       PIR. In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22), pages 1741–1758,
       Boston, MA, August 2022. USENIX Association.

[NTT23] NTT Research Quantum Money Workshop, 2023.

[Pat01]   Jacques Patarin. Generic attacks on Feistel schemes. In Colin Boyd, editor, Advances
          in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2001, volume 2248 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
          pages 222–238, Gold Coast, Australia, December 9–13, 2001. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
          Germany.

[QSi24]   QSig Workshop, 2024.           https://informatics.ed.ac.uk/blockchain/events/
          previous-events/qsig.

[RY13]    Thomas Ristenpart and Scott Yilek. The mix-and-cut shuffle: Small-domain encryp-
          tion secure against N queries. In Ran Canetti and Juan A. Garay, editors, Advances in
          Cryptology – CRYPTO 2013, Part I, volume 8042 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
          pages 392–409, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18–22, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
          Germany.

                                               93
[SACM21] Elaine Shi, Waqar Aqeel, Balakrishnan Chandrasekaran, and Bruce M. Maggs. Punc-
       turable pseudorandom sets and private information retrieval with near-optimal online
       bandwidth and time. In Tal Malkin and Chris Peikert, editors, Advances in Cryptology
       – CRYPTO 2021, Part IV, volume 12828 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
       641–669, Virtual Event, August 16–20, 2021. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Sat22]   Or Sattath. Quantum prudent contracts with applications to bitcoin, 2022.

[Shm22a] Omri Shmueli. Public-key quantum money with a classical bank. In Stefano Leonardi
        and Anupam Gupta, editors, 54th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
        pages 790–803, Rome, Italy, June 20–24, 2022. ACM Press.

[Shm22b] Omri Shmueli. Semi-quantum tokenized signatures. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas
        Shrimpton, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2022, Part I, volume 13507 of
        Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 296–319, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 15–
        18, 2022. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Sho94]   Peter W. Shor. Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring.
          In 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 124–134, Santa
          Fe, NM, USA, November 20–22, 1994. IEEE Computer Society Press.

[SW14]    Amit Sahai and Brent Waters. How to use indistinguishability obfuscation: deniable
          encryption, and more. In David B. Shmoys, editor, 46th Annual ACM Symposium on
          Theory of Computing, pages 475–484, New York, NY, USA, May 31 – June 3, 2014. ACM
          Press.

[Unr16a] Dominique Unruh. Collapse-binding quantum commitments without random oracles.
         In Jung Hee Cheon and Tsuyoshi Takagi, editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASI-
         ACRYPT 2016, Part II, volume 10032 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
         166–195, Hanoi, Vietnam, December 4–8, 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.

[Unr16b] Dominique Unruh. Computationally binding quantum commitments. In Marc Fis-
         chlin and Jean-Sébastien Coron, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2016,
         Part II, volume 9666 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 497–527, Vienna,
         Austria, May 8–12, 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.

[Wie83] Stephen Wiesner. Conjugate coding. SIGACT News, 15(1):78–88, January 1983.

[Yao82]   Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Theory and applications of trapdoor functions (extended ab-
          stract). In 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 80–91,
          Chicago, Illinois, November 3–5, 1982. IEEE Computer Society Press.

[YZW+ 19] Yu Yu, Jiang Zhang, Jian Weng, Chun Guo, and Xiangxue Li. Collision resistant
        hashing from sub-exponential learning parity with noise. In Steven D. Galbraith and
        Shiho Moriai, editors, Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2019, Part II, volume
        11922 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 3–24, Kobe, Japan, December 8–12,
        2019. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Zha15]   Mark Zhandry. A note on the quantum collision and set equality problems. Quantum
          Info. Comput., 15(7–8):557–567, May 2015.

                                              94
[Zha16]   Mark Zhandry. A note on quantum-secure prps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05564, 2016.

[Zha19]   Mark Zhandry. Quantum lightning never strikes the same state twice. In Yuval Ishai and
          Vincent Rijmen, editors, Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT 2019, Part III, vol-
          ume 11478 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 408–438, Darmstadt, Germany,
          May 19–23, 2019. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Zha21]   Mark Zhandry. How to construct quantum random functions. Journal of the ACM
          (JACM), 68(5):1–43, 2021.

[Zha22]   Mark Zhandry. New constructions of collapsing hashes. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas
          Shrimpton, editors, Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2022, Part III, volume 13509 of
          Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 596–624, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 15–
          18, 2022. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.

[Zha24]   Mark Zhandry. Quantum money from abelian group actions. In Venkatesan Guruswami,
          editor, ITCS 2024: 15th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, volume
          287, pages 101:1–101:23, Berkeley, CA, USA, January 30 – February 2, 2024. Leibniz
          International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs).




                                               95
