Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol :1–7, 2026

39th Annual Conference on Learning Theory

Invited Open Problem:
Does Differential Privacy Make PAC Learning Much Harder?
Kobbi Nissim

KOBBI . NISSIM @ GEORGETOWN . EDU

Georgetown University

Uri Stemmer

U @ URI . CO . IL

Tel Aviv University

Eliad Tsfadia

ELIAD . TSFADIA @ BIU . AC . IL

Bar-Ilan University

Editors: Steve Hanneke and Tor Lattimore

Abstract
What is the optimal sample complexity of differentially private (DP) PAC learning? Recent results
establish that a concept class C is learnable under approximate DP if and only if it is online learnable.
However, in any realistic computational model, C is finite, and it is well known that a sample
complexity of O(log |C|) suffices for both online and DP learning. In contrast, non-private learning
is characterized by the VC dimension of C, which can be significantly lower than log |C|. While
the gap between log |C| and VC(C) can be unavoidable for online learning (e.g., when learning
thresholds over a finite domain), we currently lack evidence that the same holds true for DP learning.
This leads to our central question: Is differentially private PAC learning much harder than non-private
learning?
Keywords: Differential privacy, PAC learning, Littlestone dimension, VC dimension, sample
complexity, online learning

1. Introduction
Non-private learning: VC dimension is the answer. The classical theory of PAC learning (Valiant,
1984) gives a clean and complete answer to the question of how many samples are needed to learn a
hypothesis class C: the answer is Θ(VC(C)), where VC(C) is the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension.
The VC dimension is thus the definitive complexity measure for non-private learning, and it can be
much smaller than other natural measures of complexity, such as the description length of concepts
from the class (i.e., log |C|).
Private learning: how much more is needed? A randomized algorithm A : (X ×{0, 1})n → W
is (ε, δ)-Differentially Private (DP) (Dwork et al., 2006) if for every pair of neighboring datasets
S, S ′ and every event E ⊆ W it holds that Pr[A(S) ∈ E] ≤ eε Pr[A(S ′ ) ∈ E] + δ. A private learner
is a PAC learner that guarantees DP w.r.t. its training data.1 It is well known that DP learning requires
more samples than non-private learning for some classes. But the central question we ask is: How
much more is needed? Is the answer close to VC(C), or could it be drastically larger?2
1. The standardly considered regime of parameters is to let ε be a small constant and let δ be a small function of the
dataset size, much smaller than 1/|S|.
2. For simplicity, throughout this paper we ignore the dependence of the sample complexity in the privacy and learning
parameters, and focus on its dependence in complexity measures of the class C, such as VC(C), LD(C), and log |C|.

© 2026 K. Nissim, U. Stemmer & E. Tsfadia.

N ISSIM S TEMMER T SFADIA

In the original work that introduced the concept of private PAC learning, Kasiviswanathan,
Lee, Nissim, Raskhodnikova, and Smith (2011) presented a generic construction showing that any
concept class C can be privately learned with sample complexity linear in log |C|. In a world where
everything is finite, this suggests that everything can be learned privately with “moderate” sample
complexity, which is already quite surprising. Still, log |C| can sometimes be very far from VC(C).
This motivated a rich body of work aimed at understanding the quantitative difference between the
sample complexity needed with or without privacy. To a large extent, this question still remains open.
Which classes can be learned privately? Following the work of Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011),
several examples were given of infinite classes C (so log |C| = ∞, and the generic construction
of Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011) does not apply) that can nevertheless be learned with DP.3 Thus,
perhaps a more basic question than trying to characterize the sample complexity of DP learning
is to first understand which classes can be learned privately. This question was resolved in a
pair of landmark results by Alon, Livni, Malliaris, and Moran (2019) and Bun, Livni, and Moran
(2020). Recall that the Littlestone dimension LD(C) (Littlestone, 1987) is a combinatorial parameter
characterizing online learnability: C is online learnable if and only if LD(C) < ∞, and the optimal
mistake bound in the realizable setting equals LD(C). It is always the case that VC(C) ≤ LD(C),
and the gap can be infinite (e.g., thresholds over R have VC = 1 but LD = ∞).
Theorem 1 (Alon et al. (2019); Bun et al. (2020)) A class C is DP PAC learnable if and only if
LD(C) < ∞.
For the remainder of this paper, we therefore restrict attention to classes with LD(C) < ∞ and
ask how the DP sample complexity compares to V C(C).
Existing quantitative bounds.

We next state the quantitative results behind Theorem 1.

Theorem 2 (Lower bound, Alon et al. (2019)) Let C be a concept class. Any DP PAC learner for
C requires sample complexity Ω(VC(C) + log∗ (LD(C))).
Theorem 3 (Upper bound, Bun et al. (2020); Ghazi et al. (2021); Lyu (2025)) Let C be a concept class. There exists a DP PAC learner for C with sample complexity Õ(LD5 (C)).
Simplified proof sketches for Theorems 2 and 3 are given in Sections A and B, respectively.

2. Open Questions
Theorems 2 and 3, along with Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011), place the sample complexity of
DP learning somewhere between Ω(VC(C) + log∗ (LD(C))) and min{O(log |C|), poly(LD(C))}.
Because these bounds can be a tower-of-exponentials apart, the quest for understanding the sample
complexity of private learning is far from over. The big question in this context would be to fully
understand this sample complexity, either in terms of both VC(C) and LD(C), or possibly using
different combinatorial measures.

3. See, e.g., Beimel et al. (2010, 2013a,b); Feldman and Xiao (2014).

2

D OES D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY M AKE PAC L EARNING M UCH H ARDER ?

Open Question 1 Characterize the sample complexity of private learning. That is, identify a
combinatorial measure4 of a class that determines the sample complexity of privately learning it,
analogously to the characterization of non-private learning in terms of the VC dimension.
While we leave the question somewhat amorphous, we can consider more concrete formulations
using known measures. For example, can private PAC learning be tightly characterized in terms of
VC(C) and LD(C)? An intermediate step toward this goal could be to reduce the gap between the
current upper and lower bounds stated in Theorems 2 and 3. For example, showing a generic upper
bound of poly(VC(C), log∗ (LD(C))). Even a generic upper bound of poly(VC(C), log(LD(C)))
would constitute major progress.
We remark that Open Question 1 was studied in special cases. For example, Beimel et al. (2013a)
and Feldman and Xiao (2014) presented characterizations of the sample complexity of pure DP
learning (i.e., when restricting the privacy parameter δ to be 0). As another example, Yan (2025)
studied the sample complexity of privately learning classes C with VC(C) = 1 and showed that it is
essentially characterized by log∗ (LD(C)). However, the unrestricted setting is still far from being
well understood.
A significant effort has also been devoted to analyzing the sample complexity of DP learning of
specific concept classes of interest. Simply put, before trying to understand the sample complexity of
DP learning at large, maybe we should first understand it “only” for, say, learning halfspaces. By
now, several interesting such examples where presented. In all of them, the DP sample complexity is
much closer to the lower bound rather than to the upper bound. These examples include:
• Thresholds over finite domains: Cohen et al. (2023) showed that Õ(log∗ (LD(C))) samples
suffice for privately learning 1-dimensional thresholds, essentially matching the lower bound.
• Axis-aligned rectangles: Sadigurschi and Stemmer (2021) and Cohen et al. (2023) showed that
Õ(VC(C)·log∗ (LD(C))) samples suffice for privately learning high-dimensional axis-aligned
rectangles.
• Halfspaces: Beimel et al. (2019) and Kaplan et al. (2020) showed that Õ(VC2.5 (C)) ·
∗
2O(log (LD(C))) samples suffice for privately learning high-dimensional halfspaces. Recently,
Nissim et al. (2026) showed that Õ(VC5.5 (C) · log∗ (LD(C))) samples also suffice.
Note that in all examples above, the overhead is polynomial in VC(C) and a tiny function of
LD(C). We currently do not have any example where the DP sample complexity must be “far”
from the generic lower bound. For example, we currently do
 not know if there is a concept class
∗
C that requires sample complexity Ω VC(C) · 2log (LD(C)) . Note, however, that this would still
be tantalizingly close to the non-private sample complexity. What would constitute a “convincing”
example showing that DP learning can be “significantly” harder than non-private learning? We
formulate this in the following question:

4. We acknowledge that what constitutes a “combinatorial measure” is inherently open-ended. We intentionally avoid a
rigid syntactic definition to prevent ruling out unforeseen structural properties. To borrow a famous phrase, we will
“know it when we see it”.

3

N ISSIM S TEMMER T SFADIA

Open Question 2 Does there exist a sequence of finite-size classes C = {Cκ }κ∈N where:
(1) limκ→∞ |Cκ | = ∞, (2) log |Cκ | is superpolynomial5 in VC(Cκ ), and (3) The number of
samples required to learn Cκ under differential privacy is Ω(log |Cκ |).
An intermediate step toward this goal could be to find a class sequence C, satisfying Items (1)
and (2) above, for which the private sample complexity is closer to log |C| than to VC(C) on a log
scale, or even on a log log scale. In other words, we measure the significance of the privacy overhead
by where it falls on the spectrum between the non-private baseline of VC(C) and the log |C| upper
bound. Of course, the reference to log |C| could be replaced with other quantities, such as LD(C)
or poly(LD(C)). We chose log |C| as the reference point because it is a known upper bound of
the sample complexity of DP learning that does not require a special combinatorial structure of C,
making the problem more natural.
We note that for the specific concept classes mentioned earlier (thresholds, axis-aligned rectangles,
and halfspaces), LD(C) is effectively log |C|. In addition, Item (2) in Open Question 2 states that
VC(C) must be tiny compared to log |C|. Therefore, the known upper bounds for these classes are
negligible compared to log |C|, and are much closer to VC(C) than to log |C| in any reasonable
scale. Hence, these specific classes cannot constitute a positive answer to Open Question 2 or to any
of its relaxed forms (e.g., on a logarithmic scale).

References
Noga Alon, Roi Livni, Maryanthe Malliaris, and Shay Moran. Private PAC learning implies finite
littlestone dimension. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
Computing, STOC 2019, pages 852–860. ACM, 2019.
Amos Beimel, Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, and Kobbi Nissim. Bounds on the sample complexity
for private learning and private data release. In TCC, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
437–454. Springer, 2010.
Amos Beimel, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Characterizing the sample complexity of private
learners. In ITCS, pages 97–110. ACM, 2013a.
Amos Beimel, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Private learning and sanitization: Pure vs. approximate differential privacy. In APPROX-RANDOM, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
363–378. Springer, 2013b.
Amos Beimel, Shay Moran, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Private center points and learning of
halfspaces. In COLT, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 269–282. PMLR, 2019.
Mark Bun, Kobbi Nissim, Uri Stemmer, and Salil P. Vadhan. Differentially private release and
learning of threshold functions. In FOCS, pages 634–649, 2015.
Mark Bun, Roi Livni, and Shay Moran. An equivalence between private classification and online
prediction. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
pages 389–402, 2020.
5. Let f and g be functions of κ that are eventually non-negative. We say that f (κ) is superpolynomial in g(κ) if for
every p ∈ N, there exists an integer κ0 such that for all κ ≥ κ0 it holds that f (κ) > (g(κ))p .

4

D OES D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY M AKE PAC L EARNING M UCH H ARDER ?

Edith Cohen, Xin Lyu, Jelani Nelson, Tamás Sarlós, and Uri Stemmer. Õptimal differentially private
learning of thresholds and quasi-concave optimization. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, pages 472–482, 2023.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
private data analysis. In TCC, pages 265–284, 2006.
Vitaly Feldman and David Xiao. Sample complexity bounds on differentially private learning via
communication complexity. In COLT, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pages
1000–1019. JMLR.org, 2014.
Badih Ghazi, Noah Golowich, Ravi Kumar, and Pasin Manurangsi. Sample-efficient proper pac
learning with approximate differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT
Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC, pages 183–196, 2021.
Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Uri Stemmer, and Eliad Tsfadia. Private learning of halfspaces:
Simplifying the construction and reducing the sample complexity. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:13976–13985, 2020.
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K. Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam
Smith. What can we learn privately? SIAM J. Comput., 40(3):793–826, 2011.
Nick Littlestone. Learning quickly when irrelevant attributes abound: A new linear-threshold
algorithm. In 28th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs 1987), pages
68–77, 1987. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1987.37.
Xin Lyu. Private learning of littlestone classes, revisited, 2025.
Kobbi Nissim, Eliad Tsfadia, and Chao Yan. Differentially private quasi-concave optimization:
Bypassing the lower bound and application to geometric problems. In Proceedings of the 2026
Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA, pages 5824–5842, 2026.
Menachem Sadigurschi and Uri Stemmer. On the sample complexity of privately learning axisaligned rectangles. In NeurIPS, pages 28286–28297, 2021.
Saharon Shelah. Classification theory: and the number of non-isomorphic models. Elsevier, 1990.
L. G. Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Commun. ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
Chao Yan. An õptimal differentially private learner for concept classes with VC dimension 1. CoRR,
abs/2505.06581, 2025.

Appendix A. Proof Sketch of Theorem 2
Proof sketch. A classical result of Shelah (1990) shows that every class C with Littlestone dimension
d has a collection of Ω(log d) 1-dimensional threshold functions embedded in it as a subclass. Thus, a
lower bound on the sample complexity of privately learning 1-dimensional thresholds implies a lower
bound for C. Here, we provide an informal description of a lower bound by Bun, Nissim, Stemmer,
5

N ISSIM S TEMMER T SFADIA

and Vadhan (2015) that holds only for proper learners (i.e., learners that output a hypothesis that
is itself a threshold function). As we mentioned, an unrestricted lower bound that holds also for
improper learners was later proven by Alon et al. (2019).
Limiting ourselves to proper learners allows us to focus on the following simple problem, called
the Private Interior Point (PIP) problem: Given n input points from a 1-dimensional grid of size d,
the goal is to privately identify a point between the smallest and largest input points. This problem
directly reduces to proper learning of 1-dimensional thresholds by labeling the lower half of the
(sorted) inputs as 1 and the upper half as 0, thereby forcing any accurate proper learner to produce a
threshold that “breaks” between the minimal and maximal inputs. Thus, it suffices to show a lower
bound for the PIP problem. Towards this, observe that the PIP problem is trivially unsolvable when
n = 1 (i.e., just 1 input point) on a grid of size (say) 10, as DP prevents the output from depending
significantly on a single uniform input. We now “lift” this impossibility result inductively to larger
input sizes, by showing that an impossibility result for n inputs over a grid of size d implies an
impossibility result for n + 1 inputs over a grid of size exp(d). This shows that privately solving the
interior point problem over a domain of size d requires at least log∗ (d) input points.
To this end, suppose that we have a distribution D on n-row databases over the grid [d] such
that any DP algorithm fails (with high probability) to solve the interior point problem on datasets
sampled from D. Consider the following distribution D′ on (n + 1)-row databases over a larger grid
[d′ ], where d′ = 10d : First, sample (x1 , ..., xn ) ∈ [d]n according to D. Next, sample a uniformly
random y0 ∈ [d′ ]. For i = 1, . . . , n, let yi be a uniformly random string that agrees with y0 on the
first xi coordinates in base 10 notation. Output (y0 , ..., yn ).
Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that we have a DP mechanism M ′ on (n + 1)-row
databases over universe [d′ ]. Consider the following mechanism M on n-row databases over [d]:
on input (x1 , .., xn ), sample y0 , y1 , . . . , yn as in the distribution D′ (given x1 , ..., xn ). Run M ′ on
(y0 , . . . , yn ), and let its output be y. Output x, defined as the length of the longest prefix for which y
agrees with y0 (in base 10 notation).
Whenever M succeeds, x cannot be smaller than mini {xi }, or else y would be larger than all
the elements y1 , ..., yn or smaller than all of them (depending on whether y’s symbol is larger or
smaller than that of y0 in the first coordinate where they disagree). Now we will use the privacy of
M ′ to argue that x cannot be larger than maxi {xi }. To see this, note that excluding y0 itself, all the
other inputs given to M ′ do not contain any information about the maxi {xi } + 1 coordinate of y0 .
Hence, as M ′ is DP, even with y0 as one of its inputs, the probability of it guessing this coordinate is
≲ 1/10. (The actual construction leverages a larger base in order to keep this probability sufficiently
small.) So mini {xi } ≤ x ≤ maxi {xi } is a valid solution for D, contradicting its hardness.

Appendix B. Proof Sketch of Theorem 3
Proof sketch. We give an informal description of the construction of Bun, Livni, and Moran (2020)
LD(C)
which provides an upper bound of ≈ 22
. Let C be a class with LD(C) = d, which implies
the existence of an online learner Aonline that makes at most d mistakes on any realizable sequence.
We construct a DP learner for C by first transforming Aonline into a (non-private) globally-stable
learner, meaning a learner that outputs the exact same hypothesis with noticeable probability even
when its training dataset is completely resampled. (Such a learner is easily made private via standard
techniques, such as running it on disjoint samples and privately outputting the most frequent result.)
6

D OES D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY M AKE PAC L EARNING M UCH H ARDER ?

As Aonline makes at most d mistakes, there must exist an index i∗ ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , d} such that
the probability of it making exactly i∗ mistakes on a fresh sample is ≳ 1/d. Consider sampling
∗
d
k = 2d−i independent samples S = (S1 , S2 , . . . , Sk ). Then, with probability ≳ (1/d)k ≥ (1/d)2
algorithm Aonline makes exactly i∗ mistakes on each of these samples. Suppose that this is indeed
the case. We may assume that there are not too many duplicates among the hypotheses h1 =
Aonline (S1 ), . . . , hk = Aonline (Sk ), as otherwise Aonline itself would be globally-stable and our job
would be complete. (Here we treat Aonline as a batch learner by letting Aonline (S) denote its final
hypothesis after processing the sequence S.) For this simplified proof sketch, let us further assume
that these hypotheses are in fact all distinct.
We next combine pairs of samples from S to generate input sequences on which Aonline makes
i∗ + 1 mistakes. For concreteness, let us illustrate this on S1 and S2 . To this end, let x be a point
such that h1 (x) ̸= h2 (x) (such a point exists as we assumed that h1 ̸= h2 ). Now observe that each
of the input sequences S1 ◦ (x, h2 (x)) and S2 ◦ (x, h1 (x)) would cause Aonline to make exactly
i∗ + 1 mistakes. Furthermore, one of these two sequences is realizable, and we can “guess” which
one it is with probability 1/2. This way, by pairing samples from S (and guessing), with probability
≥ (1/2)k/2 we generate k/2 realizable input sequences, each forcing exactly i∗ + 1 mistakes.
The process continues by an inductive argument: Either there is a “stable” hypothesis among
the newly obtained k/2 hypotheses, or else we randomly generate realizable sequences that force
i∗ + 2 mistakes, and so on. Observe that if we reach sequences that force d mistakes, meaning that no
additional mistake could ever be made, then these sequences must produce the actual target concept,
and global-stability is obtained. Overall, this construction guarantees that a stable hypothesis is
d
d
identified with probability ≳ (1/d)2 · (1/2)2 , which results in a DP learner with sample complexity
d
roughly 22 . This construction was later improved by Ghazi, Golowich, Kumar, and Manurangsi
(2021) and by Lyu (2025) to obtain a DP learner with sample complexity poly(d).

7

