                                                Ineffectiveness for Search and Undecidability of PCSP
                                                                    Meta-Problems
                                                                                      Alberto Larrauri *

                                                                                     University of Zaragoza
arXiv:2504.04639v4 [cs.CC] 25 May 2026




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   It is an open question whether the search and decision versions of promise CSPs are equi-
                                               valent. Most known algorithms for PCSPs solve only their decision variant, and it is unknown
                                               whether they can be adapted to solve search as well. The main approaches, called BLP, AIP and
                                               BLP ` AIP, handle a PCSP by finding a solution to a relaxation of some integer program. We
                                               prove that rounding those solutions to a proper search certificate can be as hard as any problem
                                               in the class TFNP. In other words, these algorithms are ineffective for search. Building on the
                                               algebraic approach to PCSPs, we find sufficient conditions that imply ineffectiveness for search.
                                               Our tools are tailored to algorithms that are characterized by minions in a suitable way, and
                                               can also be used to prove undecidability results for meta-problems. This way, we show that the
                                               families of templates solvable via BLP, AIP, and BLP ` AIP are undecidable.
                                                   Using the same techniques we also analyze several algebraic conditions that are known
                                               to guarantee the tractability of finite-template CSPs. We prove that several meta-problems
                                               related to cyclic polymorphims and WNUs are undecidable for PCSPs. In particular, there is
                                               no algorithm deciding whether a finite PCSP template (1) admits cyclic a polymorphism, (2)
                                               admits a WNU.




                                            * This work was supported by the UKRI grant EP/X024431/1, and the UK EPSRC grant EP/X033201/1. The research
                                         leading to these results was conducted at the University of Oxford between 2024 and 2025, and continued during the
                                         summer of 2025 at Durham University.
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                                        2

2   Preliminaries                                                                                                       4

3   Main Results                                                                                                        8

4   Overview of the Proofs                                                                                              9
    4.1 Organization of the Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14

5   Sources of Undecidability, Non-Computability and Hardness                                                          15

6   Main Definitions                                                                                                   17
    6.1 Interpretations over Minions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17
    6.2 Manifold Minions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       18
    6.3 Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
    6.4 Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21

7   From Minions to Templates                                                                                          23

8   Main Reductions                                                                                                    27

9   Proof of the Main Results                                                                                          31
    9.1 The AIP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32
        9.1.1 AIP: Interpreting the Super-Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           32
        9.1.2 AIP: Interpreting the Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         35
    9.2 The BLP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38
        9.2.1 BLP: Interpreting the Super-Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           38
        9.2.2 BLP: Interpreting the Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         42
    9.3 The BLP + AIP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          44
        9.3.1 BLP + AIP: Interpreting the Super-Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             45
    9.4 Weak Near-Unanimity Polymorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                48
        9.4.1 WNUs: Interpreting the Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            49
        9.4.2 WNUs: Interpreting Triangular Slices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             53
    9.5 Cyclic Polymorphisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         53
        9.5.1 Cyclic Polymorphisms: Interpreting the Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              54
        9.5.2 Cyclic Polymorphisms: Interpreting Triangular Slices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               58

10 Discussion                                                                                                          59

A Proofs of Section 5                                                                                                  67
  A.1 Proof of Proposition 4.2-(2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       67
  A.2 Proof of Proposition 4.2-(3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       68
  A.3 Proof of Proposition 5.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       68
  A.4 Hardness Proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        69
      A.4.1 Proof of Proposition 4.2-(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           70
      A.4.2 Proof of Proposition 5.2-(1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           70

B Characterizing Polymorphism Minions up to Isomorphism                                                                72




                                                            1
1    Introduction
The Dichotomy Theorem [25, 65] and, more generally, the algebraic approach to constraint satisfac-
tion [15, 49] show that finite-template constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs) form a particularly
well-behaved class of NP problems. This class includes a wide range of natural problems relev-
ant across many domains, such as variants of the Boolean satisfiability problem, graph coloring
problems, and systems of equations over finite algebraic structures. Unconditionally, the search
and decision variant of each finite-template CSPs are polynomial-time equivalent. Each problem in
this class is either NP-complete or in P, and there is an explicit procedure that correctly assigns one
of these two cases to each given CSP. This stands in contrast to the well-known fact that there are
NP-intermediate problems if P‰ NP [52], and there are problems in FNP (the search analogue of
NP) which we believe to be hard but whose decision variants are trivial, captured by the TFNP
class [40]. Therefore, it is natural to ask how far (and in which directions) can finite-template CSPs
be generalized while still keeping their nice properties.
     Promise CSPs (PCSPs) are qualitative relaxations of CSPs generalizing the task of coloring a
c-colorable graph using d colors for fixed integers d ě c, called the approximate graph coloring (AGC)
problem. A PCSP is given by a pair of relational structures pA, Bq, the template, where the first
maps homomorphically into the second, denoted A Ñ B. In the decision variant of PCSPpA, Bq
the task is to distinguish input structures I satisfying I Ñ A from those satisfying I ̸Ñ B. In
the search variant, the goal is to find an explicit homomorphism from I to B given the promise
that I Ñ A. The algebraic approach, instrumental in much of the CSP theory and both proofs of
the Dichotomy Theorem, has recently been extended to the PCSP framework [11]. Roughly, this
approach studies the complexity of PCSPpA, Bq by analyzing the algebraic properties of the set
PolpA, Bq of homomorphisms f : An Ñ B from some direct power of A to B, called polymorphisms.
This extension has motivated a surge of activity in the area that has yielded partial complexity
classifications [10, 18, 19, 36, 54, 58, 59], efficient algorithms [11, 21, 27, 30], and hardness conditions
[7, 14, 22, 51]. However, many basic questions remain unanswered. For example, the complexity
classifications of Boolean and graph PCSPs (including the complexity of AGC) are still open, despite
relevant progress in those directions [37,51]. Crucially, the relationship between search and decision
PCSPs is not well understood, and it is unknown whether there is always an efficient way of solving
a finite-template search PCSP whose decision variant is tractable.
     In this work we analyze several PCSP algorithms, as well as some algebraic conditions that guar-
antee tractability in the CSP setting. It is known that, unless P=NP, there are tractable finite-template
PCSPs which cannot be reduced via gadgets to a tractable finite-template CSP, as exemplified by
“1-in-3-SAT vs not-all-equal-SAT” [2, 9, 57, 61]. Therefore, there is a need to develop algorithms
that go beyond the finite CSP case. Solving the decision variant of PCSPpA, Bq involves solving a
tractable relaxation of CSPpAq which should be a restriction of CSPpBq. The main relaxations used
for this purpose are direct relaxations of the basic integer programming formulation of CSPpAq
[11, 20, 21], the local consistency algorithm [4, 12], and algorithmic hierarchies built on top of
these two previous approaches [27, 28, 30]. Virtually all these algorithms present two inherent
limitations. The first is that they only solve the decision version of PCSPpA, Bq: when an instance I
is accepted by the relaxation, we do not directly obtain a homomorphism I Ñ B. To obtain such a
homomorphism we must round the solution to the relaxation, and there is no obvious efficient way
of doing so except for in a few known cases [17, 18]. The second limitation of these algorithms is


                                                     2
that, despite some of them admitting nice algebraic characterizations, we do not know of a way to
recognize the problems PCSPpA, Bq that they solve. This is known as the meta-problem related to
these algorithms.
    In our analysis of algorithms we focus on the affine integer programming (AIP) and the basic linear
programming (BLP) relaxations for PCSPs, as well as on the BLP ` AIP relaxation, which combines
the power of the previous two. We present results of three kinds: hardness, undecidability, and
non-computability. We show that rounding the output of these algorithms to search certificates
can be as hard as any problem in the total FNP (TFNP) class, and that all these algorithms have
undecidable meta-problems.

Theorem 1.1 (Main algorithmic result, informal). Let Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu, and let S Q be the
family of finite templates pA, Bq such that Q solves PCSPpA, Bq. Then, given any problem Λ in the TFNP
class, there is a finite template pAΛ , BΛ q P S Q such that Λ is many-one reducible in polynomial time to the
problem of finding a homomorphism I Ñ BΛ for an input structure I accepted by Q. Furthermore, S Q is
undecidable.

    This is the first hardness-of-rounding result in the PCSPs literature. If TFNP contains some
problem that has no polynomial-time solution (which is widely conjectured [45, 55]), then this
gives a negative answer to the question of whether the output of these algorithms can always be
rounded to a search solution efficiently, posed in [50] 1 . Furthermore, for AIP and BLP we show
that there are finite-template PCSPs solved by those algorithms where no computable function is
a valid rounding rule. This remains true even for left-Boolean templates pA, Bq (i.e., those where
A’s domain contains only two elements). This means that directly rounding the output of these
algorithms through consistent families of well-behaved polymorphisms such as the ones defined in
[17] is not always possible. However, changing the domain of our relaxations to other efficiently
computable rings, as proposed in [17], could be a way to bypass the issues presented in this paper.
This is expanded upon in the discussion section (Section 10). We also point out that while our
results include small bounds on A’s domain size, the domain of the right structure B can grow
quite large. Hence, our results do not rule out the possibility that BLP, AIP, and BLP ` AIP could
always be directly adapted for search in the Boolean setting.
    Our techniques leverage the characterizations of the algorithms AIP, BLP, and BLP ` AIP by
means of objects called minions (or minor-closed classes [62]) that lie at the heart of the algebraic
method. On a high level, our results follow from reducing tiling problems (e.g., [43]) to promise
minor condition (PMC) problems [11]. We remark that, although the connection between the TFNP
class and tiling problems is not difficult to prove, to our knowledge it has not been previously
used to obtain hardness results within TFNP. To achieve our reductions we develop a new way of
encoding PCSPs in PMC problems by means of a sheaf-like [23] construction on minions where
elements represent partial homomorphisms, and minoring operations ensure consistency between
the corresponding local homomorphisms.
    We also study some well-known algebraic conditions following the same approach as in our
analysis of algorithms. A polymorphism f : An Ñ B is called cyclic if it is invariant under any cyclic
permutation of its arguments, and weak near-unanimity (WNU) if the value of f px, . . . , x, y, x, . . . , xq
is independent of the position of the lone y. The existence of a WNU and the existence of a cyclic
   1A previous version of this work also claimed the results presented here yielded negative answers to the questions in

[17, 21], without further clarification. This was incorrect and misleading.


                                                           3
polymorphism are equivalent conditions that characterize the tractability of finite-template CSPs
if P‰ NP [25, 65]. There is a rich network of equivalences between algebraic conditions in this
setting (e.g., [15, Theorems 41 and 47]) which were established using tools from universal algebra.
These equivalences are a powerful aid in proving the decidability of various meta-questions. For
instance, it is known that a finite structure A admits a cyclic polymorphism if and only if it admits
a cyclic polymorphism of every prime arity larger than the domain size of A [13], and hence one
can easily decide the existence of a WNU or a cyclic polymorphism. Another important algebraic
condition is the presence of WNUs of all arities k ě 3, which characterizes bounded width CSPs in
the finite-template setting [12, 48]. This condition is equivalent to the presence of WNUs of arities
3 and 4 satisfying a particular relation [48] and is, hence, decidable. The complexity of these and
other meta-questions has been examined in [26].
    For PCSPs the picture is significantly less structured. We know that, unless P‰ NP, no finite
family of polymorphisms can guarantee tractability [11]. Hence, all algebraic tractability conditions
must involve an infinite family of polymorphisms. Even then, admitting WNUs of all arities k ě 3
is no longer a sufficient condition for bounded width (but remains a necessary one) [4], and does
not even guarantee tractability [29]. Since many of the tools from universal algebra no longer apply
to the PCSP setting, few non-trivial implications between algebraic conditions have been shown
(with some exceptions, e.g. [21, Theorem 4]). In particular, the decidability of most meta-questions
related to natural algebraic conditions remains open for PCSPs. Our main algebraic result is the
following.

Theorem 1.2. The following problems are undecidable. Given an input finite template pA, Bq with |A| ď 3,
determine whether PolpA, Bq contains:

    (1) cyclic polymorphisms

         (i) for every prime arity p,
        (ii) for at least one arity k,
        (iii) for all but finitely many prime arities p,
        (iv) for infinitely many prime arities p.

    (2) weak near-unanimity polymorphisms (WNUs)

         (i) for every arity k ě 3,
        (ii) for at least one arity k ě 3,
        (iii) for all but finitely many arities k ě 3,
        (iv) for infinitely many arities k ě 3.


2     Preliminaries
The set of natural numbers N starts at 1, and rks is the set t1, 2, . . . , ku. Given sets S, T, the set of
maps f : S Ñ T is denoted by T S . A partial function from S to T is denoted as f : S á T. We write
idX for the identity map on a set X. We identify tuples t “ pt1 , . . . , tn q P T n with functions in T rns
in the natural way (i.e., tpiq “ ti ). Disjoint unions are denoted using \. We write U ˚ for the set of


                                                           4
finite strings over a finite alphabet U, i.e. U ˚ “ ně0 U n . A partial map f : U ˚ á U ˚ is said to be
                                                   Ů

computable if there is a Turing machine on an alphabet containing U that computes f pxq for any
input x P U ˚ where f is defined, and runs forever on x P U ˚ where f is undefined. We informally
say that a partial map f : S á T between countable sets S, T is computable if f is computable under
some implicit encoding. That is, we implicitly refer to a finite alphabet U, and to injective maps
α : S Ñ U ˚ and β : T Ñ U ˚ , and mean that the partial map β ˝ f ˝ α´1 is computable [31].

Search Problems We refer to [60, Section 10.3] for an introduction to search complexity and the
classes FP, FNP, and TFNP. Let R Ď U ˚ ˆ V ˚ be a binary relation on finite words, and K a special
“reject” symbol outside the alphabets U, V. The search problem ΛR , is defined as: given a string
x P U ˚ , find some y P V ˚ satisfying px, yq P R, or reject x and return K if no such y exists. The class
of total functional NP (TFNP) problems consists of all problems ΛR where R is (1) a total relation,
meaning that for all input strings x there is some y satisfying px, yq P R, (2) polynomially bounded,
meaning that there is some polynomial ppnq such that px, yq P R implies |y| ď pp|x|q, and (3) R is
recognizable in polynomial time. The class of tally TFNP problems, denoted TFNP1 , consists of all
problems ΛR P TFNP such that R Ď U ˚ ˆ V ˚ is a relation where U is the unary alphabet t1u.
    The class TFNP has been studied extensively (e.g., [40, 42, 45]) and contains several problems
for which no efficient solution is expected such as integer factoring, or the problem of computing a
Nash equilibrium [33]. There is compelling reason to believe that TFNP ̸Ď FP [45] (FP being the
class of search problems solvable in polynomial time), which would imply that P ‰ NP. On the
other hand, there are oracles with respect to which TFNP Ď FP but the polynomial hierarchy is
infinite [24]. To our knowledge, the class TFNP1 has not been studied explicitly, but also contains
problems that have no known polynomial-time solution, such as P RIME, where 1n is given as input
and the task is to find a prime number on n bits [39].
    A (polynomial-time) many-one reduction from ΛR1 to ΛR2 consists of a pair pα, βq of polynomial-
time computable functions satisfying that for all x (1) if pαpxq, zq P R2 , then px, βpx, zqq P R1 , and
(2) if pαpxq, zq ̸P R2 for all z, then px, yq RP R1 for all y. Similarly, a generalized many-one reduction
from ΛR1 to ΛR2 is a pair of polynomial-time computable functions pα, βq satisfying that whenever
z is a valid answer to αpxq in the problem ΛR2 (including the case where z “ K), then βpx, zq is a
valid answer to x in the problem R1 (including again the case where βpx, zq “ K). Given a class C
of search problems, and a set F of search problems, we say that F is C -hard if for any R P C there
is some R1 P F such that ΛR has a many-one reduction to ΛR1 . A problem ΛR is called C -hard if
the family tΛR u is C -hard. The class TFNP is conjectured to contain no TFNP-hard problems [55],
so our results show TFNP-hardness of families.
    We also consider promise search problems, which can be seen as “partial” search problems. The
notions in this section extend to promise problems in the natural way, along the lines of e.g., [35, 41].

Promise Constraint Satisfaction A relational signature Σ is a finite set of symbols where each
R P Σ has some arity arpRq P N. A Σ-structure A consists of: a set A called its universe, and a relation
R A Ď AarpRq for each R P Σ. Given two similar (i.e., with the same signature) structures A, B, a
homomorphism h : A Ñ B is a map from A to B satisfying phpep1qq, . . . , hpeparpRqqqq P R B for each
R P Σ and each tuple e P R A . We write A Ñ B to denote there is a homomorphism from A to B.
                                                                                                          n
The n-th power of A, denoted An , is a structure similar to A whose universe is An , and where R A
consists of the tuples pa1 , . . . , aarpRq q, satisfying pa1,j , . . . aarpRq,j q P R A for all j P rns.


                                                    5
    Templates are pairs of structures pA, Bq satisfying A Ñ B. The template is finite if both A, B
are finite. The decision promise constraint satisfaction problem (PCSP) defined by a template pA, Bq,
denoted PCSPpA, Bq, is the problem of, given an input finite structure I, to accept it if I Ñ A, and
to reject it if I ̸Ñ B. Similarly, in the search PCSP defined by pA, Bq, denoted sPCSPpA, Bq, the
goal is to find a homomorphism F : I Ñ B, if I Ñ A, or to reject I if I ̸Ñ B. Observe that this
only makes sense if B is finite or a suitable encoding is fixed. We define the problems CSPpAq and
sCSPpAq as PCSPpA, Aq and sPCSPpA, Aq respectively.

Efficient Algorithms and Rounding Problems Let A, I be finite Σ-structures. The following
system of equations over the integers t0, 1u, denoted IP A pIq, is satisfiable if and only if I Ñ A:

                           Variables: txv,a | v P I, a P Au             \
                                           txr A ,r I | R P Σ, r I P R , r A P R A u.
                                                                       I



                                      ř
                                               x “ 1,
                                      řaP A v,a
                           Equations:           A x         “ 1,                                          (1)
                                      řr A PR r I ,r A
                                        r A P R A ,r A piq“α xr I ,r A “ xr I piq,α ,

                               for each v P I, R P Σ, r I P R I , i P rarpRqs, α P A.

    Solving this system is as difficult as solving CSPpAq, but if we allow the variables to take
arbitrary values in Z or in the rational interval r0, 1s then the task can be carried out in polynomial
time. We write AIP A pIq and BLP A pIq for the system IP A pIq when the domain of the variables is Z
or r0, 1s Ď Q respectively.
    Given an input structure I for PCSPpA, Bq, where pA, Bq is a finite template, the AIP algorithm
(resp., BLP) [11] solves AIP A pIq (resp., BLP A pIq) and accepts I if and only if this system is satisfiable.
The algorithm BLP ` AIP [21] combines the power of the previous two, and checks in polynomial
time whether AIP A pIq and BLP A pIq have compatible solutions, and accepts I when this is the case.
Compatibility here means that whenever a variable is assigned to 0 in BLP A pIq, it is also assigned
to 0 in AIP A pIq. An algorithm Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu solves PCSPpA, Bq if it always outputs a
correct answer in this problem, meaning that the following two implications hold: (1) if there is
a homomorphism I Ñ A then Q accepts I, and (2) if Q accepts I then there is a homomorphism
I Ñ B. In this situation we define the rounding problem sPCSPQ pA, Bq as the problem of, given an
instance I accepted by Q, to find a homomorphism from I to B.

Minions A minion M consists of a collection of disjoint sets M pnq indexed by the natural numbers
n P N, and a map π M : M pnq Ñ M pmq for each pair of numbers n, m P N and each function
π P rmsrns , satisfying that (1) π M “ idM pnq if π “ idrns , and (2) π M “ π1M ˝ π2M whenever
π “ π1 ˝ π2 . The elements f P M pnq are called n-ary, the functions π M are called minoring
operations, and an element π M p f q is called a minor of f . When M is clear from the context, we
write f π instead of π M p f q. The minion M is called locally finite if M pnq is a finite set for all n P N.
An element p P M pnq is called cyclic if p “ ppn,1,2,...,n´1q (we remind the reader that we represent
maps π P rnsrns as tuples). A weak near-unanimity (WNU) element is some p P M pnq satisfying
that pσi “ pσj for all i, j P rns, where σi P r2srns sends i to 1 and all other o P rns to 2. Given
a template pA, Bq, the polymorphism minion PolpA, Bq is a minion whose n-ary elements are the

                                                             6
homomorphisms f : An Ñ B, which are called polymorphisms. Given an n-ary polymorphism f ,
and a map π : rns Ñ rms, the minor f π is defined by f π paq “ f pa ˝ πq for every f P An . Finally, a
minion homomorphism F : M Ñ N is a map from elements of M to elements of N that preserves
arities and minoring operations, i.e., satisfying that Fp f qπ “ Fp f π q for each suitable f , π. Similarly,
                                                         h
given h P N, a partial homomorphism F : M Ýá                 N up to arity h is a partial map defined on all
elements f P M of arity at most h that preserves arities and minoring operations.
    We define three minions that characterize the power of the algorithms AIP, BLP, BLP ` AIP.
In the minion MAIP the n-ary elements are the tuples f P Zn satisfying iPrns f piq “ 1. Given
                                                                                       ř

f P MAIP pnq, and π P rmsrns , minoring is defined by the identity p f π qpiq “ jPπ´1 piq f pjq for each
                                                                                        ř

i P rms. In the minion MBLP the n-ary elements are the the tuples f P r0, 1sn of rational numbers for
which iPrns f piq “ 1. Minoring is defined as for MAIP , i.e., by the identity p f π qpiq “ jPπ´1 piq f pjq.
        ř                                                                                       ř

Finally, in the minion MBLP`AIP the n-ary elements are pairs p f , gq, where f P MBLP pnq, g P MAIP pnq,
and f piq “ 0 implies gpiq “ 0 for each i P rns. Minoring in MBLP`AIP is defined component wise.
That is, p f , gqπ “ p f π , gπ q, where f π “ π MBLP p f q, and gπ “ π MAIP pgq. The following theorem has
been shown in [11] for the algorithms AIP, BLP and in [21] for BLP ` AIP.

Theorem 2.1. Let Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu, and let pA, Bq be a finite template. Then the algorithm Q
solves PCSPpA, Bq if and only if MQ Ñ PolpA, Bq.

    In (non-)computability results we consider the plain encoding of MBLP , MAIP , MBLP`AIP , where
tuples are represented as comma separated lists, delimited with parentheses, integers are repres-
ented with their decimal representations, and rational numbers are represented as irreducible
fractions, written as two numbers separated by a forward slash (i.e., n{m).

Minor Conditions Another useful way of looking at minions is to consider them as multi-sorted
structures [32], where the sort of each element p P M is its arity arppq, and ¨π is a function from
m-ary elements to n-ary elements for each map π P rnsrms . We consider the multi-sorted first-order
(FO) language LMC of minions. For some background of multi-sorted (or many-sorted) FO logic we
refer to [38], but we require only the very basics. Formulas in LMC are built using variables, each of
which has an arity (i.e., its sort), Boolean connectives, and function symbols ¨π for each n, m P N
and each map π P rmsrns . Variables represent elements of minions, and each symbol ¨π represents
the corresponding minoring operation. We write Dn x rather than Dx to make explicit that x is a
n-ary variable, and ϕpx1n1 , . . . , xknk q to express that the free variables x1 , . . . , xk of the formula ϕ have
                                                                       `              ˘
arities n1 , . . . , nk respectively. For example, the formula D3 x x “ xp2,3,1q expresses the existence of
a 3-ary cyclic element. The maximum arity of a formula ϕ P LMC is the largest maximum arity of
any of its sub-terms. A primitive positive formula is one that does not include disjunction, negation,
or universal quantification, and a sentence (or a closed formula) is a formula with no free variables.
Minor conditions are closed pp-formulas in LMC . We remark that more commonly the notion of
minor condition is introduced using bipartite Label Cover instances (e.g., [11]).
    Given a minion M , a formula ϕpx1 , . . . , xk q P LMC , and elements f 1 , . . . , f k P M such that f i has
the same arity as xi for all i P rks, we write M |ù ϕp f 1 , . . . , f k q to express that M satisfies ϕ when
substituting each xi with the element f i . A pp-definition of a set Q Ď M is a pp-formula Φpxq such
that M |ù Φp f q if and only if f P Q. Suppose that M |ù ϕ for a minor condition ϕ. A satisfying
assignment of ϕ in M maps each occurrence of the existential quantifier Dxφpxq in ϕ to an element f
of M of the same arity as x in such a way that ϕ is satisfied after substituting Dxφpxq with φp f q in

                                                         7
each sub-formula. When there is no ambiguity, we will simply treat assignments as maps from
variables of ϕ to elements of M . Given two minions M Ñ N and a number h P N, in the promise
minor condition problem PMCh pM , N q we consider an input minor condition ϕ whose maximum
arity is at most h, and the task is to accept it if M |ù ϕ and reject it if N ̸|ù ϕ. Additionally, if N is
locally finite, we define the search promise minor condition problem sPMCh pM , N q as the problem of
either finding a satisfying assignment of ϕ in N or to reject ϕ if M ̸|ù ϕ.


3     Main Results
We are ready to state our main results about the algorithms AIP, BLP, and BLP ` AIP. These are
summarized in Figure 1. Given Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu and k P N, SkQ denotes the family of
finite templates pA, Bq with |A| ď k such that Q solves PCSPpA, Bq.

Theorem 3.1 (Main result for AIP). The following hold:

    (1) the family of rounding problems sPCSPAIP pA, Bq for pA, Bq P S4AIP is TFNP-hard,

    (2) the family sPCSPAIP pA, Bq for pA, Bq P S2AIP is TFNP1 -hard,

    (3) the family S2AIP is undecidable, and

    (4) there is a template pA, Bq P S2AIP for which there is no computable minion homomorphism from MAIP
        to PolpA, Bq.

Theorem 3.2 (Main result for BLP). The following hold:

    (1) the family of rounding problems sPCSPBLP pA, Bq for pA, Bq P S5BLP is TFNP-hard,

    (2) the family sPCSPBLP pA, Bq for pA, Bq P S2BLP is TFNP1 -hard,

    (3) the family S2BLP is undecidable, and

    (4) there is a template pA, Bq P S2BLP for which there is no computable minion homomorphism from MBLP
        to PolpA, Bq.

Theorem 3.3 (Main result for BLP ` AIP). The following hold:

    (1) the family of rounding problems sPCSPBLP`AIP pA, Bq for pA, Bq P S5BLP`AIP is TFNP-hard, and

    (2) the family S5BLP`AIP is undecidable.

    We also recall here our main result about cyclic polymorphisms and WNUs. We remark that
PolpA, Bq admitting some cyclic polymorphism is equivalent to it admitting one of some prime
arity.

Theorem 1.2. The following problems are undecidable. Given an input finite template pA, Bq with |A| ď 3,
determine whether PolpA, Bq contains:

    (1) cyclic polymorphisms

          (i) for every prime arity p,

                                                     8
         (ii) for at least one arity k,
        (iii) for all but finitely many prime arities p,
        (iv) for infinitely many prime arities p.

    (2) weak near-unanimity polymorphisms (WNUs)

         (i) for every arity k ě 3,
         (ii) for at least one arity k ě 3,
        (iii) for all but finitely many arities k ě 3,
        (iv) for infinitely many arities k ě 3.


4     Overview of the Proofs
We sketch the proof of the following theorem while outlining the ideas used in our main results.

Theorem 4.1. Let S be the set of finite templates pA, Bq with |A| ď 3 such that PCSPpA, Bq is solved
by AIP. Then (1) the family of problems sPCSPAIP pA, Bq where pA, Bq P S is TFNP1 -hard, (2) S is
undecidable, and (3) there is a template pA, Bq P S for which there is no computable homomorphism
F : MAIP Ñ PolpA, Bq.

    The proof of this result is a reduction from tiling problems. The signature ΣΓ consists of a unary
symbol O and binary symbols E1 , E2 , and Γ is the ΣΓ -structure whose universe is the upper-right
quadrant N2 , and where OΓ “ tp1, 1qu marks the origin, and E1Γ “ tppm, nq, pm ` 1, nqq | pm, nq P
N2 u, E2Γ “ tppm, nq, pm, n ` 1qq | pm, nq P N2 u are the horizontal and vertical adjacency relations. We
write HompΓ, ¨q for the set of finite structures T satisfying Γ Ñ T. A ΣΓ -structure T can be seen as a
set of tiles, equipped with horizontal and vertical constraints, and a set of distinguished tiles that
can occupy the initial position. This way, a homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T represents a tiling of the
upper-right quadrant of the plane that satisfies all the imposed restrictions.

Proposition 4.2. The following hold:

    (1) the family of problems sPCSPpΓ, Tq where T P HompΓ, ¨q is TFNP1 -hard,

    (2) HompΓ, ¨q is undecidable, and

    (3) there exists T P HompΓ, ¨q for which there is no computable homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T.

   At a high-level, this is follows from the fact that, given a non-deterministic Turing machine
M, we can construct a finite structure T M for which the homomorphisms F : Γ Ñ T M represent
non-halting runs of T M .
   In order to prove Theorem 4.1 using this proposition we first represent Γ inside the minion
MAIP , and then we find a way of encoding finite ΣΓ -structures in finite templates pA, Bq in a suitable
way. The first task is the simpler one. We can identify each pair m “ pm1 , m2 q in N2 with the 3-ary
element f m “ pm1 , m2 , 1 ´ m1 ´ m2 q P MAIP . Similarly, we can represent each pair pm, m1 q P EiΓ
                                                                                           p1,2,3,3q
with the 4-ary element gEi pm,m1 q “ pm1 , m2 , 1, ´m1 ´ m2 q with the idea that f m “ gEi pm,m1 q and
         p1,2,i,3q
f m1 “ gEi pm,m1 q in mind. We call this way of representing a relational structure inside a minion an

                                                           9
interpretation (Section 6.1) and we denote it by I . We define U I “ t f m | m P N2 u, OI “ t f p1,1q u, and
EiI “ tgEi pm,m1 q | pm, m1 q P EiΓ u for i “ 1, 2.
    The interpretation I is almost pp-definable in MAIP . Indeed, the element p1, 0q P MAIP p2q
is the only witness of the pp-formula ϕ1 px2 q ” x “ xp1,1q , so the 4-ary elements of the form
pm1 , m2 , 1, ´m1 ´ m2 q P MAIP are precisely the witnesses of ϕE py4 q ” ϕ1 pyp2,2,1,2q q. However, this
does not take into account the restriction that m1 , m2 P N. Under closer inspection it is not hard
to see that the set of elements pm, nq P MAIP with m ą 0 is not pp-definable, so, in fact, the
interpretation I itself is not pp-definable either 2 . However, we get something almost as good:
for any element m P N2 we can construct in polynomial time a pp-definition ψm px3 q of f m in
MAIP . For m “ p1, 1q, we simply define ψm px3 q ” ϕ1 pxp1,2,2q q ^ ϕ1 pxp2,1,2q q. Given m P N2 , for
m1 “ pm1 ` 1, m2 q, we define ψm1 px3 q as the formula
                               4       3    ´                                                 ¯
                           D D     y       z ψm pzq ^ ϕE pyq ^ z “ yp1,2,3,3q ^ x “ yp1,2,1,3q ,                                     (2)

and so on. This way, given a finite substructure G Ă Γ, we can construct in polynomial time
a minor condition ΨG containing an existentially-quantified variable xm for each vertex m P G
an existentially-quantified variable y Ei pm,m1 q for each edge pm, m1 q P EiG , such that the satisfying
assignments of ΨG on MAIP must map each variable to the minion element that encodes the
corresponding vertex or edge. That is, xm ÞÑ f m and y Ei pm,m1 q ÞÑ gEi pm,m1 q . The minor condition ΨG
can be defined as
                                   ˜             ¸
    3           4                    ľ             ľ
   D  xm          D   y Ei pm,m1 q     ψm pxm q
   mP G    iPr2s,pm,m1 qPEiG                     mP G
                                             ˜                                                                                   ¸
                                                                                                p1,2,3,3q           p1,2,i,3q
                                                        ľ
                                                                     ψE py Ei pm,m1 q q ^ xm “ y E pm,m1 q ^ xm1 “ y E pm,m1 q   . (3)
                                                                                                  i                   i
                                                 iPr2s,pm,m1 qPEiG

This construction is called a pattern (Section 6.4). Having found a nice way to represent Γ inside
MAIP , the next step is to develop a construction that, given a finite ΣΓ -structure T, builds a suitable
finite template pA T , B T q. We would like MT “ PolpA T , B T q to satisfy the following.

Property 1 (Conditions that enable our reductions).

  (I) MAIP Ñ MT if and only if Γ Ñ T.

 (II) A homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T can be computed given oracle access to a homomorphism
      H : MAIP Ñ MT .

(III) Given a finite substructure G Ă Γ, there is a polynomial-time reduction from the task of
      finding a homomorphism F : G Ñ T to the task of finding a satisfying assignment of ΨG in
      MT .

   It is easy enough to see that the conditions (I) and (II) allow us to respectively reduce the
undecidability and non-computability parts of Theorem 4.1 to those of Proposition 4.2. In to bridge
   2 This could be circumvented by having defined Γ on the whole integer plane Z2 instead of N2 , but we want to

illustrate the point that our reductions are not uniform pp-definitions. This will be useful in the more involved proofs.


                                                                        10
the gap between the TFNP1 -hardness statements in those results, we use condition (III) together
with the following additional result, which is a consequence of Theorem 8.5 (Section 8). We note
that this is a standard modification of an analogous result, [11, Theorem 3.12], that has been applied
widely in the PCSP literature.

Proposition 4.3. Suppose that AIP solves PCSPpA, Bq for a finite template pA, Bq. Then sPCSPAIP pA, Bq
is log-space equivalent to sPMC N pMAIP , PolpA, Bqq, where N is at least as large as |A| and |R A | for all
relation symbols R.

     We remark that we do not always achieve the conditions from Property 1 in tandem: for
example, sometimes we obtain templates that satisfy both (I) and (III), but not (II), meaning that we
are able to obtain undecidability, and hardness-of-rounding results for a given algorithm, but not a
related non-computability result. This is the case, for example, of BLP ` AIP. With our methods,
the condition (I) used to prove undecidability has the weakest requirements, while the conditions
(II) and (III) used to show non-computability and hardness have non-comparable requirements.
     Rather than constructing the template pA T , B T q directly, we focus on its polymorphism minion
instead. We start by defining a minion NT that satisfies Property 1 of PolpA T , B T q. The n-ary
elements of NT are pairs p f , χq, where f P MAIP pnq, and χ : r3srns á T is a partial map defined
on the elements γ P r3srns such that f γ P U I that satisfies the following properties: if f p1,1q “ f γ ,
then χpγq P O T , and if gEi pm,m1 q “ f π , then pχpγq, χpγ1 qq P EiT , where γ “ p1, 2, 3, 3q ˝ π, and
γ1 “ p1, 2, i, 3q ˝ π. Intuitively, the element f P MAIP covers some part of Γ (as interpreted by I ),
which consists of the elements f m P U I that can be obtained by minoring f . Similarly, we also
think of f as covering the edges pm, m1 q P EiΓ where gEi pm,m1 q P EiI is a minor of f . Then, the map
χ represents a homomorphism from the substructure S f Ď Γ covered by f to T. Given a map
π P rmsrns , we define the minor p f , χqπ as the pair p f π , χπ q, where χπ : r3srms á T is the partial map
defined by γ ÞÑ χpγ ˝ πq. The rationale behind this construction is that the structure S f π covered
by f π is a substructure of S f , so χπ is defined so that it represents the restriction of χ to S f π . If the
substructures S f formed a topology over Γ (which, we remark, is not the case), then the minion
NT would encode a sheaf [23] over Γ whose sections correspond to partial homomorphisms to T.
We keep this topological intuition in mind throughout the proof. We call NT the manifold minion 3
given by the interpretation I and the structure T (Section 6.2).

Proposition 4.4. The minion NT satisfies Property 1.

     Let us sketch the proof of this fact. It is not difficult to show that every element f P MAIP is
pp-definable, so the only minion homomorphism F : MAIP Ñ MAIP is the identity. Hence, any
homomorphism F : MAIP Ñ NT composed with the left projection must yield the identity over
MAIP . In other words, F must be of the form f ÞÑ p f , χ f q. If such homomorphism F exists, then
the charts χ f must be compatible with each other, yielding a global homomorphism from Γ to T.
Conversely, if there is a homomorphism H : Γ Ñ T, one can restrict it to each local structure S f
to obtain compatible charts χ f and define a minion homomorphism F. This proves NT satisfies
(I). To show (II), suppose that we have oracle access to a homomorphism F : MAIP Ñ NT . Then,
by the previous reasoning, in order to compute a homomorphism H : Γ Ñ T, given an element
   3 In previous versions of this work, this was called the exponential minion. We changed the name to appease a

category-theoretically inclined reader who would point out that these minions are not, in fact, exponential objects in the
category of minions.


                                                           11
m P N2 we just need to query Fp f m q “ p f m , χ f m q and consider the chart χ f m . Finally, to see that
(III) holds, consider a finite substructure G Ă Γ, and a satisfying assignment x ÞÑ p f x , χ x q of ΨG in
NT . The map x ÞÑ f x is a satisfying assignment of ΨG in MAIP , so by construction of ΨG it must
hold that f x “ f m when x “ xm for each m P G, and f x “ gEi pm,m1 q when x “ y Ei pm,m1 q for each
i P r2s, pm, m1 q P EiG . Hence, when x ranges over all variables txm umPG Y ty Ei pm,m1 q uiPr2s,pm,m1 qPEi , the
elements f x cover the whole structure G (as induced by the interpretation I ), and the charts χ x
must piece together a homomorphism from G to T.
     The main issue at this point is that, despite having the desired properties, the minion NT is
not (isomorphic to) the polymorphism minion of any finite template pA T , B T q. In fact, it is not
even locally finite. The first step towards constructing pA T , B T q from the minion NT is to find a
locally finite quotient NT1 of NT that still satisfies Property 1. More precisely, NT1 will be obtained
by performing the manifold construction on a locally finite quotient of MAIP by some equivalence
relation „. Let us spell this out. The equivalence „ defines a quotient minion MAIP { „ where each
element x f y is the „-class of an element f in the original minion MAIP . Similarly, given a subset
S Ď MAIP , we write xSy for the subset of MAIP { „ consisting of the elements x f y for each f P S.
The relation „ also induces an equivalence on Γ through the interpretation I defined as m „ m1
whenever f m „ f m1 . Finally, we can also speak of the quotient interpretation I { „ over the quotient
                                                                                I {„
minion MAIP { „, which is given by U I {„ “ xU I y, OI {„ “ xOI y, and Ei             “ xEiI y for i “ 1, 2.
It can be shown that I { „ induces the quotient structure Γ{ „ on the quotient minion MAIP { „.
Then, we define NT1 as the manifold minion given by the interpretation I { „ and the structure T,
similarly to NT .
     The following conditions ensure that NT1 still satisfies Property 1 and that this property can be
further preserved when transforming NT1 into a polymorphism minion in the final step.

Property 2 (Requirements for a good quotient).

 (A) The interpretation I is „-stable. It holds that x f y P xU I y if and only if f P U I , x f y P xOI y if and
     only if f P OI , and x f y P xEiI y if and only if f P EiI for all i P r2s.

  (B) The interpretation I is internal with respect to „ at arity 4. For each partial homomorphism
      F : MAIP á MAIP { „ defined up to arity 4, it holds that FpU I q Ď xU I y, FpOI q Ď xOI y, and
      FpEiI q Ď xEiI y for each i P r2s.

 (C) The map G ÞÑ ΨG defined (3) is an internal pattern with respect to „. Given a finite substructure
     G Ă Γ, any satisfying assignment of ΨG in MAIP { „ must correspond to a homomorphism
     from G into Γ{ „4 .

     Let us briefly go over these conditions. Condition (A) ensures that if there is a homomorphism
F : Γ Ñ T then there is a minion homomorphism H : MAIP Ñ N 1 . Indeed, in this case we can
define H as the map f ÞÑ px f y, χ f q, where χ f is obtained by looking at the restriction of F to the
local structure induced by I on f , and then factoring the local homomorphism through the quotient.
The reason this construction works is that the quotient map Γ Ñ Γ{ „ preserves non-relations
(i.e., sends non-edges to non-edges and sends non-origin elements to non-origin elements) so
   4We warn the reader that, for the sake of exposition in this introductory section, the statement in (C) is not fully

precise.



                                                          12
partial homomorphisms on local structures can be factored through the quotient 5 . Condition (B)
implies that every minion homomorphism H : MAIP Ñ NT1 corresponds to a homomorphism
F : Γ Ñ T. Indeed, intuitively, this condition means that every homomorphism MAIP Ñ MAIP { „
must induce a homomorphism between the structures Γ and Γ{ „ interpreted on those minions.
So, if the homomorphism H maps f P MAIP to some pair pxgy, χq P NT1 , then it must hold that
the local structure Sxgy given by xgy in MAIP { „ is a homomorphic image of the local structure S f
of f in MAIP , meaning that the local homomorphism χ : Sxgy Ñ T can be lifted to another one
χ̃ : S f Ñ T. It can be seen that these lifted local homomorphisms form a consistent family, so they
define a global homomorphism from Γ to T. Finally, condition (C) requires that any assignment
of ΨG in MAIP { „ maps, for each m P G, the variable xm to some element x f m1 y in such a way that
the map m ÞÑ xm1 y is a homomorphism from G to Γ{ „. Arguing again that you can factor local
homomorphism through the quotient, this condition allows us to transfer (III) in Property 1 from
the minion NT to NT1 .
     Another important observation is that (B) would be weaker if we considered non-partial homo-
morphisms instead. Indeed, every homomorphism can be restricted to a partial homomorphism,
but not every partial homomorphism can, in principle, be extended to a fully-defined homomorph-
ism. We consider partial homomorphisms planning for a future step where, in order to obtain a
polymorphism minion, we will have to let go of high-arity terms in a certain way. The choice of
arity 4 corresponds to the fact that the minor conditions ΨG have maximum arity 4.
     In order to construct the relation „ we select some relevant predicates (related to I ) containing
the information that we would like to preserve in the quotient. These predicates will be sets of
binary elements D1 , DN Ď MAIP p2q defined as D1 “ tp1, 0qu, and DN “ tpm, 1 ´ mq | m P Nu. We
call the set of predicates D “ tD1 , DN u a description (Section 6.3). Then, we write f „D g for two
elements f , g P MAIP of the same arity n whenever for all π P r2srns and all P P D the inclusion
f π P P holds if and only if gπ P P as well. We shorten expressions of the form ¨ { „D to ¨ {D .
Figure 2 displays the quotient Γ{D .

Fact 4.5. The equivalence relation „D satisfies Property 2.

    The fact that „D meets condition (A) in Property 2 follows easily from the definition of this
relation. Items (B) and (C), hold roughly, because the formula ψm pxq given in (2) is a pp-definition
of x f m y in MAIP {D for each m P N2 6 , and there are analogous pp-definitions for the elements
xgEi pm1 ,m2 q y representing each edge. Let us sketch this fact. First, we can see that ϕ1 px2 q ” x “ xp1,1q
defines the element xp1, 0qy. Indeed, if MAIP {D |ù ϕ1 px f yq then f „D f p1,1q . However, f p1,1q P D1 for
all f P MAIP p2q, so f must belong to D1 as well, meaning that f “ p1, 0q. Following this argument,
we see that ψp1,1q pxq defines x f p1,1q y, and the other values of m P N2 can be handled by induction.
    The fact that ψm pxq is a pp-definition of x f m y in MAIP {D forces any partial homomorphism
H : MAIP á MAIP {D defined up to arity 4 (which is the maximum arity of ϕm pxq) to satisfy
Hp f m q “ x f m y for all m P N2 . Indeed, it holds that MAIP |ù ψm p f m q, and this is witnessed by
elements of arity at most 4, so MAIP {D |ù ψm pHp f m q, and it must be that Hp f m q “ x f m y. This shows
   5 Making this statement formal requires being more careful in our definition of local structures. The direct approach,

which we follow in this proof sketch, of defining the local structure S f as the substructure of Γ induced on the minors
of f does not work. The issue is that the quotient map f ÞÑ x f y might identify minors of f , which prevents us from
factoring partial homomorphisms through the quotient.
   6 This is a stronger statement than what we really need. What we will use is the existence of a kind of formulas which

we call “internal references”. These are introduced in Section 6.3.


                                                           13
that condition (B) holds. Finally, one can also show that (C) holds via a similar argument using the
fact that the minor conditions ΨG are built-up from the formulas ψm pxq.
    Having obtained a good equivalence relation, we construct the locally finite minion NT1 as
outlined previously. To reiterate, we consider the quotient interpretation I {D on the quotient
minion MAIP {D and define NT1 as the manifold minion given by I {D and the structure T. The fact
that „D satisfies Property 2, means that NT1 manages to preserve Property 1, which NT previously
satisfied. However, we are still not done: The minion NT1 is locally finite, but it may not be
isomorphic to a polymorphism minion. The reason is that we do not know whether it is finitizable
in the sense of [18]. We circumvent this issue by proving the following.
Proposition 4.6. There is a finite template pA, Bq with |A| “ 3 and |R A | ď 4 for any relation symbol
R satisfying that (1) there is a partial minion isomorphism F : NT1 á PolpA, Bq defined up to arity 4,
and (2) for any minion M , it holds that M Ñ PolpA, Bq if and only if there is a partial homomorphism
H : M á NT1 defined up to arity 4.
    This is a consequence of the more general result Theorem 7.1 (Section 7). The template pA, Bq is
constructed as follows. We consider a single relation symbol R of arity 34 . Then A is the most general
structure on 3 elements containing a single relation R A of size 4, following a construction given in
[18]. The fact that |A| “ 3 in this result has to do with the fact that any two elements f , g P NT1 of
the same arity are equal if and only if all their 3-ary minors are equal. Hence, NT1 can be seen as a
function minion on a domain of size 3. The structure B is defined as the free-structure [11] of NT1
generated by A.
    The fact that we do not obtain a full isomorphism in Proposition 4.6 may seem concerning, but
we already accounted for this by considering partial homomorphisms in Property 2. Crucially,
the second item in this proposition, ensures that MAIP Ñ PolpA, Bq exactly when there is a partial
homomorphism H : MAIP á NT1 defined up to arity 4. Putting together some of the implications
we have shown so far shows that PolpA, Bq satisfies condition (I) in Property 1, and the rest of
the conditions follow similarly. This way, the following holds and finishes the proof sketch of
Theorem 4.1.
Proposition 4.7. Let pA, Bq be a template satisfying the statement of Proposition 4.6. Then PolpA, Bq
satisfies Property 1.


4.1   Organization of the Paper
The rest of the paper follows roughly the same structure as the proof sketch in this section. We
begin in Section 5 by introducing the sources of hardness, undecidability and non-computability
that are the starting point of our reductions. In Section 6 we properly introduce the notions
required to prove the main results, including interpretations, manifold minions, descriptions, and
patterns. Each subsection defines some concepts and includes proofs of related auxiliary results. In
Section 7 we describe how to obtain polymorphism minions that are partially isomorphic to a given
locally-finite minion. In Section 8 we show the reductions that allow us to transfer undecidability,
non-computability, and hardness results from tiling problems to rounding problems. In Section 9
we put everything together and prove our main results. Finally Section 10 discusses in greater
depth the link between our results and some open questions in the area, outlining some research
directions.

                                                  14
                              Algorithm Q
                                                         Q “ AIP     Q “ BLP      Q “ BLP+AIP
         Result

            Undecidability of MQ Ñ PolpA, Bq             |A| “ 2      |A| “ 2        |A| “ 5

         Non-computability of homomorphisms
                                                         |A| “ 2      |A| “ 2          ´´
                F : MQ Ñ PolpA, Bq

             TFNP1 -hardness of sPCSPQ pA, Bq            |A| “ 2      |A| “ 2        |A| “ 5


             TFNP-hardness of sPCSPQ pA, Bq              |A| “ 4      |A| “ 5        |A| “ 5


                                  Figure 1: Main algorithmic results.

                                          V                H, V
                                                  H
                                      (1, 2)             (2, 2)


                                                            V
                                      V

                                                     H
                                     (1, 1)              (2, 1) H



                                     Figure 2: The quotient Γ{ „D


5    Sources of Undecidability, Non-Computability and Hardness
Given a family S of similar structures, HompS, ¨q denotes the set of finite structures satisfying S Ñ I
for some S P S. When S is a singleton family tSu, we write HompS, ¨q rather than HomptSu, ¨q. We
write Homeg pS, ¨q, where eg stands for eventually globally, for the set of finite structures I satisfying
S Ñ I for all but finitely many S P S. Finally, we define Homio pS, ¨q, where io stands for infinitely
often, for the set of finite structures I satisfying S Ñ I holds for infinitely many S P S.
    When S is a finite family of finite structures, or S is a finite structure, all the sets described above
can easily be recognized in polynomial time. However, when S is an infinite family, or S is an
infinite structure, the previous problems can be undecidable. We deal mostly with these later cases.
    Let S and T be two similar structures. We say that S and T are finitely equivalent if I Ñ S and
I Ñ T are equivalent conditions for every finite structure I. A standard argument shows that,
given a finite structure I, the fact that S Ñ I is equivalent to G Ñ I for every finite substructure


                                                    15
G Ď S. See [11, Remark 7.13] for a proof of this fact in the countable case, which is the only one we
use. This yields the following result.
Lemma 5.1. Let S, T be other two finitely equivalent Σ-structures. Let I be a finite Σ-structure. Then
S Ñ I if and only if T Ñ I.
Proof. We show that S Ñ I implies that T Ñ I. The reverse implication follows analogously. For
any finite substructure G Ď S it holds that G Ñ S. By the definition of finitely equivalent structures,
it must hold that G Ñ T as well. Given that we have assumed that T Ñ I, composing homomorph-
isms we obtain that G Ñ I. This way, any finite substructure of S maps homomorphically to I,
meaning that S Ñ I as well.

    The proofs of the remaining results in this section can be found in Section A. The techniques are
standard, and essentially follow the idea from [64] that runs of a Turing machine M can be encoded
in tilings of the plane by using consecutive horizontal lines to describe consecutive configurations
of the machine M.
    Recall the definition of the grid structure Γ from Section 4. We repeat here the main result about
that structure for the sake of completeness.
Proposition 4.2. The following hold:
  (1) the family of problems sPCSPpΓ, Tq where T P HompΓ, ¨q is TFNP1 -hard,

  (2) HompΓ, ¨q is undecidable, and

  (3) there exists T P HompΓ, ¨q for which there is no computable homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T.
    Items (2) and (3) were shown in [64] and [43] respectively. In (3) we consider the plain encoding
of Γ, which represents pairs pm1 , m2 q P N2 as comma-separated lists delimited by parentheses,
where the integers are written in decimal notation.
    It is worth remarking that the notion of finite equivalence introduced earlier preserves both the
undecidability and the hardness parts in this result. Indeed, if G is finitely equivalent to Γ then
HompG, ¨q and HompΓ, ¨q are the same family, and the problems sPCSPpG, Tq and sPCSPpΓ, Tq are
the same whenever G Ñ T for some finite structure T. However, the non-computability part of this
result is not preserved by finite equivalence. To see this, define G as a disjoint union of increasingly
large grids. For instance, for each n P N, let G n be the substructure of Γ induced on rns, and let
G“ 8     n“1 G n . It is not difficult to see that G is finitely equivalent to Γ. Even so, it also holds that
      Ů

there exists a computable homomorphism F : G Ñ T whenever G Ñ T for a finite structure T. To
see this, observe that when querying the value of a global homomorphism on an element v, an
algorithm just needs to compute a homomorphism from v’s connected component, which is finite,
to T, and store it in memory. This yields a global homomorphism that can be computed on the fly.
    In order to obtain TFNP-hardness instead of TFNP1 -hardness we utilize a three-dimensional
grid with extra constraints corresponding to “doubling” each coordinate. The super-grid Γ` has
signature ΣΓ` “ tO, E1 , E2 , E3 , E1 , E2 , E3 u, where the symbol O is unary and all other symbols are
binary. The universe Γ` is the set of triples N3 . The relations of Γ` are defined as follows. We have
OΓ “ tp1, 1, 1qu. The relations E1Γ , E2Γ , E3Γ describe unit increments in the first, second, and third
   `                                     `    `    `


coordinate respectively. I.e., E1Γ “ tppm, n, oq, pm ` 1, n, oqq | pm, n, oq P N3 u, and so on. Similarly,
                                       `


the relations E1Γ , E2Γ , E3Γ describe doubling increments in the first, second, and third coordinate
                    `     `     `


respectively. That is, E1Γ “ tppm, n, oq, p2m, n, oqq | pm, n, oq P N3 u, and so on.
                              `




                                                     16
Proposition 5.2. The following hold:

    (1) the family of problems sPCSPpΓ` , Tq where T P HompΓ` , ¨q is TFNP-hard,

    (2) HompΓ` , ¨q is undecidable, and

    (3) there exists T P HompΓ` , ¨q for which there is no computable homomorphism F : Γ` Ñ T.

    Again, in the non-computability result we consider the plain encoding of Γ` . Here we point out
that the undecidability and non-computability parts of this result just follow from Proposition 4.2.
Indeed, given a ΣΓ -structure T it is easy to construct a ΣΓ` -structure T ` such that Γ Ñ T if and
only if Γ` Ñ T ` , and where a homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T can be computed given oracle access to
a homomorphism H : Γ` Ñ T ` . Indeed, T ` can be obtained extending T by interpreting each
symbol R P ΣΓ` zΣΓ as the total relation of arity arpRq over T.
    Finally, we need one last source of undecidability results, which will be given by a family
of growing triangular slices of the two-dimensional grid. Given m P N, the structure ∇m has
signature Σ∇ “ tO, W, E1 , E2 u, where O, W are unary symbols and E1 , E2 are binary. The universe
∇m consists of all pairs pn, oq P N2 satisfying n ` o ď m. The relations O∇m , E1∇m , E2∇m are defined
as in Γ. That is, O∇m “ tp1, 1qu, E1∇m consists of all pairs of the form ppn, oq, pn ` 1, oqq and E2∇m
contains the pairs ppm, oq, pm, o ` 1qq. Finally, the relation W ∇m contains all pairs pn, oq satisfying
n ` o “ m (i.e., the upper-right boundary of the triangle).

Proposition 5.3. Let pan qnPN be a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers. Then the following fam-
ilies are undecidable (1) Hompt∇ an | n P Nu, ¨q, (2) Homeg pt∇ an | n P Nu, ¨q, and (3) Homio pt∇ an | n P
Nu, ¨q.


6      Main Definitions
6.1     Interpretations over Minions
We begin by introducing formally the notion of interpretation that we outlined in the proof sketch.
Let M be a minion. Given a number n P N, a n-ary predicate over M is a subset P Ď M pnq. We
write n “ arpPq. We write 2M for the set of predicates over M of arbitrary arity. Given a relational
signature Σ, a Σ-interpretation I over M consists of (1) a predicate U I P 2M , (2) a predicate RI P 2M
for each symbol R P Σ, and (3) a map ΠIR,i : rarpRI qs ÞÑ rarpU I qs for each symbol R P Σ and each
index i P rarpRqs. Interpretations over minions induce two kinds of structures, global and local,
defined as follows.

      • The global structure induced by I , denoted S “ SI , is a Σ-structure with universe S “ U I ,
        where for each symbol R P Σ, a tuple p f 1 , . . . , f arpRq q P pU I qarpRq belongs to RS if there is an
        element g P RI satisfying that f i “ gπi for each i P rarpRqs, where πi “ ΠIR,i .

      • Given an element f P M , we define the set U I , f Ď rarpU I qsrarp f qs as the subset of maps π for
        which f π P U I . The local structure induced by I on f ’s minors, denoted S “ SI , f , is a Σ-structure
        whose universe is U I , f , where for each R P Σ the relation RS consists of all the tuples of the
        form pσ ˝ π1 , . . . , σ ˝ πarpRq q P pU I , f qarpRq , where f σ P RI , and πi “ ΠIR,i for each i P rarpRqs.



                                                          17
    It is important to remark that the definition of local structure appearing here is not exactly
the same as the one given in the proof sketch. Indeed, the local structure SI , f is not the induced
substructure of SI on the minors of f . The reason is that it may be that f π1 “ f π2 P U I for some
suitable maps, whereas in the local structure SI , f the maps π1 , π2 represent different elements.
    Although this is not relevant in the proofs of our algorithmic results, when we analyse cyclic
and WNU polymorphisms we will deal with minions that correspond to disjoint unions of simpler
minions. For instance, the minion representing the existence of a k-ary WNU polymorphism for
each arity k ě 3 is the disjoint union of the minion generated by an abstract 3-ary WNU element,
with the one generated by a 4-ary WNU element, and so on. Hence, we also specialise some of our
auxiliary results to disjoint unions of minions.
    Given a subminion N Ď M , the restricted interpretation J “ I |N is defined by U J “ U I X N ,
R “ RI X N for each R P Σ, and ΠJ
  J
                                          R,i “ Π R,i for each R P Σ, i P rarpRqs.
                                                  I


Observation 1. Let J be a set, and I be a Σ interpretation over a disjoint union of minions M “ jP J M j ,
                                                                                                     Ů
                                                                        Ů
and let I j “ I |Mj for each j P J. Then the following hold: (1) SI “ jP J SI j , and (2) SI , f “ SI j , f for all
j P J, f P M j .

6.2   Manifold Minions
Now we are in position to introduce manifold minions, which is arguably the main construction
that enables our proofs.
    Let M be a minion, I be a Σ interpretation over it, and C be a Σ-structure. The manifold minion
N “ C I is defined as follows. The elements in N pnq are pairs p f , χq, where f P M pnq, and
χ : U I , f Ñ C is a homomorphism from SI , f to C, which we call a local homomorphism. Given a map
π, the minoring operation is given by p f , χqπ “ p f π , χπ q, where χπ is defined by γ ÞÑ χpγ ˝ πq.
Observe that if g “ f π , then U I ,g “ tσ | σ ˝ π P U I , f u, so the homomorphism χπ is well-defined.
The canonical projection pj : C I á C is the partial map defined on pairs p f , χq such that f P U I ,
which maps each such pair to the element χpidq, where id “ idrarpU I qs refers to the identity map
over rarpU I qs. Observe that χpidq is well-defined. Indeed, the fact that f P U I implies that id P SI , f .

6.3   Descriptions
In this section we introduce a way to obtain quotient minions that preserve sufficient information
about interpretations. Roughly, the main result here, Lemma 6.3, states that given a Σ-interpretation
I over a minion M , a Σ-structure C, and a nice quotient M { „ of M , then M Ñ C I {„ if and only
if the global structure SI maps homomorphically into C.
     A description of M is a set of predicates D Ď M . A description D induces an equivalence
relation „D on M as follows. Let f 1 , f 2 P Mpnq for some n P N. Then f 1 „D f 2 means that f 1π P P
if and only if f 2π P P for every P P D and every map π : rns Ñ rarpPqs. We shorten „D to D when
writing quotients to keep the notation light (i.e., we write ¨ {D instead of ¨ { „D ). Given an element
f P M , we write x f y to denote its equivalence class in M {D , and given a set S Ď M we write xSy
for the set of equivalence classes x f y of elements f P S. The quotient M {D inherits a natural minion
structure from M : for every n P N, we define pM {D qpnq “ xM pnqy, and for every x f y P M {D
and every suitable map π, we define the minoring operation as px f yqπ “ x f π y. Observe that this



                                                        18
operation is well defined and does not depend on the chosen representative f . Moreover, if the
description D is finite, then M {D is locally finite.
    Given a description D Ď 2M , and a Σ-interpretation I , the quotient interpretation J “ I {D is
the Σ interpretation over M {D defined by U J “ xU I y, RJ “ xRI y for each R P Σ, and ΠJ R,i “ Π R,i
                                                                                                  I

for each R P Σ, i P rarpRqs.
    We remark that by considering minion quotients corresponding to descriptions we are not
loosing any generality. Indeed, if there is a surjective homomorphism F : M Ñ N then N
is isomorphic to M {D , where D is the description consisting of all the preimages F´1 pgq. So
descriptions should be understood as a way to efficiently encode equivalence relations over
minions. Indeed, given a description D of M consisting only of k-ary predicates, the equivalence
relation „D over M could have at most kn 2|D| classes of n-ary elements.

Internal Predicates The next step now is to formally introduce what it means for a description D
of a minion M to preserve the meaningful information about an interpretation I . More precisely,
what we want is that the interpretation I is preserved, in some way, by all homomorphisms from
M to the quotient M {D . The key definition here is that of an internal predicate with respect to a
description. The description D will define a good quotient for I if all the predicates that form I are
internal with respect to D .
    Let M be a minion and let D Ď 2M be a description. A predicate Q P 2M is called D -stable if
f „D g together with f P Q imply that g P Q for any f , g P M parpQqq. Given h ě arpQq, we say
that Q is internal at arity h with respect to D if (1) Q is D -stable, and (2) all partial homomorphisms
          h
F : M Ýá     M {D satisfy FpQq Ď xQy. Similarly, a Σ-interpretation I over M is D -stable if all the
predicates U I , RI for R P Σ are D -stable; and I is internal w.r.t. D at arty h if all the predicates U I ,
RI for R P Σ are internal at arity h w.r.t. D . In particular this requires that h is at least as large as
arpU I q and arpRI q for each R P Σ.
    An internal reference to Q w.r.t. D is a pp-formula Φpxq P LMC with one free variable x of arity
arpQq satisfying
                                     M {D |ù Φpx f yq ùñ x f y P xQy
for all x f y P M parpQqq{D . Our main tool for showing that a predicate is internal is the following
result.
Lemma 6.1 (Main criterion for internal predicates). Let M be a minion D Ď 2M a description, Q P 2M
a predicate that is D -stable, and h P N a number. Suppose that for each f P Q there is an internal reference
ϕ f pxq to Q w.r.t. D whose maximum arity is at most h, and such that M |ù ϕ f p f q. Then Q is internal at
arity h w.r.t. D
                      h
Proof. Let F : M Ýá      M {D be a partial homomorphism and f P Q. Observe that M |ù ϕ f p f q is
witnessed by an assignment over elements of arity at most h, so this implies M {D |ù ϕ f pFp f qq. The
fact that ϕ f is an internal reference to Q w.r.t. D yields Fp f q P xQy. This proves the result.

    A situation in which this last criterion is especially easy to apply is that in which ϕ f can be
chosen to be the same for all f P Q. This motivates the following notion. Let M be a minion,
D Ď 2M a description and Q P 2M a predicate. An internal definition of Q with respect to D is an
internal reference Φpxq to Q w.r.t. D that additionally satisfies

                                          f P Q ùñ M |ù Φp f q

                                                     19
for all f P M parpQqq. If such definition Φpxq exists, its arity is bounded by a number h P N, and
additionally Q is D -stable, then Q is said to be internally definable at arity h w.r.t. D . Observe that
by Lemma 6.1, this implies that Q is internal at arity h w.r.t. D .

Main Results About Quotient Interpretations The next two lemmas show that, given a minion
M , if I is an internal interpretation with respect to a description D Ď 2M , then homomorphisms
M Ñ M {D preserve the interpretation, and homomorphisms to power minions M Ñ C I {D
correspond to homomorphisms from the global induced structure SI to C.

Lemma 6.2 (Homomorphisms to good quotients preserve local structures). Let M be a minion, I a
Σ-interpretation over M , and D Ď 2M a description. Define J “ I {D . The following hold.

  (1) Suppose that I is D -stable. Then SI , f “ SJ ,x f y for all f P M .
                                                                                  h
  (2) Suppose that I is internal at arity h P N w.r.t. D , and that F : M Ýá         M {D is a partial
      homomorphism. Then for any f P M whose arity is at most h, the local structure SI , f is contained in
      SJ ,Fp f q .

Proof. (1) This is a direct consequence of the stability condition. For any f P M and any suitable
map π it holds that f π P U I if and only if x f yπ P U J , and f π P RI if and only if x f yπ P RJ for each
R P Σ. This proves the statement.
     (2) Let A “ SI , f , B “ SJ ,Fp f q , and nU “ arpU I q. First, we show that if a map σ P rnU srns belongs
to A, then it also belongs to B. Indeed, the first condition is equivalent to f σ P U I . Because I is
internal, it follows that Fp f qσ P xU I y “ U J , which is equivalent to the second condition. Now, let
R P Σ, and n R “ arpRI q. We show that if a tuple σ belongs to R A , then σ belongs to R B as well. The
first condition means that there is a map γ P rn R srns such that σi “ ΠIR,i for each i P rarpRqs, and
f γ P RI . Because I is internal, it must hold that Fp f qγ P RJ , which shows that σ also belongs to
RB .

   We gently remind the reader that, given a manifold minion C J defined by a Σ-structure C and
a Σ-interpretation J , we write pj for the canonical projection from C J to C, defined in Section 6.2.

Lemma 6.3 (Power minions on good quotients capture homomorphisms from the global structure).
Let M be a minion, I a Σ-interpretation over M , D Ď 2M a description, and C a Σ-structure. Define
J “ I {D . Then the following hold.
  (1) Suppose that I is D -stable and SI Ñ C. Then M Ñ C J .
                                                                     h
  (2) Suppose that I is internal w.r.t. D at arity h P N, and F : M Ýá C J is a partial homomorphism.
      Then pj ˝ F|U I is a homomorphism from S to C.

Proof. (1) Suppose there is a homomorphism H : SI Ñ C. Given an element f P M , the local
homomorphism χ f : SI , f Ñ C is given by π ÞÑ Hp f π q for each π P U I , f . Observe that if g “ f π ,
and σ P U I ,g , then χ g pσq “ χ f pσ ˝ πq, so the local homomorphisms we have defined are compatible
with minoring. Now, by item (1) of Lemma 6.2, SI , f “ SJ ,x f y for each f P M , so the map
f ÞÑ px f y, χ f q is a minion homomorphism from M to C J .
                                                       h
    (2) Suppose there is a partial homomorphism F : M Ýá  C J , given by f ÞÑ pp f , χ f q, and ρ be
                                 J
the canonical projection from C to C. We show that H “ pj ˝ F|U I is a homomorphism from SI

                                                       20
to C. The map H sends every element f P U I to χ f pidq, where id denotes the identity map over
                                                                                                            h
rarpU I qs. First, let us see that H is a well-defined map. Observe that the map F1 : M Ýá                      M {D
given by f ÞÑ p f is a partial minion homomorphism. By item (2) of Lemma 6.2, SI , f Ď SJ ,p f for
every f P M pnq, n ď h. In particular, if f P U I , then id belongs to SJ ,p f , so Hp f q “ χ f pidq is
well-defined. Now let R P Σ and p f 1 , . . . , f arpRq q P RSI . We prove that pHp f 1 q, . . . , Hp f arpRq qq P RC .
Let πi “ ΠIR,i for each i P rarpRqs. By the definition of SI , there must be an element f R P RI
such that f i “ f Rπi for each i P rarpRqs. In particular, this means that pπ1 , . . . , πarpRq q P R A , where
A “ SI , f R . Additionally, given i P rarpRqs, the following chain of identities holds:

                                     χ f R pπi q “ χπf Ri pidq “ χ f i pidq “ Hp f i q.

Hence, as χ f R is a homomorphism from SI , f R to C, the tuple pHp f 1 q, . . . , Hp f arpRq q “ pχ f R pπ1 q,
. . . , χ f R pπarpRq qq belongs to RC , as we wanted to prove.

     Finally, we give another version of this last lemma that handles minions M that can be decom-
posed as disjoint unions of subminions.

Lemma 6.4. Let K be a set, M a disjoint union kPK Mk of subminions, I a Σ-interpretation over M ,
                                                  Ů

D Ď 2M a description, and C a Σ-structure. Define Ik “ I |Mk for each k P K, and J “ I {D . The
following hold.

  (1) Suppose that I is D -stable, and SIk Ñ C for some k P K. Then Mk Ñ C J .
                                                                   h
  (2) Suppose that I is internal at arity h w.r.t. D , and F : Mk Ýá C J is a partial homomorphism for
      some k P K. Then pj ˝ F|U Ik is a homomorphism from SIk to C.

Proof. The proof follows from the same arguments as the proof of Lemma 6.3, using Observation 1.
                                                                                    h
The main insight is that, given a minion N , partial homomorphisms M Ýá                N correspond to
                                                             h
families pFk qkPK of partial homomorphisms Fk : Mk Ýá N in a one-to-one fashion. If we let
                                                                                           h
N “ M {D , the fact that I is internal at arity h w.r.t. D , implies that for all Fk : Mk Ýá N it must
hold that Fk pU q Ď xU y and Fk pR q Ď xR y for all R P Σ.
                I k     I          I k       I



6.4   Patterns
The ideas introduced in the previous sections are (almost) enough to prove our main undecidability
and non-computability results. Indeed, consider a Σ-interpretation I over a minion M which is
internal at arity k w.r.t. some description D Ď 2M , and a Σ-structure T. Then, Lemma 6.3 shows
that there is a homomorphism from the global structure SI to T if and only if M Ñ T I {D . Moreover,
it is not difficult to show that it is possible to compute a homomorphism F : SI Ñ T when given
oracle access to a homomorphism H : M Ñ T I {D . What is missing in this picture is a way to
reduce, assuming that SI Ñ T, the problem sPCSPpSI , Tq to sPMCh pM , T I {D q for some h P N.
This reduction will be given by what we call a pattern, which is a polynomial-time algorithm that
constructs minor conditions related to input Σ-structures, in a way similar to the formulas ΨG
defined in (3) during our proof sketch. The formal definition is given below.
     Let M a minion, h P N an integer, D Ď 2M a description, and I a D -stable Σ-interpretation
over M . A pattern of h-ary internal references to I w.r.t. D is a function Ψ computable in polynomial


                                                            21
time that sends every finite structure I satisfying I Ñ SI to a minor condition Ψ I of arity at most h,
such that M |ù Ψ I , and that can be written as
                               ˜             ¸    ¨                                  ˛
                                 ľ             ľ      ľ             ľ    ΠIR,i
                Dxv       D xr      ψv pxv q      ˝        ψr pxr q     xr “ xrpiq ‚,
                vP I   RPΣ,rP R I   vP I                           RPΣ,rP R I          iPrarp Rqs


where each v P I the formula ψv pxq is an internal reference to U I w.r.t. D , and for each R P Σ and
each r P R I , the formula ψr pxq is an internal reference to RI w.r.t. D . To abbreviate, we will refer to
the tuple pI , D , Ψ, hq as a Σ-pattern over M .

Lemma 6.5. Let pI , D , Ψ, hq be a pattern over a minion M , and T a finite structure satisfying SI Ñ T.
Then there is a many-one reduction from sPCSPpSI , Tq to sPMCh pM , T I {D q.

Proof. Let J “ I {D , and N “ T J . Observe that by Lemma 6.3, the fact that I is D -stable implies
that M Ñ T J , so sPMCh pM , N q is well-defined.
    We give a many-one reduction from sPCSPpG, Tq to sPMCh pM , N q. This reduction consists
of a pair of polynomial-time computable functions pα, βq, where (1) α maps structures I satisfying
I Ñ G to minor conditions ψ of arity at most h that satisfy M |ù ψ, and (2) β maps pairs pI, Fq
to homomorphisms H : I Ñ T, where I is a structure satisfying I Ñ G and F is an assignment
satisfying αpIq over N . We simply define the function α as the map I ÞÑ Ψ I . Now consider an
assignment F that satisfies Ψ I over N , and let pj be the canonical projection form N to T. Let
HF : I Ñ T be the map that sends each v P I to pjpFpxv qq, which is clearly computable in polynomial
time. We claim that HF is a homomorphism. This way, we can define β as pI, Fq ÞÑ HF . Let us show
that HF is indeed a homomorphism. Recall the structure of the minor condition Ψ I . We can write
                                                  ˜             ¸
                                                    ľ             ľ
                            Ψ I ” xv  D        xr  D    ψv pxv q
                                      vP I      RPΣ,rP R I           vP I
                                      ¨                                                       ˛
                                             ľ                        ľ          ΠI
                                      ˝                 ψr pxr q                xr R,i “ xrpiq ‚,
                                           RPΣ,rP R I              iPrarp Rqs


where ψv pxq is an internal reference (w.r.t. D ) to U I for each v P I, and ψr pxq is an internal reference
to RI for each R P Σ, r P R I .
    We suppose that F maps v ÞÑ pxpv y, χv q for each v P I, and r ÞÑ pxpr y, χr q for each R P Σ, and
tuple r P R I . First we argue that HF is a well-defined map. Let v P I. Then M {D |ù ψv pxpv yq, which
means that xpv y P U J , by the definition of internal reference. Hence HF pvq “ pjpFpxv qq “ χv pidq is
well defined. Now we show that HF is a homomorphism. Let R P Σ and r “ pv1 , . . . , varpRq q P R I .
We have that M {D |ù ψr pxpr yq, so xpr y P RJ . It also holds that Fpxr qπi “ Fpxvi q for each i P rarpRqs,
where πi “ ΠJ         R,i . This means that χr pπi q “ χvi pidq “ HF pvi q for each i P rarpRqs. Observe that
pπ1 , . . . , πarpRq q P R A , where A “ SJ ,x pr y . Indeed, we have established that xpr y P RJ , and it
holds that πi “ πi ˝ id for each i P rarpRqs. Using that χr is a homomorphism from SJ ,x pr y to T,
we obtain that pχr pπ1 q, . . . , χr pπarpRq qq “ pHF pv1 q, . . . , HF pvarpRq q P R T . This proves that HF is a
homomorphism.




                                                              22
7     From Minions to Templates
In this section, given a locally finite minion M and a number h P N, we obtain a finite template
                                                                                                         h
pA, Bq satisfying that PolpA, Bq has a partial isomorphism to M up to arity h and that N Ýá                  M if
and only if N Ñ PolpA, Bq for any other minion N . Furthermore, we want to do so while keeping
A small, controlling both the size of its universe A and the size of its relations.
    In order to state the main result of this section we need to define one more notion. Let M be a
minion. The rank of M is the smallest number r P N satisfying that, for any n P N, whenever two
elements f 1 , f 2 P M pnq have the same r-ary minors (i.e., f 1π “ f 2π for all π P rrsrns ), then f 1 “ f 2 . We
say that M has infinite rank if no such r exists. Our goal is to prove the following.

Theorem 7.1. Let M be a minion whose rank is at most r, and let h ě r. Then there is a template pA, Bq
where |A| “ r and |R A | ď h for all relations in A such that
                                                 h
    (1) There is a partial minion isomorphism M Ýá PolpA, Bq defined up to arity h.
                                                                               h
    (2) Given a minion M 1 , it holds that M 1 Ñ PolpA, Bq if and only if M 1 Ýá M.

Moreover, if M is locally finite, then B is a finite structure.

   Through similar ideas to the ones used to prove this result, we are also able to characterize
abstract minions which are isomorphic to the polymorphism minion of some finite template. This
characterization is not essential to show the main results of this paper, and we defer it to Section B.
   In our reductions we apply Theorem 7.1 to manifold minions built using quotient interpretations.
We will need the following bound on the rank of such minions.

Lemma 7.2. Let T be a Σ-structure, M a minion, D Ď 2M , I a Σ-interpretation over M , and r P N.
Suppose that

    (1) r ě arpQq for all Q P D , and

    (2) r ě arpU I q.

Then the rank of T I {D is at most r.

Proof. Let f , g P M pnq for some n P N, and suppose that f π „D gπ for all π P rrsrns . We show this
implies f „D g. By Lemma 7.3 this implies that the rank of M {D is at most r. Indeed, suppose
that f ̸„D g. Then, without loss of generality we may assume there is some Q P D and some
π P rarpQqsrns such that f π P Q but gπ ̸P Q. Let α : rarpQqs Ñ rrs and β : rrs Ñ rarpQqs be such
that β ˝ α “ idrarpQqs . Such maps exist because arpQq ď r. By assumption, f α˝π “ gα˝π . However
f π “ p f α˝π qβ , and gπ “ pgα˝π qβ , a contradiction.
    Now define J “ I {D , and N “ T I {D . Let px f y, χ f q, pxgy, χ g q P N pnq for some n P N. Suppose
that
                                px f y, χ f qπ “ pxgy, χ g qπ for all π P rrsrns .
Then by the previous arguments x f y “ xgy, so the local structure SJ ,x f y and SJ ,xgy are the same.
Now, suppose, for the sake of a contradiction, that there is a map σ P U J ,x f y such that χ f pσq ‰




                                                       23
χ g pσq. Let α : rarpU I qs Ñ rrs and β : rrs Ñ rarpU I qs be such that β ˝ α “ idrarpU I qs (observe that
arpU I q “ arpU J q). Then it must hold that

                                 χαf ˝σ pβq “ χ f pσq ‰ χ g pσq “ χαg˝σ pβq.

However, α ˝ σ P rrsrns , yielding a contradiction. This completes the proof.

    Finite rank minions are precisely those which are isomorphic to a function minion. Indeed,
any function minion, as defined in [18], on a domain D must have rank at most |D|. In the other
direction, if M has rank r, and p P M is a n-ary element, then it can be seen as a function from
rrsn to M prq by letting ppπq “ pπ for each π P rrsrns (recall that we identify tuples and maps). The
following is a useful auxiliary fact.

Lemma 7.3. Let M be a minion, n P N, and f , g P M pnq. Let r ď h be natural numbers. Suppose that
f π “ gπ for every π P rhsrns . Then f π “ gπ for every π P rrsrns .

Proof. Let α : rrs Ñ rhs and β : rhs Ñ rrs be such that β ˝ α “ idrrs . Then for any π P rrsrns it holds
that
                                    f π “ f β˝pα˝πq “ g β˝pα˝πq “ gπ ,
as we wanted to show.

Minion Closures Let A and B be finite sets, and consider an arbitrary minion M whose n-ary
elements are functions of the form f : An Ñ B where minoring is defined as usual. One of the
insights of [18] is that a minion of this kind is a polymorphism minion of a finite template if and
only if it has bounded finitised arity. In other words, there is a number h P N such that for any
n P N and any function f : An Ñ B it holds that f P M if all h-ary minors of f belong to M .
Roughly, this means that every consistent family of h-ary elements in M occurs as the family of
h-ary minors of a higher arity element. Conversely, in the case where M is not isomorphic to the
polymorphism minion of a finite template, it must be that some consistent family of h-ary elements
in M is not represented by a higher arity element. In a way, this means that M is missing some
elements. To prove Theorem 7.1, we first define the h-closure of the minion M which results from
adding to it an element representing each consistent family of h-ary minors. Then, we show how to
construct a finite template pA, Bq such that PolpA, Bq is isomorphic to this closure.
    An m-ary system of k-ary minors over M is a map ζ : rksrms Ñ M pkq satisfying that for any pair of
maps π1 , π2 P rksrms and any map σ P rksrks for which π1 “ σ ˝ π2 it holds that ζpπ2 qσ “ ζpπ1 q. If ζ
is an m-ary system, and σ P rnsrms is a map, we denote by ζ σ the n-ary system corresponding to the
map π ÞÑ ζpπ ˝ σq. The h-closure of a minion M is another minion M phq whose n-ary elements are
the n-ary systems of h-ary minors over M , and where minoring is given by the operation ζ ÞÑ ζ π .
    Any element p P M pnq defines a n-ary system ζ p P M phq pnq in a natural way. That is, for
any π : rns Ñ rhs we set ζ p pπq “ pπ . This mapping p ÞÑ ζ p is, in fact, a minion homomorphism
Clh : M Ñ M phq , which we call the canonical homomorphism from M to M phq .
    Now we prove that the h-closure of a minion M satisfies both properties we require from
PolpA, Bq in Theorem 7.1.

Proposition 7.4. Let M be a minion and let h P N. Then the restriction of the canonical homomorphism
Clh : M Ñ M phq to elements of arity at most h is a partial isomorphism.

                                                     24
Proof. Let F be the restriction of Clh to elements of arity at most h. We define another partial
                               h
homomorphism H : M phq Ýá         M and show that F and H are inverses. For each k ď h we fix maps
σk : rks Ñ rhs and πk : rhs Ñ rks satisfying πk ˝ σk “ idrks . Then, given a k-ary element ζ P M phq , we
define Hpζq as pζpσk qqπk .
     Given n ď h and an element f P M pnq, we define Fp f q as the n-ary system ζ f of h-ary minors
that maps each function π P rhsrns to f π . The map F defined this way is clearly a h-partial minion
homomorphism. Now let us show that F is injective. Given n ď h, it is possible to find maps
π : rns Ñ rhs and σ : rhs Ñ rns such that σ ˝ π “ idrns . Hence f π “ gπ implies f “ g for all pairs
f , g P M pnq. In particular, this means that ζ f “ ζ g if and only if f “ g. Finally, let us prove that
F is surjective. Let n ď h and let π, σ be the same maps as before. Consider an arbitrary n-ary
system ζ of h-ary minors over M . We claim that ζ “ ζ f , where f “ ζpπqσ . To prove this we need to
                       1
show that ζpπ 1 q “ f π for all π : rns Ñ rhs. Observe that π 1 “ π 1 ˝ σ ˝ π. Thus, by the definition of
                         1                    1       1
system, ζpπ 1 q “ ζpπqπ ˝σ . However, ζpπqπ ˝σ “ f π , proving that ζ “ ζ f .
                                                                        h
Proposition 7.5. Let M and N be minions, and h P N be a number. Then M Ýá N if and only if
M ÑN .  p h q


Proof. Suppose there is a minion homomorphism F : M Ñ N phq . Then the restriction of F
to elements of arity at most h yields a partial homomorphism from M to N phq up to arity h.
By Proposition 7.4, this implies there is a partial homomorphism from M to N up to arity h.
                                                                       h
    Now suppose there is a partial homomorphism F : M Ýá                   N . We use F to define a minion
homomorphism F : M Ñ N . Let n P N, and let f P M pnq. Then we define F1 p f q to be the
                   1             p h q

system ζ f that sends each map π P rhsrns to Fp f π q. The system ζ f is well-defined: if π1 “ σ ˝ π2
for some maps π1 , π2 P rhsrns , σ P rhsrhs , then ζ f pπ1 q “ Fp f σ˝π2 q “ Fp f π2 qσ “ ζ f pπ2 qσ . Finally, the
map F1 is a minion homomorphism. Indeed, if f “ gπ , then ζ f “ ζ πg following the definition of
minoring for systems.



Finite Templates We introduce two kinds of structures that will be used in our templates. Let
h ě r be two natural numbers. Let m “ r h , and let π1 , . . . πm be the lexicographical ordering of
rrsrhs . The complete structure K rh is the relational structure whose signature consists of a single m-ary
                                                         h
symbol R, whose universe is rrs, and where RKr is defined as the set of tuples pπ1 piq, . . . , πm piqq,
where i P rhs. This construction was given without a name in [18, Lemma 6.7]. This is the most
general structure on r elements with relations of size at most h, in the sense that any other such
structure is pp-definable on K rh .
    The second kind of structures we use are the so-called free structures, introduced in [11]. Let
M be a minion and let A be a Σ-structure. Let n “ |A| and identify A “ rns in some fixed way.
Similarly, for each R P Σ, let m R “ |R A |, and identify R A with m R in a fixed way. The free structure
of M generated by A is a Σ-structure, denoted F “ F M pAq has universe F “ M pnq, and for each
symbol R P Σ the relation R F is given by the set of tuples p f 1 , . . . , f arpRq q for which there is an
element g P M pmq satisfying gπi “ f i for each i P rarpRqs, where πi : rms Ñ rns is the i-th projection
r ÞÑ rpiq (recall that r P R A is seen as an element of m, and rpiq P A as an element of rns).
    Having defined complete structures and free structures, we are in conditions to prove the main
result of the section.


                                                       25
Proof of Theorem 7.1. The template witnessing the statement is given by A “ K rh and B “ F M pAq.
Observe that if M is locally finite, then B is a finite structure. We prove that PolpA, Bq is isomorphic
to the closure M phq . Observe that this proves the theorem: the first item follows then from
Proposition 7.4, and the second from Proposition 7.5.
    Let N “ PolpA, Bq, m “ r h , and π1 , . . . , πm be the lexicographical ordering of rrsrhs . We see
elements p P N pnq as maps from rrsrns to M prq by identifying rrsn with rrsrns as usual. Given a
map σ P rhsrns , the elements pppπ1 ˝ σq, . . . , ppπm ˝ σqq must belong to the relation R B . In other
words, there must be some element f P M phq such that f π “ ppπ ˝ σq for each π P rrsrhs . Moreover,
as the rank of M is bounded by r, there can be only one element f with such property. We denote f
as p˚ pσq.
    Now we are able to define an isomorphism H : N Ñ M phq . Given n P N and a polymorphism
p P N pnq, we define Hppq as the system ζ p that sends each map σ P rhsrns to the element p˚ pσq P
M phq. Let us show that ζ p is a well-defined system. Let σ P rhsrns , γ P rhsrhs , f “ p˚ pσq “ ζ p pσq,
and g “ p˚ pγ ˝ σq “ ζ p pγ ˝ σq. We need to show that f γ “ g. Given π P rrsrhs , using the definition
of p˚ and the fact that π ˝ γ P rrsrhs we obtain

                            p f γ qπ “ f π˝γ “ pppπ ˝ γq ˝ σq “ ppπ ˝ pγ ˝ σqq “ gπ .

As the rank of M is at most r, Lemma 7.3 implies f γ “ g, as we wanted.
    Now let us prove that H is a minion homomorphism. Let p P N pn1 q be a polymorphism, and
let q “ pγ where γ P rn2 srn1 s . We need to show that ζ q “ ζ p . Let σ P rhsrn2 s , be an arbitrary map,
                                                                        γ

g “ ζ q pσq, and f “ ζ p pσq “ ζ p pσ ˝ γq. It is enough to prove that f “ g. For each π P rrsrhs we have
                         γ

that f π “ ppπ ˝ σ ˝ γq “ qpπ ˝ σq “ gπ . Using that the rank of M is at most r, this shows that f “ h,
completing the proof.
    Now let us prove that H is a bijective map. This is enough because the inverse map of a bijective
minion homomorphism is also a minion homomorphism. As r ď h, there are two maps σ P rhsrrs
and γ P rrsrhs such that idrrs “ γ ˝ σ. To see that H is injective, let p, q P N pnq be two different
polymorphisms. Using that the rank of N is at most r, Lemma 7.3 yields some τ P rrsrns such that
ppτq ‰ qpτq. But ppτq “ ζ p pσ ˝ τqγ , and qpτq “ ζ q pσ ˝ τqγ , so Hppq “ ζ p ‰ Hpqq “ ζ q . Finally, we
show that H is surjective. Let ζ P M phq pnq be an arbitrary system. We need to prove that there
is some polymorphism p P N pnq such that ζ “ ζ p . Define p : rrsrns Ñ M prq as the function that
maps each τ P rrsrns to ζpσ ˝ τqγ . We need to show that p is a n-ary polymorphism in N . For
this it is enough to show that pppπ1 ˝ τ 1 q, . . . , ppπm ˝ τ 1 qq P R B for each map τ 1 P rhsrns . Indeed,
ppπ ˝ τ 1 q “ ζpσ ˝ π ˝ τ 1 qγ for all π P rrsrhs . However, by the definition of system, this last element
equals ζpτ 1 qγ˝pσ˝πq “ ζpτ 1 qπ , where the last equality uses the fact that γ ˝ σ “ idrrs . The fact that
ppπ ˝ τ 1 q “ ζpτ 1 qπ for all π P rrsrhs implies that pppπ1 ˝ τ 1 q, . . . , ppπm ˝ τ 1 qq P R B . To see that ζ “ ζ p ,
observe that p˚ pτ 1 q must equal ζpτ 1 q for all τ 1 P rhsrns .

   Rather than referencing this result, it will be more convenient to use the following more concrete
corollary, which simply follows from the fact that the template constructed in the last proof is
precisely pK rh , F M pK rh qq.

Corollary 7.6. Let M be a minion whose rank is at most r, and let h ě r. Then the template pA, Bq “
pK rh , F M pK rh qq satisfies the following.
                                               h
  (1) There is a partial minion isomorphism M Ýá PolpA, Bq defined up to arity h.

                                                          26
                                                                               h
    (2) Given a minion M 1 , it holds that M 1 Ñ PolpA, Bq if and only if M 1 Ýá M.

Moreover, if M is locally finite, then B is a finite structure.


8      Main Reductions
In this section we show the reductions that enable our main results. Most proofs are short, as
they are just a matter of putting together the pieces we have constructed up until now. As in the
overview given in Section 4, the general strategy can be described as follows. We start with an
interpretation I over a minion M which is internal at some arity h w.r.t. a description D . Then
we are able to reduce problems related to the global structure SI to problems related to M by
considering manifold minions of the form T I {D for finite structures T similar to SI , and then
obtaining finite templates from these manifold minions applying Corollary 7.6.

Reductions for Undecidability

Theorem 8.1. Let G be a Σ-structure, let M be a minion, let D Ď 2M be a finite description, and let I be a
Σ-interpretation over M . Let h, r P N with h ě r. Suppose that

    (1) HompG, ¨q is undecidable,

    (2) I is internal at arity h w.r.t. D ,

    (3) SI is finitely equivalent to G, and

    (4) r ě arpQq for every Q P D and r ě arpU I q.

Then the family of finite templates of the form pK rh , Bq satisfying M Ñ PolpA, Bq is undecidable.

Proof of Theorem 8.1. We show that, given a finite Σ-structure C, there is an algorithm that computes
a finite template of the form pK rh , Bq such that M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq if and only if G Ñ C. Let N be the
manifold minion C I {D . We define B “ F N pK rh q. Let us reassure the reader that B is constructible
from C, even though this may not be immediately obvious. This follows from observing that B can
be constructed when given access to the restriction of M {D to elements of arity at most h and to
the interpretation I {D , and these are finite objects that are independent from the input C, so they
can be precomputed.
    Let us see that M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq if and only if G Ñ C. This is a consequence of the following
chain of double implications:


                                                                        Lemma 6.3
                            GÑC                                        ðùùùùùñ
                               h                                       Corollary 7.6
                            M Ýá N                                    ðùùùùùùñ

                            M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq.

   Let us spell the arguments out. As SI is finitely equivalent to G, G Ñ C holds if and only if
SI Ñ C. By Lemma 6.3, there is a homomorphism from SI to C if and only if there is a partial


                                                       27
                          h
homomorphism F : M Ýá       C I {D “ N By Lemma 7.2, the rank of N is at most r, so we can
apply Corollary 7.6 to the minion N and the template pK rh , Bq “ pK rh , F N pK rh qq. In particular,
    h
M Ýá   N if and only if M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq. This completes the proof.

    We also give an analogue of last result tailored for minions that can be expressed as disjoint
unions of subminions. In this case, the global structure induced by an interpretation is a disjoint
union of the global structures induced on each of the disjoint subminions (Observation 1), and we
can apply the strategy from last proof to each of the parts.

Theorem 8.2. Let G be a family of Σ-structures. Let M “ GPG MG be a minion, let D Ď 2M be a finite
                                                              Ů

description, and let I be a Σ-interpretation over M . Let h, r P N with h ě r. Suppose that

  (1) I is internal at arity h w.r.t. D ,

  (2) SIG is finitely equivalent to G for each G P G, where IG “ I |MG , and

  (3) r ě arpQq for every Q P D and Q “ U I ,

Then there is an algorithm that, given a finite Σ-structure C, yields a finite template pK rh , Bq such that
G Ñ T if and only if MG Ñ PolpK rh , Bq for each G P G. In particular, the following hold:

  (i) The set HompG, ¨q is Turing-reducible to the family of finite templates pK rh , Bq satisfying MG Ñ
      PolpK rh , Bq for some G P G.

  (ii) The set Homeg pG, ¨q is Turing-reducible to the family of finite templates pK rh , Bq satisfying MG Ñ
       PolpK rh , Bq for all but finitely many G P G.

 (iii) The set Homio pG, ¨q is Turing-reducible to the family of finite templates pK rh , Bq satisfying MG Ñ
       PolpK rh , Bq for infinitely many G P G.

Proof of Theorem 8.2. Given a finite Σ-structure C, define N “ C I {D and B “ F N pK rh q. As in the
proof of Theorem 8.1, there is an algorithm that computes the template pK rh , Bq in response to the
                                                    h
input C. In this case, Lemma 6.4 tells us that MG Ýá    N if and only if G Ñ C for a given G P G. By
the same arguments as in the proof of Theorem 8.1, this is the case if and only if MG Ñ PolpK rh , Bq,
as we wanted to show.
    Observe that the last three items in the statement of the theorem are a direct consequence of the
facts that G Ñ T if and only if MG Ñ PolpK rh , Bq for each G P G, and that pK rh , Bq can be computed
in response to C.

Reduction for Non-Computability

Theorem 8.3. Let G be a Σ-structure, M a minion, D Ď 2M a finite description, I a Σ-interpretation over
M , and h ě r natural numbers. Suppose that

  (1) there is T P HompG, ¨q for which no homomorphism H : G Ñ T is computable,

  (2) I is internal at arity h w.r.t. D ,

  (3) SI is finitely equivalent to G,


                                                    28
  (4) there is a computable homomorphism F : G Ñ SI , and

  (5) r ě arpQq for every Q P D and Q “ U I .

Then there exists a finite template of the form pK rh , Bq satisfying that M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq, but there is no
computable minion homomorphism H : M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq.

Proof. Define J “ I {D , and N “ T J . We claim that the finite template satisfying the theorem’s
statement is pK rh , Bq, where B “ F N pK rh q. By Lemma 7.2, we have that N has rank at most r, so N
and the template pK rh , Bq witness Corollary 7.6. Hence G Ñ T implies M Ñ PolpK rh , Bq. We show
that there is no computable minion homomorphism from M to PolpK rh , Bq.
    We proceed by contradiction. Suppose there is a computable minion homomorphism H : M Ñ
PolpK rh , Bq. We give a composition of computable partial maps that yields a homomorphism from
                                                                                 h
G to T. By Corollary 7.6, there is a partial homomorphism H 1 : PolpK rh , Bq Ýá    N . Observe that
  1
H is given by a finite table (i.e, it is defined on a finite set, and its co-domain, consisting of the
elements f P N of arity bounded by h, is finite). Hence, H 1 is computable. This way, H 1 ˝ H
yields a computable partial homomorphism from M to N defined up to arity h. Let pj : N á T
be the canonical projection (recall the definition from Section 6.2). This, again, is a computable
partial map. By Lemma 6.3, the map pj ˝ H 1 ˝ H restricted to U I is a homomorphism from SI to
T (we do not require the restriction to be computable; we just use that pj ˝ H 1 ˝ H is computable).
By hypothesis, there exists a computable homomorphism F : G Ñ SI . Then pj ˝ H 1 ˝ H ˝ F is
a computable homomorphism from G to T, yielding a contradiction. Thus, there cannot be a
computable homomorphism from M to PolpK rh , Bq, as we wanted to prove.

Reduction for Hardness

Let us take another look at the algorithms Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu. Unrolling the definitions, it
turns turns out that for a given instance I the following are equivalent: (1) I is accepted by Q, and
(2) I Ñ F MQ pAq. This is shown in [11] for BLP and AIP, and further discussed in [21] for the case
of BLP ` AIP. From this we obtain the following alternative formulation of rounding problems as
left-infinite PCSPs.

Fact 8.4. Let Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu, and pA, Bq be a finite template. Suppose that Q solves
PCSPpA, Bq. Then the problems sPCSPQ pA, Bq and sPCSPpF MQ pAq, Bq are the same.

    The projection minion P is defined as the minion where Ppnq “ rns and where f π “ πp f q for
each f P Ppnq and each π P rmsrns . If P‰ NP, the minion P is homomorphically equivalent to
PolpAq “ PolpA, Aq for each finite structure A for which CSPpAq is NP-hard. It is also not difficult
to show that P Ñ M for every non-empty minion M .
    One of the cornerstones of the algebraic approach to PCSPs is the result [11, Theorem 3.12]
that, for a finite template pA, Bq and h at least as large as |A| and each relation of A, the problems
sPCSPpA, Bq and sPMCh pP, PolpA, Bqq are log-space equivalent, and similarly for their decision
variants. The same proof actually shows the following more general result 7 .
   7 To see that this indeed generalizes [11, Theorem 3.12], choose M to be the projection minion P , and use the fact that

F P p Aq is isomorphic to A.




                                                           29
Theorem 8.5. Let M be a minion, N P N a number, and pA, Bq a finite template satisfying that M Ñ
PolpA, Bq. Then there is a log-space reduction from sPMC N pM , PolpA, Bqq to sPCSPpF M pAq, Bq. Further
suppose that N is at least as large as |A| and |R A | for any relation R in the signature of A. Then there is a
log-space reduction from sPCSPpF M pAq, Bq to sPMC N pM , PolpA, Bqq.

Proof. The reductions are essentially the ones given in the proof of [11, Theorem 3.12]. We sketch
them below. For the rest of the proof we identify A with r|A|s, and R A with r|R A |s for each
relation symbol R in some fixed way. Given a relation symbol R and an index i P rarpRqs we write
Π R,i : R A Ñ A for the map a ÞÑ ai .
    Reducing from sPMC to sPCSP. Let Φ be a minor condition of arity at most N. Without loss of
generality, we may assume that Φ is of the form Dx1 , . . . , xk φpx1 , . . . , xk q, where φ is a conjunction
of formulas of the form xi “ x πj . For each i P rks we let ni be the arity of xi . The first part of the
reduction is the construction of an structure I Φ satisfying I Φ Ñ F M pAq if M |ù Φ. First, define
the set S “ txi pπq |i P rks, π P Arni s u. Now, we identify two elements xi pπq and x j pσq if there is
                                                γ
an identity in φ of the form xi “ x j , where σ “ π ˝ γ. We define the universe IΦ as the result
of performing all these identifications in S, and write xxi pπqy to denote the equivalence class of
xi pπq in IΦ . Given a relation symbol R of arity m, we define R IΦ as the set of tuples of the form
pxxi pπ1 qy, . . . , xxi pπm qyq for which there is a map σ P rR A srni s satisfying Π R,j ˝ σ “ π j for each
j P rms. The structure I Φ can be built in log-space. Now, if xi ÞÑ pi is a satisfying assignment of
Φ in M , then the map xxi pπqy ÞÑ piπ is a well-defined homomorphism from I Φ to F M pAq. Now,
let F : I Φ Ñ B be a homomorphism. The second part of the reduction computes an assignment
of Φ over PolpA, Bq from F. For each i P rks we define f i : Ani Ñ B as the map a ÞÑ Fpxxi paqy,
where we recall that a can be seen as a map from rni s to A. It is routine to verify that f i is indeed a
homomorphism and that the map xi ÞÑ f i is a satisfying assignment of Φ in PolpA, Bq that can be
obtained in log-space.
    Reducing from sPCSP to sPMC. Let I be an instance of sPCSPpF M pAq, Bq. The first map of our
reduction constructs in log-space a minor condition Φ I of arity at most N that satisfies M |ù Φ I
if I Ñ F M pAq. Let Σ be the relational signature of all structures under consideration. Then the
condition Φ I is defined as
                                                     ¨                           ˛
                                   | A|    |R A |
                                                                            Π
                                                        ľ
                             D         Dxv        yr ˝           xrpiq “ yr R,i ‚.
                             vP I   RPΣ,rP R I   RPΣ,rP R I ,iPrarp Rqs


The arity of this minor condition is the maximum of |A| and |R A | for all R P Σ, so it is bounded
by N by assumption. Now suppose that F : I Ñ F M pAq is a homomorphism. Given R P Σ, and
                 p for the element p P M pR A q witnessing that pFprp1qq, . . . , FprparpRqqq P R FM p Aq .
r P R I we write Fprq
Then the map xv ÞÑ Fpvq together with yr ÞÑ Fprq p is a satisfying assignment of Φ I in M . Now,
let H be a satisfying assignment of Φ I in PolpA, Bq. The second map of the reduction needs to
construct a homomorphism F : I Ñ B in log-space using H. Given v P I, we define Fpvq as
Hpxv qpaq, where a P A| A| is our fixed enumeration of A. Now it is routine to check that F is indeed
a homomorphism.

   By this point showing our main hardness reduction is just a matter of composing the reductions
we have shown up until now.



                                                       30
Theorem 8.6. Let G be a Σ-structure, M a minion, pI , D , Ψ, hq a pattern over M and r ď h a natural
number. Suppose that

    (1) SI is finitely equivalent to G, and

    (2) r ě arpQq for every Q P D and Q “ U I .

Then for each C P HompG, ¨q there is a finite template pK rh , Bq such that sPCSPpG, Cq is many-one reducible
to sPCSPpF M pK rh q, Bq.

Proof. Let C P HompG, ¨q. Let N “ C I {D . By Lemma 6.5 there is a many-one reduction from
sPCSPpG, Tq to sPMCh pM , N q. By Lemma 7.2 the rank of N is at most r, so the minion N and
the template pK rh , Bq “ pK rh , F N pK rh qq satisfy Corollary 7.6. Hence, there is a partial isomorphism F :
               h
PolpK rh , Bq Ýá N . This yields a many-one reduction from sPMCh pM , N q to sPMCh pM , PolpK rh ,
Bqq. Finally, by Theorem 8.5, the problem sPMCh pM , PolpK rh , Bqq has a many-one reduction to
sPCSPpF M pK rh q, Bq.


9     Proof of the Main Results
In this section we present the proofs of Theorems 3.1 to 3.3, and Theorem 1.2. Each of these proofs
consists of reducing one of the source problems described in Section 5 to our target problems
through the reductions shown in Section 8. The lengthy lists of requirements for our reductions
indicate that applying them requires some work: even after coming up with a suitable interpretation
I and a suitable description D , proving that I is internal w.r.t. D requires multiple applications of
Lemma 6.1, which means constructing multiple logical formulas, and analysing their satisfying
assignments on the original minion M and the quotient M {D .
    To make matters worse, this section makes painfully apparent that there is, in principle, no way
of transferring our results between the minions MAIP , MBLP , MBLP`AIP despite their similarities.
This means that we need to write very similar proofs (with small, but significant changes) over and
over. We remark that minion homomorphisms do not yield reductions for any of our results. Indeed,
suppose that M Ñ N . Then, in general there is no relation between the decidability of the finite
templates pA, Bq such that M Ñ PolpA, Bq, and the decidability of those satisfying N Ñ PolpA, Bq.
Similarly, in the absence of additional restrictions, it is possible that all homomorphisms F : N Ñ
PolpA, Bq are non-computable, but there is a computable homomorphism H : M Ñ PolpA, Bq, or
vice versa. As for hardness, it is true that sPCSPpF M pAq, Bq has a straight-forward reduction to
sPCSPpF N pAq, Bq, so it may seem that the family of rounding problems arising from M is easier
than the one resulting from N . However, this is not true in general: There may be templates pA, Bq
for which M Ñ PolpA, Bq but N ̸Ñ PolpA, Bq, implying that there are more rounding problems
for M than for N , and these may be hard.

How to read this section

We try to avoid being meticulous and redundant to the point of exhausting the reader, and being
so careless as to skip relevant details. The bulk of the following subsections is spent proving that
several interpretations are internal with respect to corresponding descriptions. This is done through


                                                      31
several claims. We believe that after getting acquainted with the typical arguments, the proofs of
many of these claims are routine.
    Sections 9.1 to 9.3 are conveniently ordered from less to more difficult, and they all employ
different versions of the arguments in Section 9.1. These subsections are further divided to show
interpretations of Γ` and interpretations of Γ. Our interpretations of Γ` are relatively simpler
than the ones of Γ, because the interpretations in this second group are meant to produce Boolean
templates. Hence, a good overview of the following subsections is the following.

      • Interpretations of the super-grid Γ` (ordered from simpler to more complex):

               Section 9.1.1 (AIP),      Section 9.2.1 (BLP),       and    Section 9.3.1 (BLP+AIP).

      • Interpretations of the grid Γ (ordered from simpler to more complex):

                                Section 9.1.2 (AIP),        and   Section 9.2.2 (BLP).

    The proofs in Section 9.4 and Section 9.5 handle WNU and cyclic polymorphisms respectively,
and stand on their own. In both these cases we define minions characterizing the presence of those
polymorphisms, and then find ways to interpret useful structures (e.g., grids) on them. However,
these minions lack the arithmetical structure of MAIP , MBLP , and MBLP`AIP , so we need to use
different arguments. There is ample difference between Section 9.4 and Section 9.5, but they handle
minions constructed in a similar way, and some arguments are analogous. They are, again, ordered
from simpler to more complex, so we recommend the reader to tackle Section 9.4 first.

9.1     The AIP Algorithm
We prove Theorem 3.1 in this section. To prove item (1) we give an interpretation of the super-grid
Γ` over MAIP , shown in Section 9.1.1. Items (2),(3), and (4) are proven similarly, by showing in
Section 9.1.2 a suitable interpretation of the grid Γ over MAIP .

9.1.1    AIP: Interpreting the Super-Grid

The following interpretation I induces a global structure SI that is finitely equivalent to Γ` .

Interpretation 1. The ΣΓ` -interpretation I over MAIP is given by
      !                             ˇ                           )
U I “ pm1 , m2 , m3 , nq P MAIP p4q ˇ mi ą 0 for all i “ 1, 2, 3 ,
                                    ˇ



    !             )
OI “ p1, 1, 1, ´4q ,      and      I
                                  ΠO,1 “ id,

        !                                )
EiI “ pm1 , m2 , m3 , 1, nq P MAIP p5q , and
          #
            p1, 2, 3, 4, 4q, when j “ 1,
ΠIEi ,j “                                  for each i P r3s,
            p1, 2, 3, i, 4q when j “ 2,


                                                       32
EiI “ pm1, m2, m3, mi , nq P MAIPp5q ,
       !                                       )
                                                       and
            #
 I           p1, 2, 3, 4, 4q for j “ 1,
ΠE i ,j
        “                                   for each i P r3s.
              p1, 2, 3, i, 4q for j “ 2


This way, Γ` is easily seen to be isomorphic to SI via the homomorphism pm1 , m2 , m3 q ÞÑ pm1 , m2 , m3 , 1 ´
m1 ´ m2 ´ m3 q. Now we define a description D Ď 2MAIP so that I is internal at arity 5 w.r.t. D .

Description 1. The description D Ď 2MAIP consists of the predicates
      !                     ˇ        )
Dă “ pm1 , m2 , m3 q P MAIP ˇ m1 ă m2 ,
                            ˇ
     !     )
D1 “ p1, 0q .


    The interpretation I and the description D are the simplest in Section 9. The fact that we
are not aiming to obtain Boolean templates means that we have virtually no restrictions on I
and D , and the minion MAIP already has the arithmetical structure required to express unit incre-
ments and multiplication times two. The following claims show that I is internal at arity 5 (w.r.t. D ):

Claim 1: RI is D -stable for each R P ΣΓ` . This follows by a direct application of the defini-
tions.

Claim 2: D1 is internal at arity 5. Indeed, the minor condition ϕ1 pxq ” x “ xp1,1q is an in-
ternal definition of D1 .

Claim 3: OI is internal at arity 5. The following is an internal definition of OI :

                                ϕO pxq ” ϕ1 pxp1,2,2,2q q ^ ϕ1 pxp2,1,2,2q q ^ ϕ1 pxp2,2,1,2q q.


Claim 4: EiI is internal at arity 5 for all i P r3s. The following is an internal definition of EiI :

                                                   ϕEi pxq ” ϕ1 pxp2,2,2,1,2q q.


Claim 5: EiI is internal at arity 5 for all i P r3s. The following is an internal definition of EiI :

                                                      ϕEi pxq ” x σ “ x τ ,

where σ P r3sr5s is the map sending i to 1, 4 to 2, and the other elements to 3, and τ P r3sr5s sends
i to 2, 4 to 1, and the other elements to 3. The key insight is that if f σ „D f τ for some element
f P MAIP p5q, then it cannot be that f piq ă f p4q or f piq ą f p4q, so it must be that f piq “ f p4q.




                                                               33
Claim 6: Let i P r3s. Suppose that ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following
formula is also an internal reference to U I :
                                ´                                                   ¯
                   ϕ1 pxq ” DyDz ϕEi pzq ^ ϕpyq^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,4q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,i,4q .

Moreover, if f satisfies ϕ on MAIP , then g satisfies ϕ1 on MAIP , where gpiq “ f piq ` 1, gp4q “
f p4q ´ 1, and gpjq “ f pjq for j ‰ i, 4. Let us show that ϕpxq is indeed an internal reference to U I .
Suppose that MAIP {D |ù ϕpx f x yq with x f y y, x f z y as existential witnesses for y, z. The formula ϕ is
an internal reference to U I , so f y P U I . By a similar reasoning we also obtain that f z P EiI . It must
            p1,2,3,4,4q             p1,2,3,4,4q
hold that f z          „D f y , so f z      P U I (by Claim 1). Let f z “ pm1 , m2 , m3 , 1, m4 q. The fact that
f p1,2,3,4,4q P U I means that m1 , m2 , m3 ą 0. Hence, the fist three elements in f p1,2,3,i,4q must also be
                                                                          p1,2,3,i,4q
positive, so this tuple belongs to U I as well. Using the fact that f z               „D f x we conclude that
          I
f x P U , proving that ϕ is an internal reference to U .  I

     Finally, suppose that MAIP |ù ϕp f q for some element f , and let g be defined as in the statement.
Then g satisfies ϕ1 pxq on MAIP with f as an existential witness for y and the tuple p f p1q, f p2q, f p3q, 1, f p4q ´
1q as an existential witness for z.

Claim 7: Let i P r3s. Suppose that ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following
formula is also an internal reference to U I :
                                ´                                                    ¯
                   ϕ1 pxq ” DyDz ϕEi pzq ^ ϕpyq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,4q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,i,4q .

Moreover, if f satisfies ϕ on MAIP , then g satisfies ϕ1 on MAIP , where gpiq “ 2 f piq, gp4q “
f p4q ´ f piq, and gpjq “ f pjq for j ‰ i, 4. This follows analogously to the previous claim.

Claim 8: U I is internal at arity 5. We prove this claim using Lemma 6.1. We define an internal
reference ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 pxq to U I inductively for each pn1 , n2 , n3 q P N3 following the lexicographical order,
satisfying that MAIP |ù ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 ppn1 , n2 , n3 , 1 ´ n1 ´ n2 ´ n3 qq. We define ϕ1,1,1 pxq ” ϕO pxq. Now let
pn1 , n2 , n3 q P N3 be different from p1, 1, 1q, i P r3s be the largest index for which ni ą 1. We have
two cases. Suppose that ni is odd. Then we let mi “ ni ´ 1, and m j “ n j for j P r3s, j ‰ i, and define
                                     ´                                                               ¯
               ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 pxq ” DyDz ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ zp1,2,3,4,4q “ y ^ zp1,2,3,i,4q “ x .

Otherwise, if ni is even, we let mi “ ni {2, and m j “ n j for j P r3s, j ‰ i, and define
                                     ´                                                               ¯
               ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 pxq ” DyDz ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ zp1,2,3,4,4q “ y ^ zp1,2,3,i,4q “ x .

Now Claims 6 and 7 prove the statement.



Proof of item (1) in Theorem 3.1. The claims in this section show that I is internal w.r.t. D at arity 5.
We also have that SI is isomorphic to Γ` . Hence, the result will follow from applying Theorem 8.6
after defining a 5-ary pattern Ψ of internal references to I w.r.t. D . Given a structure I satisfying
I Ñ Γ` , we find a homomorphism v ÞÑ pmv , nv , ov q from I to Γ` in polynomial time. Moreover, we


                                                         34
can assume that maxv log2 pmv nv ov q ď |I|. Observe that the map v ÞÑ pmv , nv , ov , 1 ´ mv ´ nv ´ ov q
is a homomorphism from I to SI . We define
                              ˜                       ¸   ¨                                    ˛
                               ľ                        ľ   ľ            ľ         ΠIR,i
       ΨI ”   xv
               D           xr
                            D        ϕmv ,nv ,ov pxv q    ˝     ϕR pxr q         xr “ xrpiq ‚.
               vP I   RPΣΓ` ,rP R I   vP I                          RPΣΓ ,rP R I             iPrarp Rqs


Here, the minor conditions ϕm,n,o pxq, and ϕR pxq for R P ΣΓ` , are the internal references defined
in the previous claims. To see that Ψ I can be computed in polynomial time, observe that the
formula ϕm,n,o pxv q can be constructed inductively in time Oplog2 pmnoqq, and the maximum of
log2 pmv , nv , ov q is at most |I| for v P I. Now we only need to show that MAIP |ù Ψ I in order to prove
that pI , D , Ψq is a valid pattern. We give existential witnesses for the variables in Ψ I to show that
MAIP |ù Ψ I . For each v P I, we choose

                                      f v “ pmv , nv , ov , 1 ´ mv ´ nv ´ ov q

as the existential witness for xv . By Claim 6, we know that f v satisfies ϕmv ,nv ,ov pxq on MAIP . The fact
that the map v ÞÑ f v is a homomorphism from I to SI means that for each R P ΣΓ` , r P R I there is
some f r P RI satisfying that

                                       ΠI
                                      f r R,i “ f rpiq     for each i P arpRq.

The element f r must also satisfy ϕR pxq on MAIP , because ϕR pxq is an internal definition of R. Hence,
f r is a valid existential witness for xr . This shows that MAIP |ù Ψ I , and completes the proof that
pI , D , Ψ, 5q is a pattern over MAIP .
     Now Theorem 3.1-(1) follows from Theorem 8.6 together with Proposition 5.2-(1). Observe that
3 ě arpU I q and 3 ě arpPq for all P P D , so it is enough to consider templates of the form pK 53 , Bq in
Theorem 3.1-(1).

9.1.2    AIP: Interpreting the Grid

The following interpretation I induces a global structure which is finitely equivalent to Γ.

Interpretation 2. The ΣΓ -interpretation I over MAIP is given by
      !                      ˇ                            )
U I “ p2m 3n , yq P MAIP p2q ˇ m, n non-negative integers
                             ˇ


    !      )
OI “ p1, 0q ,         and     I
                             ΠO,1 “ id,

                                                                            #
        !                        ˇ          )                                   p1, 2, 2, 2q for j “ 1, and
E1I “    pm, m, n, oq P MAIP p4q ˇ m ` n “ 1 ,           and    ΠIE1 ,j “
                                 ˇ
                                                                                p1, 1, 2, 2q for j “ 2.

                                                                                #
     !                           ˇ          )                                       p1, 2, 2, 2, 2q for j “ 1, and
E2I “ pm, m, m, n, oq P MAIP p5q ˇ m ` n “ 1 ,            and     ΠIE2 ,j “
                                 ˇ
                                                                                    p1, 1, 1, 2, 2q for j “ 2.

                                                           35
Observe the grid structure Γ is isomorphic to SI via the bijection

                                    pm, nq ÞÑ p2m´1 3n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´1 3n´1 q.

Moreover, this map is computable under the plain encoding for Γ and MAIP . Next, we define a
description D Ď 2MAIP so that I is internal w.r.t. D at arity 5.

Description 2. The description D Ď 2MAIP consists of the predicates U I , OI defined in the previous
interpretation.

    We have defined the interpretation I and description D with the goal to obtain templates pA, Bq
where A is Boolean after applying Corollary 7.6. By Lemma 7.2, this requires arpU I q ď 2 and
arpDq ď 2 for all predicates D P D . This is the reason behind the more awkward encoding of Γ
compared to the previous subsection. An added difficulty is that because D cannot contain ternary
predicates, we cannot speak about equality between coordinates in a straight-forward way. In the
previous subsection, D contained the predicate Dă “ tpm1 , m2 , m3 q P MAIP | m1 ă m2 u, so given an
element f “ pn1 , n2 , n3 , n4 q P MAIP p4q we could tell whether its first two coordinates were equal
by checking whether x f y “ x f yp2,1,3,4q in the quotient MAIP {D 8 . In this section we cannot compare
coordinates in this direct way. But instead, we can still verify that the first two coordinates of f
are equal as long as we have, for example, that n1 ` n3 “ 1 and n2 ` n3 “ 1. This motivates the
definition of the predicates E1I and E2I in this subsection.
    Let us show that I is indeed internal at arity 5 (w.r.t. D ). This is a consequence of the following
claims.

Claim 1: The predicates U I , OI , E1I , and E2I are all D -stable. This follows directly from the
definitions.

Claim 2: The predicate OI is internal at arity 5. Indeed, the minor condition ϕO pxq ” x “ xp1,1q is
an internal definition of OI .

Claim 3: The predicates E1I and E2I are internal at arity 5. Consider the following internal
definitions for E1I and E2I :
                              ϕE1 pxq ” ϕO pxp1,2,1,2q q ^ ϕO pxp2,1,1,2q q,

                        ϕE2 pxq ” ϕO pxp1,2,2,1,2q q ^ ϕO pxp2,1,2,1,2q q ^ ϕO pxp2,2,1,1,2q q.


Claim 4: The following implications hold.

                            f p1,2,2,2q P U I ùñ f p1,1,2,2q P U I for all f P E1I
                            f p1,2,2,2,2q P U I ùñ f p1,1,1,2,2q P U I for all f P E2I .

We prove the statement for f P E1I . The case where f P E2I follows analogously. Let pm, nq “ f p1,2,2,2q .
By the definition of E1I , it must hold that f p1,1,2,2q “ p2m, n ´ mq. Now, observe that pm, nq P U I
implies that p2m, m ´ nq P U I as well, following the definition of U I .
  8We do this when proving Claim 5 in Section 9.1.1.



                                                         36
Claim 5: Let ϕpxq be an internal reference to U I then the following formulas are also internal
references to U I :
                                 ´                                                ¯
                    ϕ1 pxq “ DyDz ϕpyq ^ ϕE1 pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,1,2,2q ,

and
                                  ´                                                    ¯
                     ϕ2 pxq “ DyDz ϕpyq ^ ϕE2 pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,2,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,1,1,2,2q .

   Indeed, let us argue the statement for ϕ1 . The case of ϕ2 follows similarly. Suppose that
MAIP {D |ù ϕ1 px f x yq for some f P Qp2q, and let x f y y and x f z y be existential witnesses for y and z
respectively. In particular,

                           MAIP {D |ù ϕpx f y yq,    and MAIP {D |ù ϕE1 px f z yq.

The fact that U I , and E1I are D -stable and ϕpxq, ϕE1 pxq are internal references to those predicates
                                                                       p1,2,2,2q
implies that f y P U I and f z P E1I . It must also hold that f y „D f z         , so we can conclude that
 p1,2,2,2q                                          p1,1,2,2q                               p1,1,2,2q
fz       P U I . By Claim 5 this implies that f z           P U I as well. Using that f z               „D f x we
finally obtain that f x P U I , proving that ϕ1 pxq is an internal reference to U I .

Claim 7: The predicate U I is internal at arity 5. We use Lemma 6.1 to prove the claim. We
define an internal reference ϕm,n pxq to U I inductively for each m, n P N. Additionally, we keep the
invariant that MAIP |ù ϕm,n p f q, for each m, n P N where f “ p2m´1 2n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´1 3n´1 q. We define
ϕ1,1 as the minor condition ϕO . Now, given m ą 1, we define

                                 ´                                                      ¯
                  ϕm,1 pxq ” DyDz ϕm´1,1 pyq ^ ϕE1 pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,1,2,2q .

    By the previous Claim, the fact that ϕm´1,1 is an internal reference to U I , means that so is
ϕm,1 as well. Moreover, the fact that p2m´2 , 1 ´ 2m´2 q satisfies ϕm´1,1 pxq on MAIP , means that
p2m´1 , 1 ´ 2m´1 q satisfies ϕm,1 pxq on MAIP by taking p2m´2 , 1 ´ 2m´2 q as an existential witness for y
and
                                       ` m´2 m´2
                                                  , 1 ´ 2m´2 , ´2m´2
                                                                     ˘
                                        2   ,2
as an existential witness for z. Arguing in a similar way, if n ą 1, we define
                                 ´                                                        ¯
                ϕm,n pxq “ DyDz ϕm,n´1 pyq ^ ϕE2 pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,2,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,1,1,2,2q .

Again, using the previous claim we obtain that ϕm,n is an internal reference to U I . One can also see
that p2m´1 3n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´1 3n´1 q satisfies ϕm,n pxq on MAIP . This shows the claim.

Proof of items (2), (3), (4) of Theorem 3.1. In this section we have shown that SI is isomorphic to Γ
through a computable homomorphism, and that I is internal at arity 5 w.r.t. D . Additionally,
arpU I q “ 2, and arpQq “ 2 for all Q P D . Then items (3), (4) of Theorem 3.1 follow from
Proposition 4.2 together via Theorem 8.1 and Theorem 8.3.
   Finally, to prove Theorem 3.1-(2) we define a 5-ary pattern Ψ of internal references to I w.r.t. D .
We map each I P HompΓ, ¨q to a minor condition Ψ I defined as follows. First, we find in polynomial

                                                      37
time a homomorphism v ÞÑ pmv , nv q from I to Γ. Moreover, this can be done in such a way that
maxvP I mv ` nv ď |I| ` 1. Then
                                ˜               ¸   ¨                                   ˛
                                 ľ                ľ   ľ             ľ     Π I
         ΨI ”   Dxv       D  xr    ϕmv ,nv pxv q    ˝      ϕR pxr q      xr R,i “ xrpiq ‚.
               vP I   RPΣΓ ,rP R I   vP I                       RPΣΓ ,rP R I        iPrarp Rqs


Here, for each R P Σ R , ϕR pxq is the internal definition of RI given in the previous claims, and
ϕm,n pxq is the internal reference to U I defined in Claim 7. To see that Ψ I can be constructed in
polynomial time, observe that ϕm,n takes Opn ` mq time to construct inductively, and we have that
maxvP I nv ` mv ď |I| ` 1. To prove that pI , D , Ψ, 5q is a valid pattern we need to show that Ψ I is
satisfiable over MAIP . Recall that MAIP |ù ϕm,n p f m,n q, where f m,n “ p2m´1 3n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´1 3n´1 q, and
observe that the map v ÞÑ f mv ,nv is a homomorphism from I to SI . Using this fact, MAIP |ù Ψ I can
be proven following the same reasoning as in the proof of Theorem 3.1-(1), in Section 9.1.1.

9.2     The BLP Algorithm
We prove Theorem 3.2 in this section. To prove item (1) we give an interpretation of the super-grid
Γ` over MBLP , shown in Section 9.2.1. Items (2),(3), and (4) are proven similarly, by showing in
Section 9.2.2 a suitable interpretation of the grid Γ over MBLP .

9.2.1   BLP: Interpreting the Super-Grid

The following interpretation I induces a global structure which is finitely equivalent to Γ` .

Interpretation 3. The ΣΓ` -interpretation I over MBLP is given by

  I
   !                              ˇ     1                                )
U “ pms, ns, os, s, tq P MBLP p5q ˇ s “ j for some j P N, and m, n, o P N ,
                                  ˇ
                                       2

    !                          ˇ                      )
OI “ ps, s, s, s, tq P MBLP p5qˇs “ 2´i for some i P N ,            and         I
                                                                               ΠO,1 “ id,
                               ˇ


                                                            #
    !                                   )                    p1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5q if j “ 1,
Ei “ ps1 , s2 , s3 , s, s, tq P MBLP p6q  and   ΠIEi ,j “                                        for all i P r3s,
                                                              p1, 2, 3, i, 4, 5q if j “ 2

                                                              #
EiI “ tps1, s2, s3, si , s, tq P MBLPp6qu and ΠEI ,j “
                                                     i
                                                               p1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5q if j “ 1,
                                                                                                 for each i P r3s.
                                                                p1, 2, 3, i, 4, 5q if j “ 2

Here it is worth pointing out the main difference with respect to the interpretation of Γ` over MAIP
given in Section 9.1.1. Addition and, by extension, multiplication times two are easy to perform in
the minion MBLP , but we are missing a natural notion of “unit increment”. To remediate this, we
represent a triple pm, n, oq P N3 in the 3-dimensional grid with elements of the form pms, ns, os, s, tq
in MBLP , where the fourth coordinate represents the increment that we have chosen in our encoding.
Of course, for a given increment s, the resulting grid in MBLP is finite, but we consider the disjoint
union of these grids when s ranges over all values of the form 2´ℓ for ℓ P N. The resulting global

                                                         38
structure is not isomorphic to Γ` , but it is finitely equivalent to it, as indicated below.



Claim 1: The structure S “ SI induced by I is finitely equivalent to Γ` . Let us describe S. For
each integer i ě 2 we define S as the connected component of Si containing the element
                                     ˆ                      ˙
                                       1 1 1 1           1
                                         ,   ,  ,  1 ´        P UI .
                                       2i 2i 2i 2i     2i´2

Observe that S is the disjoint union iě2 Si . Given i ě 2, we define Γ`
                                         Ů
                                                                           i as the substructure of
Γ induced on the set of elements pm, n, oq P N with m ` n ` o ` 1 ď 2i . The structure Γ`
  `                                                  3
                                                                                                 i is
isomorphic to Si through the bijection
                                        ˆ                              ˙
                                           m n o 1          m`n`o`1
                           pm, n, oq ÞÑ      , , , ,1´                   .
                                           2i 2i 2i 2i           2i

Finally, observe that Γ` is finitely equivalent to the disjoint union ią2 Γ`
                                                                           i . Indeed, if I Ñ Γ , for
                                                                                               `
                                                                     Ů

some finite I, then it must be that I Ñ Γi for some i ą 2, and we also have that Γi Ñ Γ for all i.
                                            `                                         `     `

This proves the claim.
    Now let us define a description D Ď 2MBLP so that I is internal at arity 6 w.r.t. D .

Description 3. The description D Ď 2MBLP consists of the predicate UI defined in the previous
interpretation, and the predicates
     ! 1           1       )
D p “ p i , 1 ´ i q | i ě 0 , and
     ! 2          2                  )
Dă “ ps1 , s2 , s3 q P MBLP | s1 ă s2 .

The following claims establish that I is internal at arity 6 (w.r.t. D ).

Claim 2: The predicates U I , and RI for R P ΣΓ` are all D -stable. This follows from the definitions.

Claim 3: The predicates EiI are internal at arity 6. The following is an internal definition of
EiI :
                              ϕEi pxq ” xp3,3,3,1,2,3q “ xp3,3,3,2,1,3q .


Claim 4: The predicates EiI are internal at arity 6. The following is an internal definition of EiI :

                                           ϕEi pxq ” x σ “ x τ ,

where σ : r6s Ñ r3s maps i to 1, 4 to 2 and the other elements to 3, and τ : r6s Ñ r3s maps i to 2, 4 to
1 and the other elements to 3.

Claim 5: If ϕpxq is an internal reference to D p , then the following formula is also an internal
reference to D p :
                                  ´                                                 ¯
                   ϕ1 pxq “ DyD3 z ϕpyq ^ z “ zp2,1,3q ^ y “ zp1,1,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2q .


                                                    39
Moreover, if p1{2i , ´1{2i q satisfies ϕpxq (over MBLP ), then p1{2i`1 , 1 ´ 1{2i`1 q satisfies ϕ1 pxq. Let us
begin with the second part of the statement. To see that p1{2i`1 , 1 ´ 1{2i`1 q satisfies ϕ1 pxq, observe
that p1{2i , 1 ´ 1{2i q and p1{2i`1 , 1{2i`1 , 1 ´ 1{2i q are valid existential witnesses for y and z.
       Now let us show that ϕ1 is an internal reference to D1{2 . Suppose MBLP {D |ù ϕ1 px f x yq and
x f y y, x f z y are existential witnesses for y and z. As ϕ is an internal reference to D p , we have f y P D p .
                                    p1,1,2q                    p1,1,2q
Hence, the fact that f y „D f z               means that f z             P D p , so f z p1q ` f z p2q “ 1{2i for some i ě 0.
                                                     p2,1,3q
Also, observe that the fact that f z „D f z      implies f z p1q “ f z p2q. Indeed, otherwise exactly
                p2,3,1q                                                     p1,2,2q
one of f z or f z       would belong to Dă . Hence f z p1q “ 1{2i`1 , and f z       P D p . Finally, because
         p1,2,2q
f x „D f z         , we must have f x P D p , proving the claim.

Claim 6: The predicate D p is internal at arity 6. We use Lemma 6.1 to prove the claim. We
define an internal reference ϕi pxq to D p inductively for each i ě 0 in such a way that p1{2i , 1 ´ 1{2i q
satisfies ϕi pxq on MBLP . We define
                                            ϕ0 pxq ” x “ xp1,1q .
Given i ą 0, we define
                                       ´                                                     ¯
                        ϕi pxq ” DyD3 z ϕi´1 pyq ^ z “ zp2,1,3q ^ y “ zp1,1,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2q .

    Now the previous claim proves that ϕi pxq is an internal reference to D p and p1{2i , 1 ´ 1{2i q
satisfies it. This proves the statement.

Claim 7: The predicate OI is internal at arity 6. Let i ě 2. Then, by last claim, the follow-
ing formula is an internal reference to OI :

                                 ϕO,i pxq ” ϕi pxp1,2,2,2,2q q ^ xp1,2,3,3,3q “ xp2,1,3,3,3q
                                                                ^ xp1,3,2,3,3q “ xp2,3,1,3,3q
                                                                ^ xp1,3,3,2,3q “ xp2,3,3,1,3q .

Additionally, ϕO,i pxq is satisfied on MBLP by the element
                                       ˆ                    ˙
                                         1 1 1 1          1
                                           , , , , 1 ´ i´2 .
                                         2i 2i 2i 2i    2
Now the claim follows from Lemma 6.1.

Claim 8: Let i P r3s. Suppose ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following formula is
also an internal reference to U I :
                                 ´                                                        ¯
                  ϕ1 pxq ” DyD6 z ϕpyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q .

Moreover, if f satisfies ϕpxq (on MBLP ), then the tuple g satisfies ϕ1 pxq, where g is defined
by gpiq “ f piq ` f p4q, gp5q “ f p5q ´ f p4q and gpjq “ f pjq, and gpjq “ f pjq for j ‰ i, 5. We
begin with the second part of the statement. To see that g satisfies ϕ1 pxq, observe that f and
f z “ p f p1q, f p2q, f p3q, f p4q, f p4q, f p5q ´ f p4qq are existential witnesses for y and z.
       Now let us show that ϕ1 is an internal reference to U I . Suppose MBLP {D |ù ϕ1 px f x yq with
x f y y, x f z y as existential witnesses for y, z. As ϕ is an internal reference to U I , it must hold that

                                                               40
                                       p1,2,3,4,5,5q       p1,2,3,4,5,5q
f y P U I . Moreover, f y „D f z         , so f z       P U I , meaning that f z p4q “ 21i for some i ě 2,
              m
and f z pjq “ 2ij for some m j P N for each j P r3s. Now, the fact that f z P EiI means that f z p4q “ f z p5q.
                                                                                             p1,2,3,4,i,5q
Hence, we conclude that f z p5q “ 21i as well. This implies that f z                                         belongs to U I . Finally,
                      p1,2,3,4,i,5q
using that f x „D f z                 , we obtain f x P U I , as we wanted.

Claim 9: Let i P r3s. Suppose ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following formula is
also an internal reference to U I :
                                  ´                                                         ¯
                   ϕ1 pxq ” DyD6 z ϕpyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q

Moreover, if f satisfies ϕpxq (on MBLP ), then the tuple g satisfies ϕ1 pxq, where g is defined by
gpiq “ 2 f piq, gp5q “ f p5q ´ f piq and gpjq “ f pjq, and gpjq “ f pjq for j ‰ i, 5. This can be shown
analogously to the previous claim.

Claim 10: The predicate U I is internal at arity 6. We prove the claim using Lemma 6.1, as usual.
We define an internal reference ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 ,m4 pxq to U I inductively, following the lexicographical
order, for each pm1 , m2 , m3 , m4 q P N4 such that m2 ` m3 ` m4 ` 1 ď 2m1 , in such a way that
                               ˆ                                          ˙
                                 m2 m3 m4 1             m2 ` m3 ` m4 ` 1
                                      ,   ,   ,     ,1´
                                 2m1 2m1 2m1 2m1               2m1
satisfies ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 ,m4 pxq on MBLP . For each m ě 2 we define
                                                       ϕm,1,1,1 pxq ” ϕO,m pxq,
where ϕO,m pxq is the internal reference to OI defined in Claim 7. Now suppose that i ą 1 is the
maximum index such that mi ą 1. We have two cases. Suppose that mi is odd. Then we let
ni “ mi ´ 1, n j “ m j for all j ‰ i, and define ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 ,m4 pxq as
                          ´                                                                      ¯
                   DyD6 z ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 ,n4 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q .

Otherwise, suppose mi is even. Then Then we let ni “ mi {2, n j “ m j for all j ‰ i, and define
ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 ,m4 pxq as
                             ´                                                                       ¯
                       DyD6 z ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 ,n4 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q .

Now the statement follows from Claims 8 and 9.

Proof of item (1) of Theorem 3.1. We define a 6-ary pattern Ψ of internal references to I w.r.t. D . Then
the result will frollow from Theorem 8.6. Given I P HompΓ` , ¨q, we first compute a homomorphism
v ÞÑ pmv , nv , ov q from I to Γ` in polynomial time in such a way that maxvP I log2 pmv nv ov q ď |I|. Let
M “ maxvP I mv ` nv ` ov ` 1, and let j “ rlog2 Ms. Then F is actually a homomorphism from I to
Γ`j , where Γ j Ď Γ is the substructure defined in Claim 1. Then the minor condition Ψ I is defined
               `       `

as
                              ˜                        ¸  ˜                          ¸
                               ľ                         ľ ľ
        D   xv    D        xr      ϕj,mv ,nv ,ov pxv q       ϕO,j pxr q ^ xr “ xrp1q
       vP I   RPΣΓ` ,rP R I       vP I                                rPO I
                                                                   ¨                                                           ˛
                                                              ľ               ľ                         ľ          ΠI
                                                                   ˝                        ϕR pxr q              xr R,i “ xrpiq ‚.
                                                                        RPΣΓ` ,R‰O,rP R I              iParp Rq



                                                                   41
To see that Ψ I can be computed in polynomial time, observe that ϕj,mv ,nv ,ov can be constructed
inductively in time Opj ` log2 pmv nv ov qq, j ď 1 ` log2 4|I|, and maxvP I log2 pmv nv ov q ď |I|. In order
to prove that pI , D , Ψ, 6q is a valid pattern, we only need to show that MBLP |ù Ψ I . To do this,
observe that the map
                                      ˆ                                      ˙
                                        mv nv ov 1         mv ` nv ` ov ` 1
                           v ÞÑ f v “     , , , ,1´                            ,
                                        2j 2j 2j 2j                2j

is a homomorphism from I to the connected component of
                                  ˆ                    ˙
                                    1 1 1 1         1
                                      , , , , 1 ´ j´2
                                    2j 2j 2j 2j   2

in SI (recall the isomorphisms from Claim 1). Now M |ù Ψ I can be proven analogously to
Theorem 3.1-(1) in Section 9.1.1. Observe that 5 ě arpU I q and 5 ě arpPq for all P P D . Hence, we
only need to consider templates of the form pK 65 , Bq to achieve the TFNP-hardness result.

9.2.2   BLP: Interpreting the Grid

The following interpretation I induces a global structure that is finitely equivalent to Γ.

Interpretation 4. The ΣΓ -interpretation I over MBLP is given by
      !ˆ 1         ˙                                        )
  I
U “            , y   P MBLP p2q | m, n non-negative integers ,
         2m 3n

    !      )
OI “ p1, 0q ,     and     I
                         ΠO,1 “ id,

                                                      #
     !                       )                            p1, 1, 2, 2q for i “ 1,
E1I “ px, x, y, yq P MBLP p4q ,    and    ΠIE1 ,i “
                                                          p1, 2, 2, 2q for i “ 2,

                                                                            #
     !                                        )                                 p1, 1, 1, 2, 2q for i “ 1,
E2I “ px, x, x, y, zq P MBLP p4q | x ` y “ 1{3 ,      and       ΠIE2 ,i “
                                                                                p1, 2, 2, 2, 2q for i “ 2.

This way, the grid structure Γ is isomorphic to S via the bijection
                                         ˆ                          ˙
                                              1               1
                               pm, nq ÞÑ             , 1 ´ m´1 n´1 .
                                           2m´1 3n´1      2    3

Moreover, this map is computable under the plain encoding for Γ and MBLP . Next, we define a
description D Ď 2MBLP so that I is internal w.r.t. D at arity 5.

Description 4. The description D Ď 2MBLP consists of the binary predicates U I and                           OI defined
in the previous interpretation I , and the new predicates
        !         )                    !         )
D1{2 “ p1{2, 1{2q , and D1{3 “ p1{3, 2{3q .


                                                      42
    It is worth to compare the interpretation I and description D with the ones from Section 9.1.2,
used to encode Γ on MAIP . Both constructions are completely analogous, with the main difference
that in that subsection we considered positive powers 2m 3n and here we consider negative ones
2´m 3´n . Let us show that I is indeed internal at arity 5 w.r.t. D . This is a consequence of the
following claims.

Claim 1: The predicates U I , OI , E1I , and E2I are all D -stable. This is a routine check.

Claim 2: The predicate OI is internal at arity 5 (w.r.t. D ). Indeed, the minor condition ϕO pxq ”
x “ xp1,1q is an internal definition of OI .

Claim 3: The predicates D1{2 and D1{3 are internal at arity 5. The following are internal definitions
for D1{2 and D1{3 w.r.t. D :

                          ϕ1{2 pxq ” x “ xp2,1q ,
                                         ´                                          ¯
                          ϕ1{3 pxq ” D3 y y “ yp3,1,2q ^ y “ yp2,3,1q ^ x “ yp1,2,2q .


Claim 4: The predicates E1I and E2I are internal at arity 5. Consider the following internal
definitions for E1I and E2I :

                       ϕE1 pxq ” ϕ1{2 pxp1,2,1,2q q ^ ϕ1{2 pxp2,1,1,2q q,    and
                       ϕE2 pxq ” ϕ1{3 pxp1,2,2,1,2q q ^ ϕ1{3 pxp2,1,2,1,2q q ^ ϕ1{3 pxp2,2,1,1,2q q.


Claim 5: The following implications hold.

                          f p1,1,2,2q P U I ùñ f p1,2,2,2q P U I for all f P E1I ,         and
                          f p1,1,1,2,2q P U I ùñ f p1,2,2,2,2q P U I for all f P E2I .

We prove the statement for f P E1I . The case where f P E2I follows analogously. Let pm, nq “ f p1,2,2,2q .
By the definition of E1I , it must hold that f p1,1,2,2q “ p2m, n ´ mq. Now, observe that pm, nq P U I
implies that p2m, n ´ mq P U I as well, following the definition of U I .

Claim 6: Let ϕpxq be an internal reference to U I then the following formulas are also internal
references to U I :
                               ´                                                ¯
                  ϕ1 pxq “ DyDz ϕpyq ^ ϕE1 pzq ^ y “ zp1,1,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2,2q , and
                               ´                                                    ¯
                  ϕ2 pxq “ DyDz ϕpyq ^ ϕE2 pzq ^ y “ zp1,1,1,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2,2,2q .

Indeed, let us argue the statement for ϕ1 . The case of ϕ2 follows similarly. Suppose that MBLP {D |ù
ϕ1 px f x yq for some f P Qp2q, and let x f y y and x f z y be existential witnesses for y and z respectively. In
particular,
                            MBLP {D |ù ϕpx f y yq, and MBLP {D |ù ϕE1 px f z yq.


                                                           43
The fact that U I , and E1I are D -stable and ϕpxq, ϕE1 pxq are internal references to those predicates
                                                                       p1,1,2,2q
implies that f y P U I and f z P E1I . It must also hold that f y „D f z         , so we can conclude that
 p1,1,2,2q                                            p1,2,2,2q                                p1,2,2,2q
fz       P U I . By Claim 5 this implies that f z         P U I as well. Using that f z                    „D f x we
finally obtain that f x P U , proving that ϕ1 pxq is an internal reference to U I .
                           I



Claim 7: The predicate U I is internal at arity 5. We use Lemma 6.1 to prove the claim. We
define an internal reference ϕm,n pxq to U I inductively for each m, n P N. Additionally, we keep the
invariant that MBLP |ù ϕm,n p f q, for each m, n P N where f “ p 2m´112n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´113n´1 q. We define ϕ1,1
as the minor condition ϕO . Now, given m ą 1, we define as
                                   ´                                                   ¯
                 ϕm,1 pxq ” DyDz ϕm´1,1 pyq ^ ϕE1 pzq ^ y “ zp1,1,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2,2q .

By the previous Claim, the fact that ϕm´1,1 is an internal reference to U I , means that so is ϕm,1 as
well. Moreover, the fact that p 2m1´2 , 1 ´ 2m1´2 q satisfies ϕm´1,1 pxq on MBLP , means that p 2m1´1 , 1 ´ 2m1´1 q
satisfies ϕm,1 pxq on MBLP by taking p 2m1´2 , 1 ´ 2m1´2 q as an existential witness for y and
                                  ˆ                                         ˙
                                        1       1 1          1 1         1
                                           ,         ,  ´       ,   ´
                                     2m´2 2m´2 2 2m´2 2 2m´2
as an existential witness for z. Arguing in a similar way, if n ą 1, we define
                                          ´
                           ϕm,n pxq “ DyDz ϕm,n´1 pyq ^ ϕE2 pzq^
                                                                               ¯
                                            y “ zp1,1,1,2,2q ^ x “ zp1,2,2,2,2q .

Again, using the previous claim we obtain that ϕm,n is an internal reference to U I . One can also see
that p 2m´113n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´113n´1 q satisfies ϕm,n pxq on MBLP . This shows the claim.

Proof of items (2),(3), and (4) of Theorem 3.2. Observe that arpU I q “ 2, and arpQq “ 2 for all Q P D .
Thus items (3) and (4) of Theorem 3.2 follow from Proposition 4.2 together with Theorem 8.1 and
Theorem 8.3 using the interpretation I and the description D in this section.
   Finally, to prove item (2) of Theorem 3.2 we define a 5-ary pattern Ψ of internal references to
I w.r.t. D . Given I P HompΓ, ¨q we construct the minor condition Ψ I as follows. First, we find in
polynomial time a homomorphism v ÞÑ pmv , nv q from I to Γ such that maxvP I mv ` nv ď |I| ` 1.
Then
                                    ˜                 ¸   ¨                                     ˛
                                     ľ                  ľ   ľ               ľ     Π I
          ΨI ”  D   xv     D     xr      ϕmv ,nv pxv q    ˝       ϕR pxr q       xr R,i “ xrpiq ‚.
                vP I   RPΣΓ ,rP R I   vP I                        RPΣΓ ,rP R I   iPrarp Rqs

Here, for each R P Σ R , ϕR pxq is the internal definition of RI given in the previous claims, and
ϕm,n pxq is the internal reference to U I defined in Claim 7. To see that Ψ I can be computed in
polynomial time, observe that ϕm,n pxq takes Opm ` nq time to be constructed inductively, and
maxvP I mv ` nv ď |I| ` 1. The fact that MBLP |ù Ψ I can be proven similarly to Theorem 3.1-(1) in
Section 9.1.1, using that the map v ÞÑ p 2m´113n´1 , 1 ´ 2m´113n´1 q is a homomorphism from I to Γ.

9.3    The BLP + AIP Algorithm
We prove Theorem 3.3 in this section. This result follows from a suitable interpretation of the
super-grid Γ` over MBLP`AIP , shown in Section 9.3.1.

                                                        44
9.3.1    BLP + AIP: Interpreting the Super-Grid

Let M “ MBLP`AIP for the rest of this section. Recall that elements in M pnq consists of pairs p f , gq
where f P r0, 1sn and g P Zn . We consider the lexicographical order on pairs ps, mq P r0, 1s ˆ Z.
                                                                            .
We perform arithmetic on tuples coordinate-wise. We write m .. n for n, m P Z to denote that
                                                                 ..
there exists an integer o P Z such that on “ m, and m ̸ . n for the negation of this statement 9 .
                                                               .
Similarly, given ps, mq, pt, nq P r0, 1s ˆ Z, we write ps, mq .. pt, nq if there is some integer o ě 0 such
that opt, nq “ ps, mq.
    The constructions and arguments in this section are very similar to those in Section 9.2.1, so
we will omit some details. The following interpretation I induces a global structure that is finitely
equivalent to Γ` .
Interpretation 5. The ΣΓ` -interpretation I over MBLP`AIP is given by
                                             .                        .
      !                ˇ                                                                                )
U I “ p f , gq P M p5q ˇ f p4q ă 1{3, gp4q̸ .. 2, and p f piq, gpiqq .. p f p4q, gp4qq for each i P r3s
                       ˇ


                                            .
    !                 ˇ                                                                             )
OI “ p f , gq P M p5q ˇ f p1q ă 1{3, gp1q̸ .. 2, and p f piq, gpiqq “ p f p4q, gp4qq for all i P r3s , and
                      ˇ

 I
ΠO,1 “ id .
And, for all i P r3s
                                                                                     #
        !                 ˇ                                )                             p1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5q for j “ 1,
EiI “    p f , gq P M p6q ˇ p f p4q, gp4qq “ p f p5q, gp5qq ,    and     ΠIEi ,j “
                          ˇ
                                                                                         p1, 2, 3, i, 4, 5q for j “ 2,

                                                                                   #
EiI “ p f , gq P M p6q ˇˇ p f p4q, gp4qq “ p f piq, gpiqq ,                            p1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5q for j “ 1,
     !                  ˇ                                )
                                                                        I
                                                                and    ΠE i ,j
                                                                               “
                                                                                       p1, 2, 3, i, 4, 5q for j “ 2.

As in Section 9.2.1, we follow the idea of interpreting increasingly large grids and keeping track
of the increments in each of these grids. Similarly to before, if we represent a pair p f , gq P U I as
p f , gq “ pp f p1q, gp1qq, . . . , p f p5q, gp5qqq, it holds that the first three coordinates of this vector (which
are two-dimensional vectors themselves) are integer multiples of p f p4q, gp4qq, which takes the role
of the unit increment. Again, the fact that we consider tuples p f , gq where f p4q can be arbitrarily
small but positive means that the global structure given by I contains arbitrarily large grids. This
yields the following claim.

Claim 1: The structure S “ SI induced by I is finitely equivalent to Γ` . Given j P N, we
define Γ`
        j as the substructure of Γ induced on the elements pm, n, oq P N satisfying m ` n ` o ă j.
                                  `                                     3

Consider an element p f , gq P U I . Let j “ r f p14q s. Then Γ`    j is isomorphic to the connected component
of p f , gq in S via the bijection pm1 , m2 , m3 q ÞÑ p f , g q, where p f 1 piq, g1 piqq “ mi p f p4q, gp4qq for i P r3s,
                                                             1  1

p f 1 p4q, g1 p4qq “ p f p4q, gp4qq, and p f 1 p5q, g1 p5qq is defined so that both the elements in f 1 and the
elements in g1 add up to 1. We have that Γ` is finitely equivalent to the disjoint union jPN Γ`
                                                                                                           Ů
                                                                                                                    j , so
this proves the result.

    Let us define a description D so that I is internal at arity 6 w.r.t. D .
   9 The more standard notation n | m would quickly lead to readability issues.



                                                           45
Description 5. The description D Ď 2MBLP`AIP is given by the predicate U I defined in the previous
interpretation, and
          !                ˇ                            )
Dă “ p f , gq P M p3q ˇ p f p1q, gp1qq ă p f p2q, gp2qq ,
                           ˇ

                                                  .
          !                 ˇ                        )
D̸ ... 2 “ p f , gq P M p2q ˇ f p1q ă 1{3, gp1q̸ .. 2 .
                            ˇ


    Let us show that I is internal at arity 6 (w.r.t. D ). This is a consequence of the following claims.

Claim 2: The predicates U I , OI , and EiI , EiI for i P r3s are all D -stable.

Claim 3: The predicate EiI is internal at arity 6 for each i P r3s. This is shown in a similar
way to Claim 3 in Section 9.2.1. The following is an internal definition of EiI :

                                           ϕEi pxq ” xp3,3,3,1,2,3q “ xp3,3,3,2,1,3q .


Claim 4: The predicate EiI is internal at arity 6 for each i P r3s. This is shown in a similar way to
Claim 4 in Section 9.2.1. The following is an internal definition of EiI :

                                                     ϕEi pxq ” x σ “ x τ ,

where σ : r6s Ñ r3s sends i to 1, 4 to 2 and the other elements to 3, and τ : r6s Ñ r3s sends i to 2, 4
to 1 and the other elements to 3.

Claim 5: The predicate D̸ ... 2 is internal at arity 6. Indeed, the following is an internal defini-
tion of D̸ ... 2 :
                    ´                                                                                                          ¯
 ϕ̸ ... 2 pxq ” D5 y yp1,2,3,3,3q “ yp2,1,3,3,3q ^ yp1,3,2,3,3q “ yp2,3,1,3,3q ^ yp3,3,3,1,2q “ yp3,3,3,2,1q ^ x “ yp1,2,2,2,2q .

We need to show both that p f , gq satisfy ϕ̸ ... 2 pxq on M for all p f , gq P D̸ ... 2 and that ϕ̸ ... 2 is an internal
reference to D̸ ... 2 . Let us begin with the first statement. Let p f , gq P D̸ ... 2 . Then let p f y , gy q P M p5q
be defined by p f y piq, gy piqq “ p f p1q, gp1qq, for all i P r3s, and p f y piq, gy piqq “ 12 p1 ´ f p1q, 1 ´ gp1qq for
i “ 4, 5. The fact that p f y , gy q P M follows from the definition of D̸ ... 2 . Observe that p f , gq satisfies
ϕ̸ ... 2 pxq on M with p f y , gy q as an existential witness for y.
         Now let us show that ϕ̸ ... 2 is an internal reference to D̸ ... 2 . Suppose that M {D |ù ϕ̸ ... 2 px f , gyq
with x f y , gy y as an existential witness for y. We claim that p f y piq, gy piqq “ p f y p1q, gy p1qq for i P r3s,
and p f y p4q, gy p4qq “ p f y p5q, gy p5qq. Indeed, suppose that p f y p1q, gy p1qq “ p f y p2q, gy p2qq Then ex-
actly one of p f y , gy qp1,2,3,3,3q or p f y , gy qp2,1,3,3,3q would belong to Dă , contradicting p f y , gy qp1,2,3,3,3q „D
p f y , gy qp2,1,3,3,3q . The other identities can be argued similarly. Hence, we have that 3gy p1q ` 2gy p4q “
                                                                 .             .
1, where gy p1q, gy p4q P Z. This forces gy p1q ̸ .. 2 and gy p4q ̸ .. 3. In particular gy p1q, gy p4q ‰ 0, so
f y p1q, f y p4q ą 0 by the definition of M . We also have that 3 f y p1q ` 2 f y p4q, so we obtain f y p1q ă 1{3
using that f y p4q ą 0. All of this together implies that p f y , gy qp1,2,2,2,2q P D̸ ... 2 . Finally, the fact that
p f , gq „D p f y , gy qp1,2,2,2,2q shows that p f , gq P D̸ ... 2 , as we wanted to prove.

Claim 6: The predicate OI is internal at arity 6. The formula ϕO pxq defined below is an internal


                                                              46
definition of OI .
                                    ´
                                  Dy ϕ̸ ... 2 pyq ^ y “ xp1,2,2,2,2q ^ xp1,2,3,3,3q “ xp2,1,3,3,3q
                                                                                                 ¯
                                      p1,3,2,3,3q      p2,3,1,3,3q    p1,3,3,2,3q    p2,3,3,1,3q
                                  ^x               “x              ^x             “x              .


Claim 7: Let i P r3s. Suppose ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following formula is
also an internal reference to U I :
                                 ´                                                        ¯
                  ϕ1 pxq ” DyD6 z ϕpyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q .

Moreover, if p f , gq satisfies ϕpxq (on MBLP ), then p f 1 , g1 q satisfies ϕ1 pxq, where

    • p f 1 piq, g1 piqq “ p f piq, gpiqq ` p f p4q, gp4qq

    • p f 1 p5q, g1 p5qq “ p f p5q, gp5qq ´ p f p4q, gp4qq, and

    • p f 1 pjq, g1 pjqq “ p f pjq, gpjqq, for j ‰ i, 5.

This is shown exactly as Claim 8 in Section 9.2.1.

Claim 8: Let i P r3s. Suppose ϕpxq is an internal reference to U I . Then the following formula is
also an internal reference to U I :
                               ´                                                         ¯
                  ϕ pxq ” DyD z ϕpyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ z
                    1        6                         p1,2,3,4,5,5q
                                                                     ^x “z p1,2,3,4,i,5q
                                                                                          .

Moreover, if p f , gq satisfies ϕpxq (on MBLP ), then p f 1 , g1 q satisfies ϕ1 pxq, where

p f 1 piq, g1 piqq “ p2 f piq, 2gpiqq,
p f 1 p5q, g1 p5qq “ p f p5q, gp5qq ´ p f piq, gpiqq, and
p f 1 pjq, g1 pjqq “ p f pjq, gpjqq, for j ‰ i, 5.

Again, this follows similarly to Claim 8 in Section 9.2.1.

Claim 9: The predicate U I is internal at arity 6. We prove the claim using Lemma 6.1. For
each pm1 , m2 , m3 q P N3 we define an internal reference ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pxq to U I inductively following the
lexicographical order on N3 in such a way that M |ù ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pp f , gqq for all elements p f , gq P U I
satisfying that p f piq, gpiqq “ mi p f p4q, gp4qq for each i P r3s. We define

                                                      ϕ1,1,1 pxq ” ϕO pxq.

Now, let pm1 , m2 , m3 q P N3 and suppose i P r3s is the greatest index for which mi ą 1. We have two
cases. Suppose mi is odd. Then we let n j “ m j for j ‰ i, and ni “ mi ´ 1, and define
                                             ˜                                                                           ¸
                                         6                                       p1,2,3,4,5,5q           p1,2,3,4,i,5q
               ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pxq ” DyD z ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ z                         ^x “z                   .




                                                                 47
Otherwise, suppose mi is even. Then we let n j “ m j for j ‰ i, and ni “ mi {2, and define
                             ˜                                                          ¸
            ϕm1 ,m2 ,m3 pxq ” DyD6 z ϕn1 ,n2 ,n3 pyq ^ ϕEi pzq ^ y “ zp1,2,3,4,5,5q ^ x “ zp1,2,3,4,i,5q .

Now the statement follows from Claims 7 and 8.



Proof of Theorem 3.3. Observe that 5 ě arpU I q and 5 ě arpPq for all P P D . Theorem 3.3-(2) follows
from Theorem 8.3 and Proposition 5.2 using that SI is finitely equivalent to Γ` , and I is internal at
arity 6 w.r.t. D .
    We prove Theorem 3.3-(1) using Theorem 8.6 and Proposition 5.2. To do this it is enough
to define a 6-ary pattern Ψ of internal references to I w.r.t. D . We map each finite structure
I P HompΓ` , ¨q to the minor condition Ψ I defined as follows. First, we compute a homomorphism
v ÞÑ pmv , nv , ov q from I to Γ` in polynomial time, in such a way that maxvP I log2 pmv nv ov q ď |I|.
Then we set
                                   ˜                     ¸   ¨                                 ˛
                                    ľ                      ľ   ľ            ľ ΠI
        ΨI ”  D    xv    D      xr     ϕmv ,nv ,ov pxv q     ˝     ϕR pxr q     xr R,i “ xrpiq ‚.
             vP I   RPΣΓ` ,rP R I       vP I                       RPΣΓ` ,rP R I        iParp Rq

    To see that Ψ I can be computed in polynomial time, observe that ϕm,n,o takes Oplog2 pmnoqq time
to be constructed inductively, and maxvP I log2 pmv nv ov q ď |I|. In order to prove that pI , D , Ψ, 6q is a
valid pattern we just need to show that M |ù Ψ I . We give an explicit homomorphism from I to SI .
This map is defined by v ÞÑ p f v , gv q, where
                                    ˆ                                     ˙
                                      mv nv ov 1       mv ` nv ` ov ` 1
                             fv “         , , , ,1´                          ,
                                        j j j j                  j

where j “ maxvP I mv ` nv ` ov ` 1, and

                                    gv “ pmv , nv , ov , 1, 1 ´ pmv ` nv ` ov ` 1qq .

Now M |ù Ψ I can be shown the same way as in the proof of Theorem 3.1-(1) in Section 9.1.1.

9.4   Weak Near-Unanimity Polymorphisms
In this section we prove items (2)(i-iv) of Theorem 1.2. We begin by introducing a minion W that
characterizes the existence of WNUs suitably. Then, item (1)(i) will follow from interpreting the
grid Γ over W (Section 9.4.1), and items (1)(ii-iv) from interpreting growing triangular slices ∇n
over W (Section 9.4.2).
    Given k ě 2, we introduce a minion Wk that characterizes the existence of a n-ary w.n.u. We
define an auxiliary minion first. Let Wk be the minion whose n-ary elements are the ordered
partitions of r2s. That is,
                       #            ˇ                                                  +
                            ´ ¯n ˇ ď
              Wk pnq “ γ P 2 rk s
                                          γpiq “ rks, and γpiq X γpjq “ H for all i ‰ j .
                                    ˇ
                                    ˇ
                                    ˇ
                                               iPrns



                                                           48
Given a map π : rns Ñ rms and elements ω P Wk pnq and γ P Wk pmq, the identity γ “ ω π holds
if γpiq “ jPπ´1 piq ωpjq. We write γ „k ω for two elements γ, ω P Wk pnq if for any π : rns Ñ r2s
         Ť

we have that γπ “ ω π , that |γπ p1q| “ |ω π p1q| “ 1, or that |γπ p1q| “ |ω π p1q| “ k ´ 1. Clearly the
equivalence relation „k is compatible with minoring (i.e. γ „k ω implies γπ „k ω π for all suitable
maps π), so we can define W k “ Wk { „k . Given γ P Wk , we write γ to denote its „k -class.

Lemma 9.1. Let M be a minion and p P N be a prime number. Then M contains a w.n.u. element of arity
k if and only if W k Ñ M .

Proof. Let ω P Wk pkq be the element defined by ωpiq “ tiu for each i P rks. Suppose there is a
homomorphism α : Wk Ñ M . Then αpωq must be a k-ary w.n.u.
    In the other direction, suppose that f P M pkq is a w.n.u. Then we define a homomorphism
α : Wk Ñ M by setting αpωq “ f . This defines the homomorphism completely. Indeed, for any
γ P Wk pnq we have that γ “ ω πγ , where for each i P rks we have πγ piq “ j if and only if i P γpjq.
Hence, we define αpγq “ f πγ . In order to prove that α is well-defined we need to prove that
f πγ1 “ f πγ2 for any γ1 , γ2 P Wk satisfying γ1 „ γ2 . Suppose that γ1 , γ2 P Wk pnq are elements
satisfying γ1 „ γ2 but γ1 ‰ γ2 . Then there must be indices i, j P rns satisfying |γ1 piq| “ |γ2 piq| “ 1
and |γ1 pjq| “ |γ2 pjq| “ k ´ 1. Let τ : r2s Ñ rns be the map 1 ÞÑ i, 2 ÞÑ j. Then for s “ 1, 2 we have
π γs “ τ ˝ σs , where σs : rks Ñ r2s satisfies |σs´1 p1q| “ 1 and |σs´1 p2q| “ k ´ 1. The fact that f is a
w.n.u. implies that f σ1 “ f σ2 , so f πγ1 “ f πγ2 , as we wanted to prove.

    We define W as the disjoint union kě3 W k . A straight-forward corollary of last lemma is the
                                            Ů

following.

Corollary 9.2. Let M be a minion. Then M contains a w.n.u. of each arity k ě 3 if and only if W Ñ M .

9.4.1   WNUs: Interpreting the Grid

The following interpretation I induces a global structure that is finitely equivalent to Γ

Interpretation 6. The ΣΓ -interpretation I over W is given by

U I “ W p3q,

    !          ˇ                )
OI “ ω P W p3q ˇ ωp1q “ ωp2q “ H ,             and        I
                                                         ΠO,1 “ id,
               ˇ


and, for each i P r2s,
                                                         #
        !             ˇ           )                          p1, 2, 3, 3q for j “ 1,
EiI “       ω P W p4q ˇ |ωp3q| “ 1 ,   and   ΠIEi ,j “
                      ˇ
                                                             p1, 2, i, 3q for j “ 2.
                                                                                        Ů
Given an integer k ě 3 we define Ik as the restriction I |W k . Then we have that SI “ kě3 SIk .
    The idea behind this interpretation relatively simple (the difficult part will be to show that its
predicates are internal w.r.t. some suitable description). We represent grid elements pn, mq P N
as elements ω P W p3q where the partition ω satisfies |ωp1q| “ n ´ 1 and |ωp2q| “ m ´ 1. This is
correspondence is far from a bijection, but we only need to show finite equivalence.



                                                         49
Claim 1: The structure SI induced by I is finitely equivalent to Γ. Given a number m P N,
we define Γm to be the substructure of Γ induced on the elements pn, oq P N2 satisfying n ` o ď m.
Observe that Γ is finitely equivalent to the disjoint union iPN Γi , and that Γi Ñ Γ j for each pair i ď j.
                                                             Ů

We prove that Γk`2 is finitely equivalent to SIk for each k ě 3. Observe that this proves the claim.
We define suitable homomorphisms. Let F : SIk Ñ Γk`2 be the map ω ÞÑ p|ωp1q| ` 1, |ωp2q| ` 1q. To
see that F is well defined, observe that the relation „k preserves the size of sets. That is, if ω1 „k ω2
for some ω1 , ω2 P Wk , then |ω1 piq| “ |ω2 piq| for all i. The fact that F is indeed a homomorphism
follows from the definition of SIi .
    Now let H : Γk`2 Ñ SIk be the map given by pm, nq ÞÑ ωm,n , where ωm,n P C p p3q is defined as
pXm , Yn , rkszpXm Y Yn qq, where Xm “ rm ´ 1s and Yn “ tk ´ n ` 2, . . . ku. Observe that for m “ n “ 1
we have Xm “ Yn “ H. Hence, Hp1, 1q P OSIk . To see that H is a homomorphism we need to prove
that H preserves E1 and E2 . We show the statement for E1 , the other case is analogous. In other
                                                       SI                              Γ
words, we need to prove that pωm,n , ωm`1,n q P E1 k for all ppm, nq, pm ` 1, nqq P E1 k`2 . Consider the
element ω “ pXm , Yn , tmu, rkszpXm Y Yn Y tmuqq. Then we have that ω P E1I , and

                                              ΠI                        ΠI
                                   ω m,n “ ω E1 ,1 ,    ω m`1,n “ ω E1 ,2 ,

as we wanted to prove. This completes the proof of the claim.

   We define a description D so that I is internal at arity 4 (w.r.t. D ).

Description 6. The description D Ď 2W consists of the predicates

D0 “ tω P C p2q | ωp1q “ Hu,
D1 “ tω P C p2q | |ωp1q| “ 1u,
D˚ “ tω P C p2q | |ωp1q|, |ωp2q| ‰ 1, and 1 P ωp1qu.

   Given ˝ P t0, 1, ˚u we also define the auxiliary binary predicate C˝ P 2W which contains all
elements ω such that ω p2,1q P D˝ . This way,
                                    ¨           ˛ ¨           ˛
                                        ğ        ğ     ğ
                                    ˝        D˝ ‚ ˝        C˝ ‚
                                      ˝Pt0,1,˚u             ˝Pt0,1,˚u

is a partition of W p2q.
    We warn the reader that we deal with two nested equivalence relations from now on: An
element xωy P W {D is a „D -class of some ω P W , which is in turn a „k -class of an element ω P Wk
for some integer k ě 3.
    Now the task at hand is showing that I is internal with respect to D . The crux is proving that
the predicate D1 is internal w.r.t. D , as that predicate is what enables us to define unit increments.
This seems intuitive: after all, the elements ω P W p2q with |ωp1q| “ 1 are the ones that explain the
existence of WNU elements in W . The intuition behind the internal reference to D1 shown in Claim
4 is that, starting from an element of the form ω “ prks, H‘q, the elements of D1 are the only ones
which allow us to transfer all the weight of ω from its first coordinate to its second coordinate by
taking D -equivalent “scoops”. We show that I is internal at arity 4 (w.r.t. D ) through the following
claims.

                                                       50
Claim 2: The predicates U I , OI , E1I and E2I are all D -stable. This follows from the definitions.

Claim 3: The predicate OI is internal at arity 4. Indeed, the following formula is an internal
definition of OI :
                                    ϕO pxq ” x “ xp3,3,3q .


Claim 4: Let m ě 1 be an integer. Then the following is an internal reference to D1 :
                           ˜                            ¸
              2      4
                                  p1,1q           p2,2q
                                                          ľ
 ϕ1,m px2 q ”    yi
                 D      z j y1 “ y1
                             D          ^ ym`1 “ ym`1
             iPrm`2s        jPrms
             ˜                                                                                                       ¸
                              p2,1,2,2q        p2,2,1,2q         p1,1,1,2q           p1,1,2,2q           p1,2,2,2q
                 ľ
                         x “ zi         ^ x “ zi         ^ yi “ zi         ^ yi`1 “ zi         ^ yi`2 “ zi               .
                 iPrms

We recall the intuition given at the start of this series of claims. Consider an element ωx P W such
that W {D |ù ϕ1,m pxωx yq and consider a satisfying assignment witnessing this, given by yi ÞÑ xωyi y
and zi ÞÑ xωzi y for all suitable indices i. What this formula indicates is that all the mass of ωy1 is in
its first coordinate, and all the mass of ωym`1 is in its second one. The sequence ωy1 , . . . , ωym`1 is
obtained by successively taking D -equivalent scoops out of the first coordinate of ωyi and placing
them into its second coordinate, obtaining ωyi`1 . The key idea is that this is only possible if the
scoops are of size one. Otherwise, only one of them would contain the element 1 and would not be
D -equivalent to the rest. This motivates the predicate D˚ P D . Now we give the formal argument.
     Suppose that C {D |ù ϕ1,m pxωyq, with xωyi y and xωzi y as witnesses for each variable yi , zi . We
prove that ω P D1 . Suppose that ω R D1 for the sake of contradiction. Then ω must belong to either
D0 , D˚ , C0 , C1 , C˚ . We rule out each of the possibilities by case analysis.
                                          p2,1,2,2q     p2,2,1,2q
     Suppose that ω P D0 . Then, ω zi               , ω zi        P D0 for all i P rms. This means that for all
                                                              p1,1,1,2q     p1,1,2,2q     p1,2,2,2q
i P rms we have ωzi p2q “ ωzi p3q “ H, and ω zi                      “ ω zi        “ ω zi     . This yields that
ω yi „D ω yi`1 „D ω yi`2 for all i P rms, so in particular ω y1 „D ω ym`2 . This implies ω y1 P D0 X C0 , a
contradiction.
     Suppose that ω P D˚ . This implies that ωzi p2,1,2,2q , ωzi p2,2,1,2q P D˚ , for all i P rms. However, this
means that 1 P ωzi p2q, and 1 P ωzi p3q, contradicting the fact that ωzi is an ordered partition.
                                      p2,1,2,2q     p2,2,1,2q
     Suppose that ω P C1 . Then, ω zi           , ω zi        P D˚ for all i P rms. This means that

                         |ωzi p1q| ` |ωzi p3q| ` |ωzi p4q| “ |ωzi p1q| ` |ωzi p2q| ` |ωzi p4q| “ 1,

This implies that |ωzi p2q| “ |ωzi p3q| ď 1. However, these identities together with

                                     |ωzi p1q| ` |ωzi p2q| ` |ωzi p3q| ` |ωzi p4q| ě 3

also imply that |ωzi p2q|, |ωzi p3q| ě 2. This yields a contradiction.
    Suppose that ω P C0 . Then, ωzi p2,1,2,2q , ωzi p2,2,1,2q P C0 for all i P rms. The first inclusion means
that ωzi p1q “ ωzi p3q “ ωzi p4q “ H, and the second means that ωzi p1q “ ωzi p2q “ ωzi p4q “ H. This
means that all entries of ωzi contain the empty set, contradicting the fact that ωzi is an ordered
partition of rks for some k ě 3.

                                                            51
                                                                                            p2,1,2,2q       p2,2,1,2q
   Suppose that ω P C˚ . This is the hardest case. We have that ω zi                             P C˚ for all
                                                                                                        , ω zi
                                                             p1,1,1,2q
i P rms. Using the facts that ω y1 P C0 and ω y1 „D ω z1               we obtain that ωz1 p4q “ H. This way,
          p1,1,2,2q     p1,1,2,1q
ω y2 „D ω z1        “ ω z1        , and in particular ω y2 P D˚ . Let 2 ă j ď m ` 2 be the smallest index
satisfying ωy j R D˚ . Such index must exist because D0 and D˚ are disjoint, and ω ym`2 P D0 . We
prove that ωy j P D1 . Indeed, we have both
                                              p1,1,2,2q                     p1,2,2,2q
                                ω y j´1 „D ω z j´2        , and ω y j „D ω z j´2        .

                                                     p1,1,2,2q
By our choice of j, it must be that ω y j´1 , ω z j´2    P D˚ , meaning that 1 R ωz j´1 p3q\ R ωz j´2 p4q.
                                 p2,1,2,2q
Additionally, the fact that ω z j´2        P C˚ implies that 1 R ωz j´2 p2q as well. Hence, 1 P ωz j´2 p1q.
                    p1,2,2,2q
This implies that ω z j´2     belongs to either D1 or D˚ . By our choice of j the first case must hold,
yielding ω y j P D1 . Thus j ă m ` 2, because ω ym`2 P D0 . Now consider the element ωz j´1 . The fact
                p1,1,2,2q                                                                                               p2,1,2,2q
that ω y j „D ω z j´1   implies that |ωz j´1 p1q| ` |ωz j´1 p2q| “ 1. However, the fact that ω z j´1                                P D˚
implies that |ωz j´1 p2q| ą 1, a contradiction.

Claim 5: Let m ě 1 be an integer and let ω P W m`2 p2q X D1 . Then W |ù ϕ1,m pωq. We find
witnesses for each variable in ϕ1,m . For each i P rm ` 2s, let ωyi P Wm`2 p2q be defined as

                                            ωyi p1q “ rm ` 2 ´ is,

and
                                       ωyi p2qtm ` 3 ´ i, . . . , m ` 2u.
Similarly, given i P rms, we define ωzi P Wm`2 p4q as

                                ωzi p1q “ rm ´ is,         ωzi p2q “ tm ` 1 ´ iu,
                                ωzi p3q “ tm ` 2 ´ iu,           and
                                ωzi p4q “ tm ` 3 ´ i, . . . , m ` 2u.

Now it is routine to check that W |ù ϕ1,m pωq with ω yi as a witness for yi for each i P rm ` 2s, and
ω zi as a witness for zi for each i P rms.

Claim 6: Let i P r2s. Then EiI is internal at arity 4. By Claim 4, given an integer m ě 1, the
following is an internal reference to EiI :

                                         ϕE,m pxq ” ϕ1,m pxp2,2,1,2q q.

Moreover, by Claim 5, if ω P W m`2 X EiI , then W |ù ϕE,m pωq. Hence the claim follows from
Lemma 6.1.



Proof of item (2)(i) of Theorem 1.2. Observe that 3 ě arpU I q and 3 ě arpPq for all P P D . The claims
in this section show that SI is finitely equivalent to Γ, and I is internal at arity 4 w.r.t. D . Hence, the
result follows from Theorem 8.1 together with Proposition 4.2. It is enough to consider templates of
the form pK 43 , Bq in the statement.

                                                           52
9.4.2   WNUs: Interpreting Triangular Slices

The following interpretation I over W induces structures SIm that are homomorphically equivalent
to ∇m for each integer m ě 3, where Im “ I |W m .

Interpretation 7. The Σ∇ -interpretation I over W is defined as in Interpretation 6, by adding

W I “ tω P W p3q | ωp3q “ Hu,     and     I
                                         ΠW,1 “ id .




  Claim 1: For each integer k, the structures ∇k and SIk are homomorphically equivalent. The
maps defined in Claim 1 in Section 9.4.1 are homomorphisms in both directions between ∇k and SIk .

    We define the description D Ď 2W in the same way as in Description 6. We claim I is internal at
arity 4 (w.r.t. D ). The following, together with the claims from Section 9.4.1, proves the statement.

Claim 2: The predicate W I is internal at arity 4. Clearly W I is D -stable. Additionally, the
following is an internal definition of W I :

                                      ϕW pxq ” xp1,1,2q “ xp1,1,1q .




Proof of items (2)(ii-iv) of Theorem 1.2. Observe that 3 ě arpU I q and 3 ě arpPq for all P P D . Let
I and D be the Σ∇ -interpretation over C and the description over W given in this section. The
claims in this section and the previous one show that for each integer k ě 3, the structure SIk
is homomorphically equivalent to ∇k`2 , where Ik “ I |W k , and I is internal at arity 4 w.r.t. the
description D . Then the result follows from Proposition 5.3 together with Theorem 8.2. It is enough
to consider templates of the form pK 43 , Bq in the statement.

9.5     Cyclic Polymorphisms
In this section we prove items (1)(i-iv) of Theorem 1.2. We begin by introducing a minion C
that characterizes the existence of cyclic polymorphisms suitably. Then, item (1)(i) will follow
from interpreting the grid Γ over C (Section 9.5.1), and items (1)(ii-iv) from interpreting growing
triangular slices ∇n over C (Section 9.5.2).
    Given prime arity. Given a prime number p P N, we define the minion C p as follows. We let
                     #            ˇ                                                   +
                          ´    ¯n ˇ ď
             C pnq “ γ P 2Z p ˇ         γpiq “ Z p , and γpiq X γpjq “ H for all i ‰ j .
                                  ˇ
                                  ˇ
                                     iPrns

   The minoring operation is defined as follows. Let γ P C pnq, π : rns Ñ rms. Then γπ “ ω, where
      Ť
ωpjq “ iPπ´1 p jq γpiq for each j P rms, and empty unions yield the empty set.
   Given a set S Ď Z p and an element m P Z p we write S ` m for the set tn ` m | n P Su. Given two
elements γ, ω P C p pnq, we write γ „ p ω if there is some element m P Z p such that γpiq “ ωpiq ` m

                                                   53
for all i P rns. Observe that „ p is an equivalence relation and it is compatible with minoring, in
the sense that γ „ p ω implies γπ „ p ω π . We write γ to denote the „ p -class of an element γ, and
define C p as the quotient minion C p { „ p .

Lemma 9.3. Let M be a minion and p P N be a prime number. Then M contains a cyclic element of arity
p if and only if C p Ñ M .

Proof. We show both directions. Suppose there is a homomorphism α : C p Ñ M . Let γ “
pt0u, t1u, . . . , tp ´ 1uq P C p ppq. Then the element γ P C p ppq is cyclic, so αpγq must be cyclic as well.
     In the other direction, suppose that f P M ppq is a cyclic element. Then we define a homo-
morphism α : C p Ñ M by setting αpγq “ f . This defines the image of any element ω P C p pnq.
Indeed, we have that ω “ γπω , where πω : rps Ñ rns is the map that sends i P rps to j P rns
if the element i ´ 1 P Z p belongs to ωpjq. Hence, we can define αpωq “ f πω . To see that this
is well defined, we need to prove that whenever ω1 „ p ω2 then f πω1 “ f πω2 . However, if
ω1 „ p ω2 , then there is some m P Z p such that ω1 piq “ ω2 piq ` m for all i. This means that
πω2 “ πω1 ˝ σm , where σ “ pp ´ 1, 1, . . . , p ´ 2q is the cyclic shift. Hence, as f is cyclic, we obtain
                     m
that f πω2 “ p f σ qπω1 “ f ω1 , as we wanted. We have shown that α is a well-defined map. The fact
that α is a minion homomorphism now follows from the fact that if ω1 “ ω2π , for some elements
ω1 , ω2 P C p then πω1 “ π ˝ πω2 .

     We define C as the disjoint union p prime C p . A straight-forward corollary of last lemma is the
                                             Ů

following.

Corollary 9.4. Let M be a minion. Then M contains a cyclic element of each prime arity p if and only if
C Ñ M.

9.5.1   Cyclic Polymorphisms: Interpreting the Grid

The following interpretation I that induces a global structure which is finitely equivalent to Γ. We
note that this interpretation is completely analogous to Interpretation 8, defined over C .

Interpretation 8. The ΣΓ -interpretation I over C is given by

U I “ C p3q,
      !        ˇ                )
OI “ ω P C p3q ˇ ωp1q “ ωp2q “ H ,            and         I
                                                         ΠO,1 “ id,
               ˇ


and, for each i P r2s,
                                                         #
        !             ˇ           )                          p1, 2, 3, 3q for j “ 1,
EiI “       ω P C p4q ˇ |ωp3q| “ 1 ,   and   ΠIEi ,j “
                      ˇ
                                                             p1, 2, i, 3q for j “ 2.
                                                                                               Ů
Given a prime number p we define I p as the restriction I |C p . Then we have that SI “            p prime SI p .


Claim 1: The structure SI induced by I is finitely equivalent to Γ. This follows similarly to
Claim 1 in Section 9.4.1. Given a number m P N, we define Γm to be the substructure of Γ induced
on the elements pn, oq P N2 satisfying n ` o ď m. Observe that Γ is finitely equivalent to the disjoint
union iPN Γi , and that Γi Ñ Γ j for each pair i ď j. We prove that Γ p`2 is finitely equivalent to SI p
       Ů


                                                         54
for each prime number p. Observe that this proves the claim. We define suitable homomorphisms.
Let F : SI p Ñ Γ p`2 be the map ω ÞÑ p|ωp1q| ` 1, |ωp2q| ` 1q. To see that F is well defined, observe
that the relation „ p preserves the size of sets. That is, if ω1 „ p ω2 for some ω1 , ω2 P C p , then
|ω1 piq| “ |ω2 piq| for all i. The fact that F is indeed a homomorphism follows from the definition of
S Ii .
       Now let H : Γ p`2 Ñ SI p be the map given by pm, nq ÞÑ ωm,n , where ωm,n P C p p3q is defined as
pXm , Yn , Z p zpXm Y Yn qq, where Xm “ t0, . . . , m ´ 1u and Yn “ tp ´ n ` 1, . . . p ´ 1u. Observe that
for m “ n “ 1 we have Xm “ Yn “ H. Hence, Hp1, 1q P OSI p . To see that H is a homomorphism we
need to prove that H preserves E1 and E2 . We show the statement for E1 , the other case is analogous.
                                                                   SI                                Γ
In other words, we need to prove that pωm,n , ωm`1,n q P E1 p for all ppm, nq, pm ` 1, nqq P E1 p`2 .
Consider the element ω “ pXm , Yn , tmu, Z p zpXm Y Yn Y tmuqq. Then we have that ω P E1I , and

                                             ΠI                     ΠI
                                  ω m,n “ ω E1 ,1 ,    ω m`1,n “ ω E1 ,2 ,

as we wanted to prove. This completes the proof of the claim.

We define a description D so that I is internal at arity 5 w.r.t. D .

Description 7. The description D Ď 2C consists of the predicates
     !          ˇ          )
D0 “ ω P C p2q ˇ ωp1q “ H ,
                ˇ
     !          ˇ          )
D1 “ ω P C p2q ˇ |ωp1q| “ 1 ,
                ˇ
      !          ˇ              )
Dă “ ω P C p3q ˇ |ωp1q| ă |ωp2q| ,
                 ˇ
      !          ˇ                                      )
D˜ “ ω P C p3q ˇ |ωp2q| “ n|ωp1q| for some integer n ě 0 .
                 ˇ

We also consider the auxiliary predicate
      !          ˇ               )
D“ “ ω P C p3q ˇ |ωp1q| “ |ωp2q| .
                 ˇ

   As in Section 9.4, we warn the reader again that we deal with two nested equivalence relations
from now on: An element xωy P C {D is a „D -class of some ω P C , which is in turn a „ p -class of an
element ω P C p for some prime p.

As in the previous section about WNU polymorphisms, here the more involved part is show-
ing that I is internal with respect to D . Here the important step is showing that the predicate D1 is
internal, because it allows us to define unit increments. We can show that D1 is internal if D˜ is
internal, because the elements in D1 are precisely the classes of tuples ω where ωp1q is a set whose
size divides the size of ωp2q (here it is crucial that we are dealing with cyclic elements of prime
arity). To speak about division, we need to speak about equality, so the most important part is
proving that D“ is internal, as shown in Claim 4. The intuition is that, if we represent Z p in a circle
in the usual way, an element ω with ω P D“ selects two points in the circle, given by ωp1q “ tau
and ωp2q “ tbu, and we can think of the pair pa, bq as a “step”. Then the idea is that in C one can
return to a from b taking D -equivalent steps. We show that I is internal at arity 5 (w.r.t. D ) through
the following claims.

                                                      55
Claim 2: The predicates U I , OI , E1I and E2I are all D -stable. This is a routine check.

Claim 3: The predicate OI is internal at arity 5. Indeed, the following formula is an internal
definition of OI :
                                    ϕO pxq ” x “ xp3,3,3q .


Claim 4: Let p be a prime number. Then the following predicate is an internal reference to D“ :

                                                            ϕ“,p pxq ” x “ xp2,1,3q

if p “ 2, and
                                                            ˜                                                     ¸
                               4                5
                                                                 p1,2,3,3q        p3,1,2,3q        p2,3,1,3q
                                                                                                                      ľ
              ϕ“,p pxq ”      D y D z
                           iPr p´2s
                                         i
                                             iPr p´3s
                                                        i       y1         “ x ^ y1         “ x ^ y p´2      “x
                          ˜                                                                                           ¸
                                          p1,2,3,3,3q    p3,3,1,2,3q         p1,2,3,4,4q           p1,2,4,3,4q
                               ľ
                                         zi           “ zi           ^ yi “ zi           ^ yi`1 “ zi
                              iPr p´3s

if p ą 2. Let us show that ϕ“,p pxq is an internal reference. The case p “ 2 is straightforward.
We assume that p ě 3. Suppose that C {D |ù ϕ“,p pxωx yq with xωyi y as the witness for yi for
each i P rp ´ 2s and xωzi y as the witness for zi for each i P rp ´ 3s. We repeat the intuition
given before this chain of claims. The idea is that ωx fixes a step inside some cyclic group. I.e.,
ωx “ ptau, tbu, Z p zta, buq. Then, up to equivalence in C {D , each element ωyi is of the form
ptau, tbu, tci u, Zq zta, b, cuq, where ci`1 “ ci ` b ´ a, and c1 “ 2b ´ a. Then the idea is that at the end
we have come full circle, so to say, and obtain c p´2 “ 2a ´ b. Now we proceed with the formal
argument.
     First, we show that |ωx p1q| “ |ωx p2q|. Suppose that |ωx p1q| ă |ωx p2q| for a contradiction (the
reverse inequality can be dealt with analogously). We prove that |ωyi p1q| ă |ωyi p2q| ă |ωyi p3q| for
all i P rp ´ 2s by induction on i. For i “ 1, we have that ωy1 p1,2,3,3q „D ωx , and ωy1 p3,1,2,3q „D ωx , so
necessarily |ωy1 p1q| ă |ωy1 p2q| ă |ωy1 p3q|. Now let i ą 1 and suppose that

                                              |ωyi´1 p1q| ă |ωyi´1 p2q| ă |ωyi´1 p3q|.

We have that ωyi´1 „D ωzi´1 p1,2,3,4,4q , so

                                              |ωzi´1 p1q| ă |ωzi´1 p2q| ă |ωzi´1 p3q|.

Additionally, ωzi´1 p1,2,3,3,3q „D ωzi´1 p3,3,1,2,3q , so

                                                        |ωzi´1 p3q| ă |ωzi´1 p4q|.

Finally, ωyi „D ωzi´1 p1,2,4,3,4q , so we can conclude that

                                                    |ωyi p1q| ă |ωyi p2q| ă |ωyi p3q|,

as we wanted to show. We have shown that

                                             |ωy p´2 p1q| ă |ωy p´2 p2q| ă |ωy p´2 p3q|.

                                                                        56
However, ωx „D ωy p´2 p2,3,1,3q implies that

                                                 |ωy p´2 p3q| ă |ωy p´2 p1q|,

a contradiction. Hence, it must be that |ωx p1q| “ |ωx p2q| to begin with.

Claim 5: Let p be a prime, and let ω P C p p3q be such that |ωp1q| “ |ωp2q| “ 1. Then C |ù ϕ“,p pωq.
Suppose that p “ 2. Then ω „ p pt0u, t1u, Hq „ p pt1u, t0u, Hq, proves the statement. Suppose that
p ě 3. Without loss of generality we can assume that ω “ pt0u, tmu, Z p zt0, muq for some m P Z p .
We find witnesses ωyi , ωzi , for every variable yi , zi . Given i P rp ´ 2s we define

                           ωyi “ t0u, tmu, tpi ` 1qmu, Z p zt0, m, pi ` 1qmu .
                                `                                           ˘


Given i P rp ´ 3s, we define

                ωzi “ t0u, tmu, tpi ` 1qmu, tpi ` 2qmu, Z p zt0, m, pi ` 1qm, pi ` 2qmu .
                     `                                                                 ˘


Now it is routine to check that our choice of representatives satisfies ϕ“,p pωq.

Claim 6: Let p be a prime, and let m ě 0 be an integer. Then the following is an internal
reference to D˜ :
                                       ˜                         ¸
                                    3             4
                                                             p2,2,2q    p2,1,2q
                  ϕ˜,p,m pxq ”     D        yi    Dz y   j   1       “ y1       ^ x “ ym`1       ^
                                 iPrm`1s         jPrms
                               ˜                                                                         ¸
                                            p1,2,3,3q            p1,2,2,3q                   p1,3,2,3q
                                   ľ
                                           zi            “ yi ^ zi           “ yi`1 ^ ϕ“,p pzi           q .
                                   iPrms


Suppose that C {D |ù ϕ˜,p,m pxωyq, with xωyi y and xωzi y as witnesses for each variable yi , zi .
We prove that ω P D˜ . In order to show this, we prove by induction on i that ωyi P D˜
for each i P rm ` 1s. This proves the result because ω „D ωym`1 . For i “ 1, we have that
ωy1 p2,2,2q „D ωy1 p2,1,2q . Given that the first element must belong to D0 , so does the second one, and
we obtain that ωy1 p2q “ H. Hence ωy1 P D˜ vacuously. Now let i ą 1 and assume that |ωyi p1q|
divides |ωyi p2q|. Using that ωyi „D ωzi p1,2,3,3q , we obtain that |ωzi p1q| divides |ωzi p2q|. We also have
that |ωzi p1q| “ |ωzi p3q| using that ϕ“,p pxq is an internal reference to D“ . Hence |ωzi p1q| divides
|ωzi p2q| ` |ωzi p3q|. Finally, using that ωyi`1 „D ωzi p1,2,2,3q , we obtain that ωyi`1 belongs to D˜ , as we
wanted to prove. This shows the claim.

Claim 7: Let p be a prime and let 0 ď m ď p ´ 1 be an integer. Let ω p,m P C p p3q be defined
as pt0u, t1, . . . , mu, tm ` 1, . . . , p ´ 1uq. Then C |ù ϕ˜,p,m pω p,m q. We show the claim by defining
suitable witnesses for each variable in ϕ˜,p,m . For each i P rm ` 1s we define ωyi “ ω p,i´1 , and for
each i P rms we define

                            ωzi “ pt0u, t1, . . . , i ´ 1u, tiu, ti ` 1, . . . , p ´ 1uq.

Now it is routine to check that the elements ωyi , ωzi are witnesses for the variables yi , zi . The key
observation is that ωzi p1,3,2,3q satisfies ϕ“,p pxq on C for all i P rms by Claim 5.

                                                               57
Claim 8: The predicate D1 is internal at arity 5. We apply Lemma 6.1. Let ω p P C p be the element
pt0u, Z p zt0uq. We define an internal reference to D1 that is satisfied by ω p . This interpretation is the
following.                                    ´                          ¯
                                 ϕ1,p pxq ” D3 y y “ xp1,2q ^ ϕ˜,p,p´1 pyq .

Let us show that ϕ1,p is an internal reference to D1 . Suppose that C {D |ù ϕ1,p pxωx yq with xωy y as a
witness for y. Observe that ωy p3q must be the empty set. Indeed, we have that ωy „D ωx p1,2q , so
ωy p2,2,1q „D ωx p2,2q , and ωx p2,2q P D0 , so ωy p2,2,1q P D0 as well. Additionally, the formula ϕ˜,p,p´1 pxq
is an internal reference to D˜ , so |ωy p1q| must divide |ωy p2q|. Both these numbers must add up to
some prime q, so the only possibility is that |ωy p1q| “ 1 and |ωy p2q| “ q ´ 1. This means that yp1,2,2q
belongs to D1 . Finally, using again that ωy „D ωx p1,2q , we obtain again that x belongs to D1 , as we
wanted to prove.
    Now, in order to see that ω p satisfies ϕ1,p pxq on C , just consider ωy as a witness for y, where ωy
is the tuple pt0u, Z p zt0u, Hq P C p , and apply the previous claim.

Claim 9: Let i P r2s. Then the predicate EiI is internal at arity 5. We apply Lemma 6.1, as
usual. Let ω P EiI be such that ω P C p for a prime p. Then, using the previous claim we obtain that

                                          ϕEi ,p pxq ” ϕ1,p pxp2,2,1,2q q

is an internal reference to EiI and is satisfied by ω on C .

Claim 10: The predicate U I is internal at arity 5. Trivially, the following is an internal definition of
UI :
                                          ϕU pxq ” x “ x.




Proof of Theorem 1.2-(1)(i). Observe that 3 ě arpU I q and 3 ě arpPq for all P P D . The claims in this
section show that SI is finitely equivalent to Γ, and I is internal at arity 5 w.r.t. D . Hence, the result
follows from Theorem 8.1 together with Proposition 4.2.

9.5.2   Cyclic Polymorphisms: Interpreting Triangular Slices

The following interpretation I over C induces structures SI p that are homomorphically equivalent
to ∇ p`2 for each prime number p, where I p “ I |C p .

Interpretation 9. The Σ∇ -interpretation I over C is defined as in Interpretation 8, by adding
      !           ˇ         )
W I “ ω P C p3q ˇ ωp3q “ H , and ΠW,1    I
                                             “ id .
                  ˇ



Claim 1: For each prime p, the structures ∇ p`2 and SI p are homomorphically equivalent. The
maps defined in Claim 1 in Section 9.5.1 are homomorphisms in both directions between ∇ p`2 and



                                                       58
SI p .

    We define the description D Ď 2C as in Description 7. The interpretation I is internal at arity 5
(w.r.t. D ). The following claim together with the claims from Section 9.5.1 prove the statement.

Claim 2: The predicate W I is internal at arity 5. Clearly W I is D -stable. Additionally, the
following is an internal definition of W I :

                                      ϕW pxq ” xp1,1,2q “ xp1,1,1q .




Proof of items (1)(ii-iv) of theorem 1.2. Observe that 3 ě arpU I q and 3 ě arpPq for all P P D . The
claims in this section and the previous one show that for each prime number p, the structure SI p
is homomorphically equivalent to ∇ p`2 , where I p “ I |C p , and I is internal at arity 5 w.r.t. the
description D . Then the result follows from Proposition 5.3 together with Theorem 8.2. It is enough
to consider templates of the form pK 53 , Bq in the statement.


10       Discussion
This work represents a step towards understanding the relationship between search and decision
in promise constraint satisfaction. It is important to insist that the relationship between our results,
the Search vs Decision question for PCSPs, and other related questions in the literature [17, 21] is
nuanced. While we prove that rounding the output of the algorithms BLP, AIP, and BLP ` AIP is
hard (in the TFNP sense), it is still possible that, for instance, whenever BLP solves the decision
version of PCSPpA, Bq, another linear programming relaxation, such as the ones introduced in [17],
can be used to solve the search variant of PCSPpA, Bq. A counterintuitive possibility is that even
if both algorithms BLP and BLP ` AIP cannot be used for search separately, it could happen that
BLP ` AIP could be adapted for search in the templates where decision is solvable via BLP. In other
words, it could be the case that sPCSPBLP`AIP pA, Bq is tractable whenever BLP solves PCSPpA, Bq.

The Search vs Decision Question We have shown that, conditional to TFNP ̸Ď FP, not every
efficient decision algorithm for PCSPpA, Bq can be turned into an efficient decision algorithm for
sPCSPpA, Bq that accepts the same instances. So in this particular sense search PCSPs are more
difficult to solve than decision PCSPs, although this is not a complexity-theoretic separation. We
remark that TFNP ̸Ď FP is the weakest assumption under which these questions make sense. If Q
is a polynomial-time algorithm solving PCSPpA, Bq, then sPCSPQ pA, Bq can be seen as a problem
in TFNP if one considers rejections by Q as proper search certificates. Hence, sPCSPQ pA, Bq can be
solved in polynomial time if TFNP Ď FP.
    We have considered the problem of obtaining search algorithms from efficient decision al-
gorithms, but standing above is the open question of whether, in the finite-template setting,
sPCSPpA, Bq has a polynomial-time solution whenever PCSPpA, Bq does. We do not consider our
results strong evidence to the contrary: There is some reason to believe that, say, the third level of
the BLP ` AIP hierarchy [28] could be used to solve sPCSPpA, Bq for all templates used to prove

                                                   59
Theorems 3.1 to 3.3. We sketch the argument here. Given Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu, those res-
ults show hardness of sPCSPQ pA, Bq by proving that sPMC N pMQ , N q is hard, where N is some
manifold minion built on top of a quotient of MQ . If, instead, we want to prove the stronger result
that sPCSPpA, Bq is hard, then we need to show that sPMC N pP, N q is hard, where P denotes the
minion of projections. The reason our proof fails to show this result is that the minor conditions ΦG
that arise in our patterns do not hold in P. In fact, they can be ruled out by a 3-consistency check.
Hence, there could be an efficient method of obtaining search certificates for minor conditions that
are both accepted by Q and 3-consistency in a way that does not involve solving the tiling problem
encoded in N .
    We further observe that a separation of search and decision PCSPs implies a non-dichotomy for
search PCSPs unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses to its first level.

Theorem 10.1. Let pA, Bq be a finite template for which PCSPpA, Bq has a polynomial-time solution.
Suppose that NP‰ coNP. Then sPCSPpA, Bq is not FNP-hard. In particular, if sPCSPpA, Bq has no
polynomial-time solution, then it must be FNP-intermediate.

Proof. Let Q be a polynomial-time algorithm solving PCSPpA, Bq. Then, by our previous reasoning,
sPCSPQ pA, Bq P TFNP. The problem sPCSPpA, Bq is trivially reducible to sPCSPQ pA, Bq. We note
that if we see sPCSPQ pA, Bq as a total problem, then this reduction must be seen as a general-
ized many-one reduction, as it may need to map some answers in sPCSPQ pA, Bq to rejections in
sPCSPpA, Bq. It is known [55, Theorem 2.1] that, unless NP “ coNP, there is not a problem in
TFNP that is FNP-hard under generalized many-one reductions 10 . Hence sPCSPpA, Bq cannot be
FNP-hard.

Small Templates Our techniques produce templates pA, Bq where B can grow quite large. To
construct B we start with a set of tiles T that exhibits some interesting behavior. For instance, if
we drop the origin constraint, it is known that the smallest aperiodic tile set has 11 elements [46].
Or alternatively, we start with a problem Π P TFNP, translate it into a problem about a particular
Turing machine, and encode this machine in a tile set T. Then, construct an manifold minion N
using T and a suitable quotient of an interesting minion M . Finally, B is obtained as some free
structure of N , although this last step does not have a significant impact on B’s size. Therefore it
seems safe to assume that our techniques have little to say about templates where the domains of
both A and B are small. For instance, it is still possible that AIP, BLP, and BLP ` AIP can always
be adapted to solve search in Boolean PCSPs.
    A somewhat unsatisfactory aspect of our reductions is that they are oblivious to the structure
inside TFNP. For example, can we obtain an explicit and relatively small template pA, Bq such that
BLP solves PCSPpA, Bq and the rounding problem sPCSPBLP pA, Bq is PPAD-hard (i.e., as hard as
the problem of computing Nash equilibria [33])? What can we say about the templates pA, Bq for
which sPCSPBLP pA, Bq is PPAD-hard?

Infinitely Many Symmetric Polymorphisms It is known that the algorithm BLP ` AIP solves
(the decision variant of) PCSPpA, Bq whenever PolpA, Bq contains symmetric polymorphisms of
infinitely many arities. It is not known, however, whether sPCSPpA, Bq is also tractable for these
  10 This result is often misquoted as referring only to many-one reductions, but notice that in that case the statement is

vacuous: a non-total search problem cannot be reduced to a total problem via many-one reductions.


                                                           60
templates [17, 21, 50]. Of course, a negative answer would imply a separation between search and
decision for PCSPs.?One open possibility is that running the BLP algorithm on a different ring other
than Q, such as Zr 2s, is enough to obtain an output that can be rounded in polynomial time and
to solve sPCSPpA, Bq. The intuitive reason for this is that those rings avoid “rounding boundaries”,
which seemed to be the obstacle to widely-applicable rounding procedures. An insight from our
results is that this difficulty is intrinsic: when we prove TFNP-hardness, the tiling problems are
precisely encoded on the rounding boundaries of the corresponding PCSPs (for instance, on the
values of the form 2n13m in Section 9.2.2). If these boundaries are the root reason the rounding
problems are difficult, then avoiding them may be key for obtaining efficient search algorithms.
    The work [17] poses a question, later repeated in [21] for the Boolean setting, whose affirmative
answer would yield efficient search algorithms for all templates with infinitely many symmetric
polymorphisms. This question is whether these templates must also contain an infinite consistent
family of so-called “regional-periodic” polymorphisms. We remark that our results do not rule out
this possibility, but they restrict the ways in which it might hold. For example, let pA, Bq be a finite
template satisfying that BLP solves PCSPpA, Bq but all homomorphisms MBLP Ñ PolpA, Bq are
non-computable, as in Theorem 3.2. Then the minion PolpA, Bq cannot contain a consistent family
of nicely-behaved symmetric polymorphisms of all (emphasis on the word all) arities, because they
would entail a computable homomorphism MBLP Ñ PolpA, Bq. Still, it could be the case that one
of these families exists, but only containing polymorphisms of infinitely many arities.

Other Algorithms A natural next step in light of our results is to study other PCSP algorithms
from the same perspective. An obstacle is that we do not know of explicit minion characterizations
for k-consistency for k ě 3 and other algorithmic hierarchies [28] for any level after the second.
Two cases where relatively tame minion characterizations can be obtained are the SDP algorithm
[20, 28], named after the semi-definite programming relaxation [63], and extensions of singleton arc-
consistency [34] such as the CLAP algorithm, introduced in [27]. Out of these, SDP is the case most
similar to the relaxations studied in this paper. In the minion MSDP , introduced independently
in [20, 28], n-ary elements are n-tuples of finitely-supported orthogonal vectors in RN that add-
up to e1 “ p1, 0, . . . , 0, . . . q. Minoring is defined by means of addition, as in the case of MAIP
and MBLP . We outline some intuition indicating that our methods may be difficult to apply to
MSDP . An observation is that our reductions exploit the lack of symmetry of the minions MQ for
Q P tAIP, BLP, BLP ` AIPu: an interpretation I over MQ that is internal (w.r.t. some description)
must, in particular, be invariant under the endomorphisms of MQ . This lack of symmetry also
seems necessary to obtain internal references to interesting predicates. In the cases of MAIP and
MBLP the only endomorphisms are the identity maps. However, any isometry of RN that fixes
the origin and e1 induces an endomorphism of MSDP , making this minion extremely symmetric
compared to the ones studied in this paper. This theme of lack of symmetry leading to hardness is
recurrent in the theory of constraint satisfaction.

Other Meta-Problems We point out several meta-problems whose decidability is still open. All of
these are well known in the area, but are most often posed as quests for characterizations. Maybe an
equally promising direction would be to consider them as invitations to prove the absence of effective
characterizations. We believe that resolving those questions could shed light on the ways in which
PCSPs may be too expressive, or pinpoint some structure that aids in the further development of


                                                  61
the theory.
     The meta-problems for virtually all PCSP algorithms referred to in this paper other than
AIP, BLP, BLP ` AIP remain open. The exception is arc-consistency, but tractability through this
algorithm is equivalent to pp-constructability from a fixed tractable finite-template CSP (Horn
3-SAT) which is decidable [11]. An important case is the one of k-consistency. Both [4] and [29]
have found some sufficient conditions implying that PCSPpA, Bq has linear width (and hence is
not solved by any fixed level of the local consistency algorithm), but we do not know of any
non-trivial necessary conditions. In this context, is also worth going back to the CSP setting.
There, the meta-problems for BLP, k-consistency, k-Sherali Adams, are decidable ([16], [8], and
[3, 5] respectively) and the relationship between those algorithms is well understood. However, for
finite-template CSPs we do not have a good understanding of AIP and its derived algorithms (e.g.,
BLP ` AIP, cohomological k-consistency [30], the BLP ` AIP hierarchy [28], CLAP [27]), and the
related meta-problems are open.
     Other than meta-problems related to algorithms, an important open question is whether we
can recognize the cases where PCSPpA, Bq is finitely tractable [2, 9], meaning that there is a finite
structure C such that A Ñ C Ñ B and CSPpCq can be solved in polynomial time. In [47] it has been
shown that the size of the smallest witness C of finite tractability can grow quite large compared
to A, B (if P‰ NP), suggesting that characterizing this phenomenon may be difficult. In the same
direction, another open-problem is the one of recognizing the cases where PCSPpA, Bq is solvable
in first-order logic. Recently [56] showed that this occurs precisely when A Ñ C Ñ B for some
finite C such that CSPpCq is definable in first-order logic. The cases where CSPpCq is definable in
first-order logic are decidable [53], but in [56] there is no obvious bound on the size of C in terms of
pA, Bq, suggesting that this also may be a difficult meta-question.
     Finally, the different notions of reductions between PCSPs are another source of interesting
problems. Reductions between finite-template PCSPs by means of pp-constructions are charac-
terized by the existence of a homomorphism between the corresponding polymorphism minions
[11], which can be shown to be a decidable condition. However, these reductions are provably not
enough to obtain all NP-hard finite-template PCSPs from, say, 3-SAT (see the discussion in [50]).
Other proposed reductions are the ones given by so-called pd, rq-homomorphisms between minions
[14], and the more general local consistency reductions [32]. These give rise to natural meta-problems:
Given finite templates pA, Bq, pA1 , B1 q can we decide (1) whether there is a pd, rq-homomorphism
from PolpA1 , B1 q to PolpA, Bq for any d, r P N? (2) whether PCSPpA, Bq reduces to PCSPpA1 , B1 q via
the k-consistency reduction for any k P N? Another related, and perhaps more accessible question
is: given a finite template pA, Bq, can we decide whether PolpA, Bq has bounded essential arity? By
this we mean that there is some d P N such that every polymorphism f P PolpA, Bq depends on at
most d variables [11]. This implies the existence of a (strong version of a) pd, 1q-homomorphism
to the minion of projections P, and is a condition that has been used to prove hardness of some
PCSPs (e.g., [6]).

Acknowledgements
I am especially grateful to Lorenzo Ciardo for his comments on the manuscript, and our discussions
on the minions characterizing CLAP and singleton arc-consistency. When I was trying to encode
tiling problems in MBLP , he also suggested that MAIP could possibly be an easier target, and that


                                                  62
approach ultimately worked. I thank Andrei Krokhin for our later discussions on the literature
surrounding the search-vs-decision question for PCSPs. I am also thankful to Silvia Butti, Lorenzo
Ciardo, Tamio-Vesa Nakajima, and Standa Živný for our early discussions on rounding algorithms.
I wish to thank Paul Goldberg for discussing with me the status of the class TFNP1 , and other
notions related to TFNP. Thanks should also go to Antoine Mottet for pointing out to me that the
class of templates admitting symmetric polymorphisms of all arities was not known to be decidable,
and discussing this and other meta-questions with me. Finally, I wish to thank the CWC 2024
attendees for their feedback on a talk presenting this work.


References
 [1] Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational complexity: a modern approach. Cambridge University
     Press, 2009.
 [2] Kristina Asimi and Libor Barto. Finitely tractable promise constraint satisfaction problems. In 46th
     International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2021), pages 11–1. Schloss
     Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
 [3] Albert Atserias, Andrei Bulatov, and Anuj Dawar. Affine systems of equations and counting infinitary
     logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 410(18):1666–1683, 2009.
 [4] Albert Atserias and Vı́ctor Dalmau. Promise constraint satisfaction and width. In Proc. 2022 ACM-
     SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA’22), pages 1129–1153, 2022. arXiv:2107.05886, doi:
     10.1137/1.9781611977073.48.
 [5] Albert Atserias and Elitza Maneva. Sherali-adams relaxations and indistinguishability in counting
     logics. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, pages 367–379, 2012.
 [6] Per Austrin, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Johan Håstad. (2+ε)-sat is np-hard. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     46(5):1554–1573, 2017.
 [7] Demian Banakh and Marcin Kozik. Injective hardness condition for pcsps. In Proceedings of the 39th
     Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 1–10, 2024.
 [8] Libor Barto. The collapse of the bounded width hierarchy. Journal of Logic and Computation, 26(3):923–943,
     2014.
 [9] Libor Barto. Promises make finite (constraint satisfaction) problems infinitary. In 2019 34th Annual
     ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS), pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019.
[10] Libor Barto, Diego Battistelli, and Kevin M. Berg. Symmetric Promise Constraint Satisfaction Problems:
     Beyond the Boolean Case. In Proc. 38th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science
     (STACS’21), volume 187 of LIPIcs, pages 10:1–10:16. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
     2021. arXiv:2010.04623, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2021.10.
[11] Libor Barto, Jakub Bulı́n, Andrei A. Krokhin, and Jakub Opršal. Algebraic approach to promise
     constraint satisfaction. J. ACM, 68(4):28:1–28:66, 2021. arXiv:1811.00970, doi:10.1145/3457606.
[12] Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Constraint satisfaction problems of bounded width. In 2009 50th Annual
     IEEE symposium on foundations of computer science, pages 595–603. IEEE, 2009.
[13] Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Absorbing subalgebras, cyclic terms, and the constraint satisfaction
     problem. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 8, 2012.




                                                       63
[14] Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Combinatorial Gap Theorem and Reductions between Promise CSPs.
     In Proc. 2022 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA’22), pages 1204–1220, 2022. arXiv:
     2107.09423, doi:10.1137/1.9781611977073.50.
[15] Libor Barto, Andrei Krokhin, and Ross Willard. Polymorphisms, and how to use them, 2017.
[16] Zarathustra Brady. Notes on csps and polymorphisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07383, 2022.
[17] Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. An algorithmic blend of lps and ring equations for
     promise csps. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages
     436–455. SIAM, 2019.
[18] Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. Promise Constraint Satisfaction: Algebraic Structure
     and a Symmetric Boolean Dichotomy. SIAM J. Comput., 50(6):1663–1700, 2021. arXiv:1704.01937,
     doi:10.1137/19M128212X.
[19] Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Sai Sandeep. Conditional dichotomy of boolean
     ordered promise csps. TheoretiCS, 2, 2023.
[20] Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Sai Sandeep. SDPs and robust satisfiability of promise
     CSP. In Proc. 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC’23), pages 609–622. ACM,
     2023. arXiv:2211.08373, doi:10.1145/3564246.3585180.
[21] Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. The power of
     the combined basic LP and affine relaxation for promise CSPs. SIAM J. Comput., 49:1232–1248, 2020.
     arXiv:1907.04383, doi:10.1137/20M1312745.
[22] Alex Brandts, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živnỳ. The complexity of promise sat on non-boolean
     domains. ACM Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 13(4):1–20, 2021.
[23] Glen E Bredon. Sheaf theory, volume 170. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[24] Harry Buhrman, Lance Fortnow, Michal Kouckỳ, John D Rogers, and Nikolay Vereshchagin. Does the
     polynomial hierarchy collapse if onto functions are invertible? Theory of Computing Systems, 46:143–156,
     2010.
[25] Andrei A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In Proc. 58th Annual IEEE Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’17), pages 319–330, 2017. arXiv:1703.03021, doi:10.1109/
     FOCS.2017.37.
[26] Hubie Chen and Benoit Larose. Asking the metaquestions in constraint tractability. ACM Transactions
     on Computation Theory (TOCT), 9(3):1–27, 2017.
[27] Lorenzo Ciardo and Stanislav Živný. CLAP: A new algorithm for promise CSPs. SIAM J. Comput.,
     52(1):1–37, 2023. arXiv:2107.05018, doi:10.1137/22M1476435.
[28] Lorenzo Ciardo and Stanislav Živný. Hierarchies of minion tests for PCSPs through tensors. In Proc.
     2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA’23), pages 568–580, 2023. arXiv:2207.02277,
     doi:10.1137/1.9781611977554.ch25.
[29] Lorenzo Ciardo and Stanislav Živnỳ. The periodic structure of local consistency. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2406.19685, 2024.
[30] Adam Ó Conghaile. Cohomology in constraint satisfaction and structure isomorphism. In 47th
     International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2022), pages 75–1.
     Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.
[31] Nigel Cutland. Computability: An introduction to recursive function theory. Cambridge university press,
     1980.


                                                     64
[32] Vı́ctor Dalmau and Jakub Opršal. Local consistency as a reduction between constraint satisfaction
     problems. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages
     1–15, 2024.
[33] Constantinos Daskalakis, Paul W Goldberg, and Christos H Papadimitriou. The complexity of comput-
     ing a nash equilibrium. Communications of the ACM, 52(2):89–97, 2009.
[34] Romuald Debruyne and Christian Bessière. Some practicable filtering techniques for the constraint
     satisfaction problem. In IJCAI (1), pages 412–417. Morgan Kaufmann, 1997. URL: http://dblp.
     uni-trier.de/db/conf/ijcai/ijcai97.html#DebruyneB97.
[35] Shimon Even, Alan L Selman, and Yacov Yacobi. The complexity of promise problems with applications
     to public-key cryptography. Information and control, 61(2):159–173, 1984.
[36] Miron Ficak, Marcin Kozik, Miroslav Olsák, and Szymon Stankiewicz. Dichotomy for symmetric
     boolean pcsps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12424, 2019.
[37] Miron Ficak, Marcin Kozik, Miroslav Olšák, and Szymon Stankiewicz. Dichotomy for Symmetric
     Boolean PCSPs. In Proc. 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (IC-
     ALP’19), volume 132, pages 57:1–57:12. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
     arXiv:1904.12424, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.57.
[38] Jean H Gallier. Logic for computer science: foundations of automatic theorem proving. Courier Dover
     Publications, 2015.
[39] Eran Gat and Shafi Goldwasser. Probabilistic search algorithms with unique answers and their crypto-
     graphic applications. In Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), volume 18, pages
     1–3, 2011.
[40] Paul W Goldberg and Christos H Papadimitriou. Tfnp: an update. In International Conference on
     Algorithms and Complexity, pages 3–9. Springer, 2017.
[41] Oded Goldreich. On promise problems: A survey. In Theoretical Computer Science: Essays in Memory of
     Shimon Even, pages 254–290. Springer, 2006.
[42] Mika Göös, Alexandros Hollender, Siddhartha Jain, Gilbert Maystre, William Pires, Robert Robere, and
     Ran Tao. Separations in proof complexity and tfnp. Journal of the ACM, 71(4):1–45, 2024.
[43] William Hanf. Nonrecursive tilings of the plane. i. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 39(2):283–285, 1974.
[44] John E Hopcroft and Jeffrey D Ullman. Formal languages and their relation to automata. Addison-Wesley
     Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1969.
[45] Pavel Hubácek, Moni Naor, and Eylon Yogev. The journey from np to tfnp hardness. In 8th Innovations
     in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2017), pages 60–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2017.
[46] Emmanuel Jeandel and Michael Rao. An aperiodic set of 11 wang tiles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06492,
     2015.
[47] Alexandr Kazda, Peter Mayr, and Dmitriy Zhuk. Small promise csps that reduce to large csps. Logical
     Methods in Computer Science, 18, 2022.
[48] Marcin Kozik, Andrei Krokhin, Matt Valeriote, and Ross Willard. Characterizations of several maltsev
     conditions. Algebra universalis, 73(3):205–224, 2015.
[49] Andrei Krokhin, Andrei Bulatov, and Peter Jeavons. The complexity of constraint satisfaction: an
     algebraic approach. Structural Theory of Automata, Semigroups, and Universal Algebra: Proceedings of
     the NATO Advanced Study Institute on Structural Theory of Automata, Semigroups and Universal Algebra
     Montreal, Quebec, Canada 7–18 July 2003, pages 181–213, 2005.


                                                     65
[50] Andrei Krokhin and Jakub Opršal. An invitation to the promise constraint satisfaction problem. ACM
     SIGLOG News, 9(3):30–59, 2022.
[51] Andrei Krokhin, Jakub Opršal, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Živný. Topology and adjunction in
     promise constraint satisfaction. SIAM J. Comput., 52(1):37–79, 2023. arXiv:2003.11351, doi:10.1137/
     20M1378223.
[52] Richard E Ladner. On the structure of polynomial time reducibility. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
     22(1):155–171, 1975.
[53] Benoit Larose, Cynthia Loten, and Claude Tardif. A characterisation of first-order constraint satisfaction
     problems. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 3, 2007.
[54] Alberto Larrauri and Stanislav Živnỳ. Solving promise equations over monoids and groups. ACM
     Transactions on Computational Logic, 26(1):1–24, 2024.
[55] Nimrod Megiddo and Christos H Papadimitriou. On total functions, existence theorems and computa-
     tional complexity. Theoretical Computer Science, 81(2):317–324, 1991.
[56] Antoine Mottet. Promise and infinite-domain constraint satisfaction. In 32nd EACSL Annual Conference
     on Computer Science Logic (CSL 2024), pages 41–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
     2024.
[57] Antoine Mottet. Algebraic and algorithmic synergies between promise and infinite-domain csps. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2501.13740, 2025.
[58] Tamio-Vesa Nakajima and Stanislav Zivný. Boolean symmetric vs. functional PCSP dichotomy. In
     Proc. 38th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’23), 2023. doi:10.1109/
     LICS56636.2023.10175746.
[59] Tamio-Vesa Nakajima and Stanislav Živnỳ. On the complexity of symmetric vs. functional pcsps. ACM
     Transactions on Algorithms, 20(4):1–29, 2024.
[60] Christos H Papadimitriou. On the complexity of the parity argument and other inefficient proofs of
     existence. Journal of Computer and system Sciences, 48:498–532, 1994.
[61] Michael Pinsker, Jakub Rydval, Moritz Schöbi, and Christoph Spiess. Three meta-questions on infinite-
     domain constraint satisfaction problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06621, 2025.
[62] Nicholas Pippenger. Galois theory for minors of finite functions. Discrete Mathematics, 254(1-3):405–419,
     2002.
[63] Prasad Raghavendra. Approximating np-hard problems efficient algorithms and their limits. University of
     Washington, 2009.
[64] Hao Wang. Dominoes and the aea case of the decision problem. Computation, Logic, Philosophy: A
     Collection of Essays, pages 218–245, 1990.
[65] Dmitriy Zhuk. A proof of the CSP dichotomy conjecture. J. ACM, 67(5):30:1–30:78, 2020. arXiv:
     1704.01914, doi:10.1145/3402029.




                                                      66
A     Proofs of Section 5
We assume familiarity with Turing machines and computability-related notions during this section.
We refer to e.g., [1] or [31]. We introduce some related notation below.
     A non-deterministic Turing machine M is a tuple pQ, Ω, ∆q, where (1) Q is a finite set of states,
containing an initial state q0 , an accepting state q` and a rejecting state q´ , where q` ‰ q´ , (2) Ω is a
finite alphabet containing a distinguished “blank” symbol ˝, and (3) ∆ Ď pQ ˆ Ωq ˆ pQ ˆ Ω ˆ tL, Ruq
is the transition relation. The machine M is deterministic if the transition function ∆ contains at
most one pair whose first element is pq, aq for each pq, aq P Q ˆ Ω. We adopt the convention that a
Turing machine M is executed on a single right-infinite tape, and the initial position of the head is
always the start of the tape. We say a Turing machine is immortal if it has an infinite run starting
from any finite input word.
     Let M “ pQ, Ω, ∆q be a (non-deterministic) Turing machine and # a fresh symbol. A configuration
of M is given by a pair pω, qq P pΩ Y t#uqZě0 ˆ pQ Y t#uqZě0 . The 0-th position of the configuration
symbolizes a blank spot to the left of the tape, which starts at position 1. Formally, (1) ω describes
the contents of M’s tape from left to right, starting with the symbol # which marks the extra position
before the leftmost end of the tape, and (2) q contains a state q P Q in a single entry and the # symbol
in all the others, denoting that the head of M is at the given position in state q. Given i P N (observe
here indices start at 1), the i-th local description of pω, qq is the pair ppωi´1 , ωi , ωi`1 q, pqi´1 , qi , qi`1 qq.
We denote by L M Ď pΩ Y t#uq3 ˆ pQ Y t#uq3 the set of local descriptions of (configurations of) M. If
pω, qq is a local restriction, we will often use the indices ´1, 0, 1 to access its elements, rather than
1, 2, 3. Hence, the sensible restrictions apply: # can only occupy the first position of ωt , and at most
one element in qt can be different from #.

A.1    Proof of Proposition 4.2-(2)
In order to prove the results from Section 5 we need some insights from the proof of Proposition 4.2-
(2) given in [64]. This work is in the context of the domino problem. In this problem we are given a
finite set of square tiles T of the same size where each side of each tile is colored, together with an
initial tile t0 . Our task is to decide whether it is possible to tile the infinite upper-right quadrant of
the plane using the tiles from T (each tile can be use infinitely many times) in such a way that t0 is
placed at the origin and any adjoining edges have the same color. Observe this problem can be
seen as a restriction of HompΓ, ¨q where we only consider instances T where each element in T is a
tuple t “ ptU , t D , t L , t R q, corresponding to the edge colors of the tile t, the relation E1T consists of the
pairs pt, t1 q such that t R “ t1L , and the relation E2T consists of the pairs pt, t1 q such that tU “ t1D . In
[64] this problem is shown to be undecidable, so by extension HompΓ, ¨q is undecidable as well.
     The proof in [64] is a reduction from the Halting Problem. The idea is that any (non-deterministic)
Turing Machine M can be encoded into a finite set of tiles TM in such a way that a tiling of the
upper-right quadrant of the plane corresponds to a non-halting execution of M starting from an
empty tape. The intuition behind this encoding is that the i-th row of a tiling should represent a
configuration of M (i.e., tape contents, head position, and machine state) at the i-th time step. This
is fairly straightforward, but we sketch a construction that is slightly simpler from the one in [64],
since we do not need to consider only “domino” tiles.
     Fix a Turing machine M “ pQ, Ω, ∆q. We a ΣΓ -structure T M as follows. We allow ourselves
to be slightly informal in the description of T M and leave some small gaps. Elements from TM

                                                         67
are tuples t “ pωt , qt , bt , ct q where pωt , qt q P L M is a local description of M, bt P t0, 1u is a bit that
equals 1 when t describes a local configuration to the right of M’s head, and ct P t0, 1u is a bit that
equals 1 when t is describes part of M’s initial configuration. Hence, qt “ p#, #, #q, when bt “ 1.
Similarly, when ct “ 1, only blank symbols ˝ and end-of-tape symbols # are allowed in ωt , and
the head of M can only be at the beginning of the tape. The relation O TM contains only the initial
tile pp#, ˝, ˝q, p#, q0 , #q, 0, 1q. Two elements pt, t1 q belong to E1TM if they are two consecutive local
descriptions of some configuration of M. More explicitly, the last two elements of ωt must equal
the first two elements of ωt1 , the last two elements of qt must equal the first two elements of qt1 , and
ct “ ct1 . If qt “ pq, #, #q, for some q P Q, then qt1 “ p#, #, #q and bt1 “ 1. The relation E2TM consists of
the pairs pt, t1 q that represent consistent local descriptions of two successive configurations of M.
We apply the natural rules: (1) ct1 “ 0, (2) if qt “ p#, #, #q then ωt “ ωt1 , and qt1 contains # in the
second position, and (3) if qt “ p#, q, #q for some q P Q, then t1 describes the evolution of t according
to some transition in ∆.
    Given our definition of T M and a homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T M , it is easy to see that there is
an infinite run of M starting from an empty tape which is given by a sequence of configurations
pω1 , q1 q, pω2 , q2 q, . . . such that the element Fpi, jq contains the j-th local description of pω1 , q1 q.
Conversely, given an infinite run of M starting from an empty tape it is straight-forward to describe
a homomorphism F : Γ Ñ T M . This shows Proposition 4.2-(2).

A.2    Proof of Proposition 4.2-(3)
The same proof from [43] essentially shows our result. This work is also in the context of the domino
problem. Their main result states that there are sets of domino tiles that can tile the whole plane
starting with a fixed tile at the origin, but satisfying that any such tiling must be non-computable.
In our setting, we only need to tile the upper-right quadrant of the plane and we consider more
general sets of tiles, other than domino tiles, but the proof from [43] can be easily adapted. The
starting point is the result that there exists a Turing machine M that does not halt for some input
words, but all those input words are non-computable. This is shown in [43] for Turing machines on
a two-way infinite tape, rather than just a semi-infinite tape as in our setting, but it is known that
both models are equivalent. This can be seen, for example, by “folding” a two-way infinite tape
into a semi-infinite tape as in [44]. Then Proposition 4.2-(3) follows from considering a ΣΓ -structure
T M derived from M as in Section A.1, modified suitably so that arbitrary input words are allowed
in the initial configuration.

A.3    Proof of Proposition 5.3
We build on the ideas from Section A.1 again. The idea is to build a Σ∇ -structure S M starting from
a Turing machine M in such a way that homomorphisms F : ∇n Ñ S M precisely encode accepting
runs of M which start from the empty input, take at most n-steps, and where the head of M is
placed left to the pn ´ i ` 1q-th position at the i-th step. This way, ∇n Ñ S M for any n P N, if and
only if ∇n Ñ S M for all but finitely many n P N, if and only if ∇n Ñ S M for infinitely many n P N,
if and only if M has a halting run starting from the empty word. Then Proposition 5.3 follows from
the fact that the problem of determining whether an input Turing machine accepts the empty word
is undecidable.



                                                       68
    To construct S M we start from the tile set T M described in Section A.1, and add an additional
element ■. The new relation W S M consists only of this element t■u. We also add the pair p■, ■q
to both E1S M , E2S M . Given a tile t “ pωt , qt , bt , ct q P TM , we add pt, ■q to E2S M if qt “ p#, #, #q, or if the
only state showing in qt is the accepting state q` . We also add pt, ■q to E1S M if the last position of qt
contains #. Let us give some intuition for this construction. When searching for a homomorphism
F : ∇n Ñ S M , we proceed as in Section A.1, by tiling the plane in a way that describes a run of M
on the empty word. Now, at any point we may chose to stop describing this run and start placing
■ tiles instead, with the conditions that (1) ■ tiles must propagate right and up, and (2) ■ tiles
cannot replace local descriptions that contain the head of M, as long as M is not in the accepting
state. It is routine to check that S M has the desired properties described in the previous paragraphs.

A.4    Hardness Proofs
Before moving on to showing Proposition 4.2-(1) and Proposition 5.2-(1) we describe some TFNP1 -
hard and TFNP-hard families. Given a immortal Turing machine M “ pQ, Ω, ∆q, in the problem
R M we are given a pair px, nq as an input, where x is an input word for M, and n P t1u˚ is a number
in unary representation, and the task is to output a run of length |n| of M on the input x. Here a run
is given as a sequence δ1 , . . . , δn of transitions in ∆. Observe the problem R M belongs to TFNP. We
also consider the “tally” version of the problem R M . Let M be a (non-deterministic) Turing machine
that has an infinite run on the empty input. In the problem R1M we are given a number n P t1u˚ in
unary representation, and the task is to output a run of M on the empty input of length |n|.

Lemma A.1. Let F be the the family consisting of the problems R M for each immortal Turing machine M
on the binary alphabet t0, 1, ˝u. Then F is TFNP-hard.

Proof. We can ignore the restriction to the alphabet t0, 1, ˝u by noting that larger alphabets can be
suitably encoded in binary by paying some small overhead [1]. Hence, it is enough to prove that the
larger family consisting of the problems R M for each immortal Turing machine M is TFNP-hard.
     Let ΛR be a problem in TFNP, where R Ď U ˚ ˆ V ˚ . Let p be a polynomial, and let N be a
polynomial-time Turing machine satisfying that for each x P U ˚ there is some y P V ˚ such that
px, yq P R and |y| ď pp|x|q, and N decides R. We build a immortal Turing machine M, informally
described as follows. The alphabet of M contains both U and V. The machine M loops forever on
input words x that are not in U ˚ . Given an input x P U ˚ , the machine M guesses a word y P V ˚ of
length at most pp|x|q and then runs N on px, yq. If N rejects this pair, then M also rejects, and if N
accepts the pair, then M loops forever. Observe that M must be immortal. Let p1 be a polynomial
such that, given x P U ˚ , it takes M at most p1 p|x|q time steps to guess y, simulate N, and continue
its execution for one more step.
     Now we claim that there is a polynomial-time many-one reduction from ΛR to R M . The first
part of this reduction sends the input x P U ˚ to ΛR to the input px, nq to R M , where n is a unary
representation of p1 p|x|q. Observe that a valid answer to px, nq in R M is a run of M on the input x
that lasts for p1 p|x|q steps. During such a run, M must guess correctly a word y P V ˚ satisfying
px, yq P R. Indeed, otherwise, N would reject, leading to M halting prematurely. The second part
of the reduction extracts the word y from the description of the run. This completes the proof.

Lemma A.2. Let F be the the family consisting of the problems R1M for each Turing machine M on the
binary alphabet t0, 1, ˝u that has an infinite run on the empty input. Then F is TFNP1 -hard.

                                                          69
Proof. We ignore the restriction on the alphabet, as in the previous lemma. Let ΛR be a problem in
TFNP1 , where R Ď t1u˚ ˆ V ˚ . Let p be a polynomial satisfying that for any n P N there is some
y P V ˚ satisfying p1n , yq P R and |y| ď ppnq, and let N be polynomial-time deterministic Turing
machine deciding R.
    We construct a Turing machine M that has an infinite run on the empty input which satisfies
that ΛR has a many-one polynomial-time reduction to R1M . The machine M is informally described
as follows. On the empty input, M keeps track of an integer counter k, whose value starts at one.
Then, M guesses a word y P V ˚ with |y| ď ppkq, and then runs N on the input p1k , yq. If N rejects,
then M rejects and halts. Otherwise, M increases the value of k by one and repeats the process
again. Let q be a polynomial such that it takes M at most p1 pmq steps to set its counter k to the value
m ` 1.
    We describe a suitable reduction from ΛR to R1M . The first part of the reduction takes an input
                                      1                                   1
1n to ΛR and constructs the input 1 p pnq to R1M . A valid response to 1 p pnq in R1M is a run of M on the
empty input that lasts for p1 pnq steps. During such a run M must guess correctly a word y P V ˚
satisfying p1n , yq P R (otherwise M would halt prematurely). The second part of the reduction
extracts the word y from the description of this run.

A.4.1   Proof of Proposition 4.2-(1)

Let M be a Turing machine that has an infinite run on the empty word, and let T M be the ΣΓ -
structure constructed in Section A.1. We show that the problem R1M has a polynomial-time many-
one reduction to sPCSPpΓ, T M q. Observe that this reduction together with Lemma A.2 prove the
result.
    The first part of the reduction takes an input 1n to R1M and produces an input Γn to sPCSPpΓ, T M q.
The structure Γn is the substructure of Γ induced on rns ˆ rns, i.e., the n ˆ n grid. A valid output to
Γn in sPCSPpΓ, T M q is a homomorphism F : Γn Ñ T M . The horizontal lines Fpi, jq for each i P rns
describe successive configurations (truncated to the first n tape spaces) of M starting from the
empty input. Therefore the homomorphism F contains the description of a n-step run of M on the
empty input. The second part of the reduction simply extracts this run from F.

A.4.2   Proof of Proposition 5.2-(1)

This result can be shown similarly to Proposition 4.2-(1), with some work. Let M be an immortal
Turing machine. We begin by modifying the construction from Section A.1 to obtain a ΣΓ` -structure
T M satisfying that any homomorphism F : Γ` Ñ T M admits the following description. We view
the super-grid Γ` as the positive quadrant of the 3-dimensional grid, where we call the dimensions
vertical, horizontal, and normal respectively. Each normal slice (i.e., each set consisting all tuples
pi, j, kq where k is fixed) is called a floor. Then the tiling Fpi, j, kq of the k-th floor describes an infinite
run of M on the input given by the binary representation tiu of i. We adopt the convention that
binary representations start from the least-significant bit. I.e., t6u “ 011.
     We construct T M as follows. Let M “ pQ, Ω, ∆q be a Turing machine on the binary alphabet
Ω “ t0, 1, ˝u. Similarly to the ΣΓ -structure constructed in Section A.1, the elements in TM are tuples
t “ pωt , qt , bt , ct , dt , et q P Ω3 ˆ Q3 ˆ t0, 1u4 , where pωt , qt q P L M is a local description of M. The bit
bt keeps track of whether the tile t describes a local configuration to the right of M’s head, bit ct
keeps track of whether the tile t is in the initial horizontal line of some floor (e.g., is in a position


                                                        70
pi, j, kq with j “ 1), and the bit dt keeps track of whether t is in the first floor (e.g., its position is
pi, j, kq with k “ 1). Finally, the bit et is a carry-over bit, used during addition operations described
below. The origin relation O TM is the singleton containing the tile

                                       pp#, 1, ˝q, p#, q0 , #q, 0, 1, 1, 0q.

The vertical and horizontal relations E1TM , E2TM are described analogously to the ones in Section A.1.
The main difference is that we force the tape described by the first horizontal line in the first floor
to be p#, 1, ˝, ˝, . . . q (i.e., the input 1), rather than the blank tape. We also need to describe how E1TM
and E2TM interact with the carry-over bit et . The vertical relation E2TM “forgets” about the carryover,
meaning that if pt, t1 q P E2TM , then et1 “ 0. However, the horizontal relation E1TM propagates the
carryover. This means that if pt, t1 q P E2TM , and et “ 0, then et1 “ 0. However if et “ 1 then we have
two options. If et1 “ 0 then the rightmost element of ωt1 must be 1, or, otherwise, if et1 “ 1 then
the rightmost element of ωt1 is 0. The doubling relations E1TM , E2TM do not impose any constraint.
The normal relations E3TM , E3TM only constrain the tiles that lie in the first horizontal line of each
floor, i.e., those t P TM with ct “ 1. The relation E3TM ensures that if the tape contains a binary
representation tnu in the horizontal line pi, 1, 1q, then the horizontal line at p2i, 1, 1q displays t2nu.
This is achieved by by shifting right ωt in each local description pωt , qt q and by adding a leading
0. In a similar way, the relation E3TM ensures that if the horizontal line pi, 1, 1q displays tnu, then
pi ` 1, 1, 1q displays tn ` 1u. This is requires addition to be performed on ωt from left to right in
each local description pωt , qt q following the standard column addition algorithm, and using the
carry-over bit et as needed. This way, we obtain a structure T M satisfying the high-level description
given at the start of the section.
     In order to complete the proof of Proposition 5.2-(1), we describe a reduction from R M to
sPCSPpΓ` , T M q. Let ptnu, 1m q be an input to R M , where tnu corresponds to the binary representation
of n P N, and m P N. Without loss of generality we may assume that m ě n: if m ă n we can act as
if m “ n. The first map of our reduction constructs in polynomial time a structure I n,m satisfying
I n,m Ñ Γ` . First, observe that there is a sequence ♠1 , . . . , ♠ℓ of length ℓ P Oplog nq consisting of
the operations `1 and ˆ2 that yields n starting from 1. Such a sequence L can be obtained in
polynomial time from tnu. For each i P rℓ ` 1s we define the number ni inductively as follows. We
let n1 “ 1, and ni “ ni´1 ♠i´1 for i ą 1, where we recall that ♠i´1 P t`1, ˆ2u. This way, nℓ`1 “ n.
The universe In,m is defined as
                                                          ď
                                  tpi, j, nq | i, j P rmsu tpi, 1, nk q | i P rms, k P rℓ ` 1su.

In other words, this includes the initial m ˆ m quadrant in the n-th floor of N3 , plus several
horizontal segments of length m that “climb” up to the n-th floor. The relations are defined so that
I n,m is the substructure of Γ` induced on In,m . By construction I n,m Ñ Γ` . Now, for the second map
of our reduction we need a polynomial-time procedure that computes a m-step run of M starting
from the input tnu by accessing a homomorphism F : I n,m Ñ T M . This is done in the intuitive
way: By construction, image of the horizontal line pi, 1, nq through F must describe the initial
configuration of M on the input tnu, and the image through F of the quadrant tpi, j, nq | i, j P rmsu
must describe a m-step run of M starting from this input. Hence, by accessing F one can compute
the desired run in polynomial time. This completes the proof.



                                                       71
B    Characterizing Polymorphism Minions up to Isomorphism
We extend the ideas of [18, Section 6.2], where function minions corresponding to polymorphisms
are characterized. The main result there is that a function minion is a polymorphism minion if
and only if it has bounded finitized arity, as we described in Section 7. The following characterizes
abstract minions that are isomorphic to the polymorphism minion of some finite template.

Theorem B.1. Let M be a minion. Then there exists a finite template pA, Bq such that PolpA, Bq is
isomorphic to M if and only if M is locally finite and M is isomorphic to M phq for some h P N.

    We need the following short auxiliary results.
                                                             h
Lemma B.2. Let M and N be minions, let h P N, and let F : M Ýá N be a partial minion isomorphism
defined up to arity h. Then M is isomorphic to N .
                             p h q              p h q


Proof. We define an isomorphism H : M phq Ñ N phq . Given a system ξ P M phq pnq, its image Hpξq
is the system defined by Hpξqpπq “ Fpξpπqq for all π P rhsrns . Checking that this is a minion
homomorphism is routine, and its inverse is given by H ´1 pρqpπq “ F´1 pρpπqq for all n P N all
ρ P N phq pnq and all π P rhsrns

    As a corollary we obtain that the h-closure of a h-closure is isomorphic to the original h-closure.

Corollary B.3. Let M be a minion, let h P N and let N “ M phq . Then, N is isomorphic to N phq .

Proof. By Proposition 7.4, M and M phq “ N are isomorphic up to arity h, so the statement follows
from last lemma.

    Now we proceed with our main proof.

Proof of Theorem B.1. We show both directions. Let pA, Bq be an arbitrary finite template. Let r “ |A|,
and let h P N be at least as large as r and as large as the number of tuples in any relation of A.
We identify A with rrs. A consequence of the definition of polymorphism is that a function of the
form f : An Ñ B belongs to PolpA, Bq if and only if f π P PolpA, Bq for every function π P rhsrns .
Define M “ PolpA, Bq. Clearly, M is locally finite. We show that M is isomorphic to M phq .
The isomorphism is the canonical map Clh : M Ñ M phq . We already know that Cl is a minion
homomorphism, so all that is left is to show that it is bijective. An argument that is convenient
to remember is that, under the usual identification of tuples from rrsn with maps in rrsrns , the
evaluation of a function f : rrsn Ñ B on a tuple a P rrsn can be seen as the evaluation f a pidrrs q.
     Clh is injective. Let n P N, and let f , g P M pnq. Suppose that f ‰ g. Then by the remark above,
it holds that f π ‰ gπ for some π P rrsrns . Composing π with the inclusion rrs ãÑ rns we obtain
                           1     1
π 1 P rhsrns such that f π ‰ gπ . Thus, by the definition of the canonical map, it holds that
                                                  1        1
                                Clh p f qpπ 1 q “ f π ‰ gπ “ Clh pgqpπ 1 q,

meaning that Clh p f q ‰ Clh phq.
   Clh is surjective. Let n P N and let ξ P M phq pnq be a system. The idea is that ξ is given by a
family of consistent h-ary polymorphisms in M , so there is a n-ary function f ξ : rrsn Ñ B whose
h-ary minors are given by f ξπ “ ξpπq. Constructing such f ξ would show that Clh is surjective:
Indeed, under this assumption all h-ary minors of f ξ belong to M forcing f ξ P M as well. Finally,

                                                      72
by definition, Clh p f ξ q “ ξ, so this shows that Clh is surjective. We define the desired function
f ξ : rrsn Ñ B as follows. Fix two maps α : rrs Ñ rhs and β : rhs Ñ rrs such that β ˝ α “ idrrs . Given
a tuple a P rrsn , we define
                                           f ξ paq “ ξpα ˝ aqpβq.
To parse this equality, recall that ξpα ˝ aq is a h-ary polymorphism in M , which can be evaluated at
a tuple in rrsh . All that is left to show is that f ξπ “ ξpπq for all π P rhsrns . Indeed, in this case, given
a tuple a P rrsrhs it holds that

          f ξπ paq “ f ξ pa ˝ πq “ ξpα ˝ a ˝ πqpβq “ pξpπqqα˝a pβq “ ξpπqpβ ˝ α ˝ aq “ ξpπqpaq.

This proves that Clh is a surjective homomorphism, and together with the fact that it is also injective,
completes the proof that it is an isomorphism.
    We have shown that if M is the polymorphism minion of some finite template, then it is locally
finite and is isomorphic to M phq for some h P N. Now we prove the other direction. Let M
be a locally finite minion, and suppose that it is isomorphic to N “ M phq for some h P N. An
observation is that the rank of N is at most h. Indeed, let n P N and let ξ 1 , ξ 2 P N pnq be two
systems of h-ary minors. Suppose that ξ 1π “ ξ 2π for all π P rhsrns . We also have that ξ 1 pπq “ ξ 1π pidrhs q
and analogously with ξ 2 . This means that ξ 1 pπq “ ξ 2 pπq for all π P rhsrns and ξ 1 “ ξ 2 . Then, by
Corollary 7.6, it holds that N phq is isomorphic to PolpK hh , F N pK hh qq. Also, N phq is isomorphic to
N “ M phq by Corollary B.3, and M phq is, by assumption, isomorphic to M . Putting together all
these isomorphisms we obtain that M is isomorphic to PolpK hh , F N pK hh qq, completing the proof.

    An alternative, and perhaps better way to present the second part of this proof could have been
to show, using essentially the same reasoning as in the proof of Theorem 7.1, that given a minion
M and a number h P N, it holds in general that M phq is isomorphic to PolpK hh , F M pK hh qq.




                                                      73
