Quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs
Baocheng Sun∗

Thomas Vidick†

Abstract

arXiv:2601.12874v1 [cs.CC] 19 Jan 2026

We initiate the study of quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs (qIOPs), a generalization of
both quantum Probabilistically Checkable Proofs and quantum Interactive Proofs, as well as a
quantum analogue of classical Interactive Oracle Proofs.
In the model of quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs, we allow multiple rounds of quantum
interaction between the quantum prover and the quantum verifier, but the verifier has limited
access to quantum resources. This includes both queries to the prover’s messages and the
complexity of the quantum circuits applied by the verifier. The question of whether QMA admits
a quantum interactive oracle proof system is a relaxation of the quantum PCP Conjecture.
We show the following two main constructions of qIOPs, both of which are unconditional:
• We construct a qIOP for QMA in which the verifier shares polynomially many EPR pairs
with the prover at the start of the protocol and reads only a constant number of qubits
from the prover’s messages.
• We provide a stronger construction of qIOP for QMA in which the verifier not only reads
a constant number of qubits but also operates on a constant number of qubits overall,
including those in their private registers. However, in this stronger setting, the communication complexity becomes exponential. This leaves open the question of whether strong
qIOPs for QMA, with polynomial communication complexity, exist.
As a key component of our construction, we introduce a novel single prover many-qubits
test, which may be of independent interest.

∗

baocheng.sun@weizmann.ac.il. Weizmann Institute of Science.
thomas.vidick@epfl.ch. School of Computer and Communication Sciences and Center for Quantum Science
and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, and Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science,
Weizmann Institute of Science.
†

Contents
1 Introduction
1.1 Our formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4 Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
2
3
4

2 Technical Overview
2.1 The Clifford-Hamiltonian problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 General quantum IOPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Strong quantum IOPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5
5
6
7

3 Organization

12

4 Preliminaries
4.1 Gap amplification of the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Probabilistically checkable proofs of proximity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Group stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13
14
16
17

5 Formulation of Quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs
5.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Quantum channels with queries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Quantum interactive oracle proof systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20
20
21
22

6 Quantum IOPs with Shared EPR Pairs and Classical Communication
6.1 Commitment in the Interactive Oracle Proof Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Quantum IOPs with shared EPR pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Technical claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25
25
27
31

7 Many Qubits Tests
7.1 Error Correcting Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Honest prover’s strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.3 Verifier’s strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.4 General prover’s actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.5 Main theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34
34
36
37
41
42

8 Strong Quantum IOPs with Logarithmic-Depth Honest Prover
8.1 Measurement in the Pauli bases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.2 Energy tests and energy consistency tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.3 General prover’s actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.4 Main theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

52
54
54
56
57

A Single Qubit Tests
A.1 Honest prover’s strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.2 Verifier’s strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A.3 Main theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65
65
66
67

1

1

Introduction

The classical PCP theorem [ALM+ 98, AS98, Din06] is one of the most significant breakthroughs
in computational complexity theory from the early 1990s. Its impact extends beyond practical
applications like succinct cryptographic arguments to foundational areas such as hardness of approximation [FGL+ 91], and it has profoundly influenced the development of coding theory.
The quantum analog of the PCP theorem, known as the quantum PCP conjecture (qPCP)
[AN02, AALV09], has been a subject of exploration for several decades. The qPCP conjecture
holds significant implications for the foundations of quantum mechanics [AAV13], as exemplified
by its relationship with the NLTS (No Low-Energy Trivial States) theorem [FH14]. Research into
the qPCP conjecture has yielded both promising [ABN23] and negative results [BH13, NN24].
A recent breakthrough [ABN23] proving the NLTS theorem has strengthened confidence in the
plausibility of qPCP. However, the qPCP conjecture remains largely unexplored [AAV13], sparking
interest in natural and less restrictive questions derived from the qPCP conjecture.
We introduce a relaxation of the qPCP conjecture analogous to how classical PCPs were generalized to Interactive Oracle Proofs (IOPs) [BCS16, RRR16]. Specifically, we introduce quantum
Interactive Oracle Proofs (qIOP) and present two incomparable constructions, each using a different technical approach. Our formulation of qIOP builds upon the quantum PCP conjecture, which
is defined in terms of efficient proof verification [AAV13]: for any instance of a QMA language,
there exists a polynomial-length quantum proof that can be verified by measuring only a constant
number of qubits. Our approach extends the proof system framework to allow multiple rounds of
interaction while ensuring that the verifier reads only a constant number of qubits in total. This
positions qPCP as a special case of quantum interactive oracle proofs, where restricting to a single
round results in a qPCP.
As a generalization of qPCP, the existence of qIOPs provides evidence supporting the validity
of the qPCP conjecture. Furthermore, qIOPs hold potential for developing quantum succinct
arguments for QMA languages [BCS16, KLVY23, BKL+ 22, GJMZ23, MNZ24].

1.1

Our formulation

We formulate several variants of quantum IOPs. Each formulation is such that when all computation and communication are restricted to be classical, the model reduces to standard classical IOPs.
More specifically, we define quantum IOP systems and strong quantum IOP systems as follows.
Definition 1.1 (Quantum IOP systems; informal version of Definition 5.10). A quantum interactive oracle proof (quantum IOP) system, parameterized by functions q(n) and l(n) : Z+ → Z+ ,
consists of a quantum verifier V satisfying the following conditions for any input of size n:
• The verifier interacts with the prover for at most poly(n) rounds.
• In each round, the prover sends a quantum message to the verifier. The message length may
vary between rounds.
• In each round, the verifier:
– applies a quantum circuit to his private qubits and to portions of the prover’s message,
including qubits received in the current round as well as those retained from previous
rounds,
– stores part of the prover’s message registers for use in later rounds.

1

• After each interaction, the verifier returns the remainder of the prover’s quantum message
(i.e., the part not stored) and may optionally send back part of their own private quantum
register.
• At the end of the protocol, the verifier outputs a single decision bit.
The main complexity parameters are:
• The query complexity q(n): the total number of qubits from the prover’s messages accessed
by the verifier across all rounds.
• The communication complexity l(n): the total number of qubits in the prover’s messages
across all rounds.
We refer to such a system as a quantum IOP if q(n) is bounded by a constant.1
We define the following variants of a quantum IOP:
• A system is called a restricted quantum IOP if the private register sent back by the verifier
is required to be classical.
• It is called a strong quantum IOP if the verifier must return the entire prover’s message
register in each round (i.e., does not store any part of the message).
Definition 1.2 (Quantum IOP systems for a promise problem, informal version of Definition 5.14).
A quantum interactive oracle proof (quantum IOP) system for a language L with completeness
c : Z+ → [0, 1] and soundness s : Z+ → [0, 1] satisfies the following:
• For any YES-instance of size n, There exists a polynomial-time prover such that the verifier
accepts with probability at least c(n).
• For any NO-instance of size n, for all provers, the verifier accepts with probability at most
s(n).
The completeness-soundness gap of the system is defined as c(n) − s(n).
Remark 1.3. In the formal definition, we use the notion of query, as defined in Definition 5.1, to
precisely quantify the query complexity and the proof length. This notion of query is motivated by
the oracle model used in the literature on quantum query complexity.
Remark 1.4. Classically, constant-round IOPs, where the verifier reads the prover’s message at
each round, are equivalent to those where the verifier reads the entire interaction only at the end.
Moreover, adaptive and non-adaptive IOPs are equivalent. However, these equivalences do not
necessarily hold in the quantum setting.

1.2

Main results

The following are informal statements of our two main results.
Theorem 1.5 (Informal version of Theorem 6.1). There exists a quantum IOP system for QMA with
the following parameters: query complexity q(n) = O(1), communication complexity l(n) = poly(n),
and constant completeness-soundness gap.
1

In the formal Definition 5.10, we refer to this as the general quantum IOP to distinguish it from the restricted
and strong variants.

2

Remark 1.6. In our construction, the only quantum communication occurs in the first round,
where the verifier sends the prover poly(n) EPR pairs. All subsequent messages exchanged between
the prover and the verifier are classical.
Theorem 1.7 (Informal version of Theorem 8.17). There exists a strong quantum IOP system
for QMA with query complexity q(n) = O(1), communication complexity l(n) = exp(poly(n)), and
constant completeness-soundness gap.
For both results the number of rounds of interaction is a constant. We expand on the proof
technique for each result in Section 2. In few words, the first protocol is based on teleportation of
the witness and adequate use of a PCP of proximity (PCPP) to enable the verifier to correct for the
teleportation pad while only querying a constant number of bits from the prover. (However, the
verifier does perform a polynomial-size quantum computation on their own private space, which
contain the verifier’s half-EPR pairs.) The second protocol is based on a multi-qubit test to delegate
measurements to the prover and classical PCP techniques to enable the verifier to recover energy
measurement outcomes. The multi-qubit test requires exponential quantum communication from
the prover to the verifier, even though the verifier only operates on a constant number of qubits in
total. Yet we believe the test should be of independent interest and may be a target for subsequent
improvements.

1.3

Open questions

Classically, a public-coin interactive oracle proof with O(log n)-bit verifier messages can be compiled
into a PCP. It is also known that a public-coin interactive oracle proof with polylog(n) rounds,
O(1) query complexity, perfect completeness, and O(1/poly(n)) soundness implies the existence
of a polynomial-length PCP [ABCY22]. The connection between quantum IOPs (qIOPs) and
quantum PCPs (qPCPs) is not as well understood as in the classical setting. In fact, it is not even
known whether a strong qIOP implies an exponential-size quantum PCP. As a result, our qIOP
constructions do not yield new insights into the form of local Hamiltonians that could arise from
quantum PCP reductions, nor into the reductions themselves. This raises the following question
about the connection between the two frameworks:
Question 1.8. Is there a black-box transformation from a quantum IOP to a quantum PCP?
Since our current construction of strong quantum IOPs has exponential communication complexity, it is natural to ask:
Question 1.9. Are there strong quantum IOPs with polynomial communication complexity?
Furthermore, we are also curious about the cryptographic applications of the qIOP model. In
[GJMZ23], the authors construct a quantum-communication succinct argument for QMA under
assumptions weaker than one-way functions (OWFs), assuming the existence of a quantum PCP.
This leads to the following question:
Question 1.10. Are there protocols for delegating quantum computation based on assumptions
weaker than OWFs, without relying on a positive resolution of the quantum PCP conjecture?
Another potential cryptographic application is the following:
Question 1.11. Can we apply a Fiat–Shamir transformation to the qIOP protocol to obtain a
non-interactive succinct quantum argument for QMA, or a non-interactive quantum argument for
QMA with constant query complexity?
3

In our construction of the strong quantum IOP, we observe that the verifier’s actions have a
classical flavor. Specifically, in the protocol, the verifier either applies a Z gate or measures in
the Z-basis. This raises a natural question about the extent to which the communication in such a
proof system can be classical, while still allowing an efficient quantum prover to convince a quantum
verifier of a QMA language. This motivates the following question:
Question 1.12. Does there exist a proof system for QMA languages in which the communication
is entirely classical, yet both the prover and the verifier are quantum?

1.4

Related works

Interactive Oracle Proofs. Classically, IOP emerged after the proof of the PCP theorem
[BCS16, RRR16]. Interaction therein aids in reducing proof length, primarily through a tool known
as interactive composition. However, our objective is not to simplify but to create something that
does not yet exist. Consequently, experiences from classical IOP provide limited insights. Nevertheless, our main motivation is to sketch a possible path towards proving the quantum PCP
conjecture, that as a first steps leverages insights from the study of classical IOPs as well as nonlocal games (see below) to, at least initially, avoid some of the main difficulties encountered in
traditional approaches to qPCP (such as the no-cloning theorem).
Verification protocols for QMA with a limited quantum verifier. There exist a number
of interactive protocols for information-theoretically secure verification of QMA, where the verifier
has limited quantum capabilities. This includes [FK17, ABOEM17, FHM18], see [GKK19] for a
survey. While these protocols are based on a verifier whose quantum operations in each round are
constant (or logarithmic) size, the protocols all have a polynomial number of rounds of interaction.
Therefore, the total effort of the verifier, as well as total amount of quantum communication
received and read from the prover, is always polynomial. Our focus is on a total constant effort of
the verifier; however, we do not limit the verifier’s quantum memory. Therefore, the models are
incomparable. We do not borrow techniques from this literature (other than the idea of reducing
the QMA language to the local Hamiltonian problem, which is used in [FHM18] and is by now very
classical).
Exponential-length classical PCP for QMA. Although it is natural to derive qPCP by
quantizing the classical PCP transformations, [AAV13] takes a step away from this approach,
partly because [BH13] suggests that “the most ‘natural’ transformations may fail in the quantum
setting” [AAV13]. More specifically, they demonstrate the existence of exponential-length classical
PCP for QMA through the following: QMA ⊆ PSPACE = IP, and the natural transformation
from IP to exponential-length classical PCP. Yet, the resulting proof system works directly with
the local Hamiltonian rather than explicitly encoding the quantum witness. As a result, even if
the prover possesses the witness, they cannot use it to improve their efficiency. In contrast, for
both our constructions the honest prover strategy is based on a natural aglorithm. For the case
of Theorem 1.5 it is efficient (given a supply of copies of the quantum witness). For the case of
Theorem 1.7 it is efficient but for the coherent evaluation of exponentially many Pauli observables,
in a very systematic manner that could easily be parallelized.
Game version of quantum PCPs. [NV16] proposed a “games version” of qPCP for the XZHamiltonian problem, in which multiple provers share entanglement and communicate classically
with a verifier in a single-round protocol with constant-length prover messages. It is natural to
4

use this and similar approaches as a starting point, but connecting the multi-prover setting to the
single-prover one presents challenges.
The only prior work we are aware of to establish such a connection is [Weh06], which demonstrates the inclusion ⊕MIP∗ [2] ⊆ QIP(2), thus unconditionally “compiling” two quantum provers
into a single one. However, their approach seems restricted to testing XOR-type relationships and
protocols involving the exchange of exactly two messages. We did not see how to extend it to more
complex two-prover protocols.
More recent methods [NZ23, MNZ24] compress provers using cryptographic techniques, but
these rely on computational assumptions and impose restrictions on the prover’s computational
power which are not inherent to a proof system. More critically, [NN24] notes that [NV16] applies
only to the XZ-Hamiltonian problem, while we aim to address QMA. To date, there is no known
construction of a game version qPCP for QMA [NN24].
Nevertheless, our construction of the strong quantum IOP is inspired by the techniques developed in [NV16]. Rather than constructing a game version of qPCP for QMA and subsequently
compiling it to qPCP, we adapt the qubit-testing technique used in [NV16] for verifying proofs of
the XZ-Hamiltonian and extend it to a single-prover protocol, applying it to QMA languages.
Our construction of a quantum IOP with shared EPR pairs is based on teleportation. We note
that the protocol in [Gri19] is also based on teleportation. In fact, our quantum IOP protocol with
shared EPR pairs can be viewed as a single-prover analogue of the multi-prover protocol in [Gri19].
However, in their setting both provers are untrusted, and the verifier cannot control the operations
performed by the prover, so additional self-testing is required. In our setting, the verifier effectively
plays the role of one of the provers in [Gri19], but as an honest quantum verifier, there is no need to
prove the qubits. Moreover, because the verifier is honest and also acts as the prover for measuring
the qubits, we do not need to hide which Hamiltonian term is being measured.
Commuting tests. While testing anti-commutation relations in the two-prover setting requires
sophisticated constructions, testing commutation is a more elementary and well-established technique [CGJV19]. Ultimately, our protocol for single-qubit tests is close to the protocol in [CRSV17]
for testing state-dependent commutation. However, in their setting, each individual qubit is already
known to anti-commute, and the primary question is whether different qubits commute with each
other.

2

Technical Overview

In this paper, unless otherwise specified, we use the term observable to refer to an operator that
is both Hermitian and squares
to the identity. Occasionally, we also use observable to refer
P
P to an
operator of the form O = i ai Pi , where ai ∈ R, each Pi is an orthogonal projection, and i Pi = I.
The notation O(a) for a ∈ Fn2 denotes a tensor product of Pauli O ∈ {X, Y, Z} operators applied
to selected qubits according to the bit string a:
O(a) = Oa1 ⊗ Oa2 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Oan ,
where O0 = I is the identity operator and O1 = O is the Pauli-O matrix.

2.1

The Clifford-Hamiltonian problem

The Clifford-Hamiltonian problem was introduced in [BJSW16]. This is a special case of the local
Hamiltonian problem where each local term has the form C † (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 C, with C being an element
5

of the Clifford group on 5 qubits. The Clifford-Hamiltonian problem is the problem of determining
the lowest energy (i.e., the smallest eigenvalue) of a Clifford-Hamiltonian given as input, up to an
additive error that is inverse polynomial in the number of qubits. This problem was shown QMAcomplete in [BJSW16], by adapting the standard Kitaev reduction. Since all our qIOP protocols
aim to obtain a constant gap between completeness and soundness, we first show how to amplify
the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem, trading locality for an improved gap.
Let H = E[Hi ] be a Clifford Hamiltonian. Here each Hi is a 5-local Clifford projection. After
amplification, the Hamiltonian becomes
i
h O
⊗N
(1 − 2H)⊗N = Ei [1 − 2Hi ]
(1 − 2Hsj ) .
= Es1 ,...,sN
j∈[N ]

This amplified Hamiltonian consists of exponentially many terms; however, we can efficiently sample
a term. Note that each sampled term is not necessarily local and, in general, does not correspond
to a Clifford projection.
In many settings, verifying the measurement result of a Pauli observable is much easier than
verifying the measurement result of a Clifford projection. Therefore, we aim to reduce the measurement of Clifford projections to measurements of Pauli observables. Note that the meaning of
a state lying in a Clifford projection of the form C † (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 C is that after applying C, all the 5
qubits are in the state |0⟩. Instead of measuring all of them at once, we can measure them one by
one. Performing the original projection is then equivalent to projecting the state for each j ∈ [5]
using:


I +Z
C † I ⊗j−1 ⊗
⊗ I ⊗(5−j) C .
2
Because Clifford gates preserve the Pauli group, each of these terms is a projection onto the +1
eigenspace of a Pauli observable. By measuring the original state with these 5 projections and
taking the logical AND of the measurement results, we obtain a method to estimate the energy of
the amplified Clifford-Hamiltonian using only Pauli observables.
A Hamiltonian is said to be an XZ-Hamiltonian if it is a weighted sum of XZ terms, where
each term is of the form X(a)Z(b) with a ∧ b = 0, meaning that a, b ∈ Fn2 have disjoint support.
It is not known whether the XZ-Hamiltonian problem with a constant gap is QMA complete.
[NN24] presents several reasons why amplifying the gap while keeping the problem within QMA
may be challenging. For this reason we mostly work with the the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem.
However, it will sometimes be convenient to reason about XZ-Hamiltonian instances; in particular
our method for measuring the energy of a Clifford-Hamiltonian essentially uses measurements of
XZ-Hamiltonians as a subroutine.

2.2

General quantum IOPs

Our first construction is based on teleportation. Note that the constant-gap Hamiltonian problem
we obtain, namely, the amplified Clifford Hamiltonian, is not local. Therefore, the prover cannot
simply send the witness to the verifier and have the verifier sample and measure a random term,
since the verifier only has constant query complexity. Recall that in the standard definition of qIOP,
we only count the number of qubits that the verifier reads from the prover’s message. If the verifier
and prover share EPR pairs 2 and the verifier measures his half, this measurement is not counted
2
The shared EPR pairs can also be established by having the verifier send the first message of half EPR pairs.
However, in our query-complexity-based definition of qIOP, the verifier is not allowed to send long messages to the
prover. The verifier only receives messages from the prover, queries them, and sends them back. If the verifier wishes
to transmit information to the prover, he must do so by using the prover’s previous message, swapping it with his
own register. Therefore, we define the protocol to begin with shared EPR pairs.

6

towards the query complexity. Building on this observation, we design the following protocol: the
prover and verifier initially share EPR pairs. The prover then performs teleportation and sends
the verifier an encoding of the classical one-time pad generated during teleportation. Since each
term in the Hamiltonian is non-local, the verifier still needs to read the one-time pad non-locally
to correctly interpret the measurement result. Fortunately, the one-time pad is classical, and we
can find a classical solution that enables the prover to provide exactly the information needed by
the verifier, in a sound and succinct manner.
Note that the only feature of general quantum IOPs we use is that verifier’s messages derived
from the verifier’s private qubits are not required to be classical; in particular, the verifier may
send arbitrary quantum states. In contrast, restricted or strong quantum IOPs allow only classical
verifier’s messages, except for returning the prover’s message registers. In particular, in the general
quantum IOPs setting, the verifier can send polynomially many half-EPR pairs to the prover in
the first round.
We will show how to estimate the energy of a non-local XZ-Hamiltonian; the approach for
estimating the energy of a non-local Clifford-Hamiltonian is similar. For an XZ-Hamiltonian, to
estimate the energy of the Hamiltonian on a given state, we can randomly sample an XZ term and
accept or reject according to the measurement result. The acceptance probability is proportional to
the energy. Since the teleported state is masked by a one-time pad, directly measuring it does not
yield the correct result on the original state. However, it is possible to infer the direct measurement
outcome of the XZ term from the masked state, given access to the OTP: if measuring X(ai )Z(bi )
on the masked state yields r, and the mask is X(p)Z(q), we know that the measurement on the
original state would give r + p · bi + q · ai . (Here, ai , bi , p, q are all n-bit strings and operations are
mod 2.)
Note that the observable X(ai )Z(bi ) that we need to measure is non-local. We still need to figure
out how to encode the one-time pad (p, q) so that the verifier can compute the value p · bi + q · ai .
While the Hadamard code can achieve this, it results in an exponentially long encoding. In the
interactive setting, the verifier can request the prover’s help, but cannot directly send the chosen
XZ-term (ai , bi ) to the prover, as this would allow the prover to cheat.
The idea is for the prover to first submit a “commitment” to the one-time pad (p, q), and only
then the verifier sends (ai , bi ). The prover must then prove that the committed values yield the
correct result p · bi + q · ai . To achieve this, we encode the commitment using any error-correcting
code, and the proof of correctness is provided through a PCP of proximity. According to the
soundness of PCPs of proximity, if the commitment is far from any codeword consistent with a
valid (p, q) producing the claimed value, the verifier will reject with high probability.
We refer to this as a commitment in the Interactive Oracle Proof model. Notably, similar
techniques have been used for other purposes in the cryptographic literature [LMS22, MNZ24].
One advantage of this protocol is that the communication is entirely classical. However, due
to the a priori use of EPR pairs, it remains unclear how to convert it into a succinct argument for
QMA.

2.3

Strong quantum IOPs

High-level approach. Many prior protocols for verification of QMA originate in multi-prover
qubit tests, and we follow the same approach. Early works such as [NV16] generalize single-qubit
anti-commuting games such as CHSH and the Magic Square game to many-qubit tests, and apply
these results to game-based versions of qPCPs for the XZ-Hamiltonian problem [NN24]. These
game versions involve multiple entangled provers interacting with a classical verifier in a singleround protocol with constant-length messages from the provers.
7

One way to understand the construction of qIOP is to view it as a compilation of multi-prover,
many-qubit tests into a single-prover, many-qubit test protocol, which can then be used to estimate
the energy of a Hamiltonian corresponding to some QMA language—mimicking the techniques of
[NV16, Gri19]. While this has been achieved under computational assumptions [KLVY23, MNZ24],
it has never before been done in an information-theoretic way.
Converting the messages intended for all provers in a non-local game directly to a single message to the single prover in the qIOP setting would potentially disclose queries intended for other
provers to the single qIOP prover, providing it with explicit questions and the capability to respond
accurately. Classically, encoding the answering strategy of each prover for every possible question
compiles a MIP, but with a blow-up in message size that is exponential in the size of the question
[BFL90]. However, for quantum provers sharing entanglement, the prover’s strategies in response
to different verifier questions may not commute. As a result, it is not straightforward to list all
possible measurement outcomes, since the order in which measurements are performed can affect
the result.
If we momentarily set aside the compilation approach, the natural approach to design a qIOP
for QMA is as follows. First, the prover sends the verifier a “commitment” to the quantum witness,
which will prevent the prover from altering it midway. The verifier then performs measurements on
the committed state, assisted by the prover. An initial goal in this framework is to design such a
commitment scheme that allows the verifier to measure simple observables, such as tensor products
of Pauli X(a), a ∈ Fn2 and Z(b), b ∈ Fn2 , with only constant query complexity. These operators
commonly appear in many-qubit tests.
Rather than direct compilation, we take inspiration from nonlocal games to design the commitment procedure. In our protocol, in the first round, the prover sends the verifier the witness,
measured in a purified way in the X basis and encoded using an error-correcting code (specifically,
the Hadamard code). In a subsequent round, the witness is measured in the Z basis, also in a purified manner and similarly encoded. This “commitment” can be interpreted as the witness being
destroyed in the X-basis and in the Z-basis (corresponding to two types of questions), with the
measurement results encoded using an error-correcting code. Because the measurement is purified,
the prover has the ability (given all qubits returned to him) to switch from one basis to the other.
Interestingly, in our protocol, each round features a fixed question. Nevertheless, by the end
of the protocol, we have asked the prover to provide answers according to X and according to
Z, therefore, all possible questions that could have been asked to the provers are always covered.
Moreover, in the final round the verifier does need to sample questions from a distribution, as
different questions are required to define distinct observables that characterize the prover’s behavior.
The different observables provide the objects for studying the anticommutation relationship that
is key to characterizing the prover’s measurements.
Single-prover single-qubit test. Following the formulation in [Vid20], a qubit can be understood as a system that can be observed in two mutually incompatible ways—more precisely, it
is a system equipped with a pair of anticommuting observables, essentially corresponding to the
existence of X and Z operators up to isomorphism.
We design a simple protocol in which the prover and verifier engage in several rounds of interaction. At the end, the verifier sends the prover a classical bit, and the prover responds with
a classical bit. Without loss of generality, in the final round, the prover applies one of two types
of observables, depending on the verifier’s question bit, on some quantum state. We show that
these two observables anti-commute on that state. While it is straightforward to force the prover
to measure anti-commuting observables on, say, half of an EPR pair the other half of which is held

8

by the verifier; here the challenge is to evaluate anti-commutation on a state of the prover’s choice
(i.e., one that is not constrainted by the verifier or the protocol).
It is interesting to compare this statement with existing research in the multi-prover setting.
In [NV16], the authors use a standard non-local game where the robustness of the multi-prover
anti-commuting game involves both the robustness of the EPR pair and the robustness of the anticommuting operator acting on the EPR pair. It is well known that these robustness results are
sufficient to construct the game version of the PCP for the XZ-Hamiltonian. What is the proper
condition that should hold for a meaningful anti-commuting relationship in order to achieve the
desired QMA result for a single prover game? Should we test whether the single prover holds
EPR pairs? Since the original provers act on different Hilbert spaces, should we expect that, after
compression, operators originally from different provers still commute with each other? At first
glance, both of these questions might seem to have affirmative answers. However, neither of these
appears as a subroutine in our final protocol. Intuitively, this makes sense because, in non-local
games with EPR pairs, an operator acting on the first prover is equivalent to its transpose acting on
the second prover. EPR pairs serve as a bridge in this context. Since there is only one prover, there
is no need to bridge between them; both provers can act on the same qubits, and the operators no
longer commute.
The construction.

Our protocol consists of three rounds.

• In the first round the honest prover sends the purified measurement of their state in the Z
basis. The purified measurement outcome is stored in a register R.
• The verifier can choose to either apply a phase flip gate (Z gate) on register R, measure it
in the computational basis (Z basis), or do nothing (apply the identity). Then, the verifier
sends register R back to the prover.
• In the second round, the honest prover undoes the purified measurement in the Z basis and
sends the purified measurement of their state in the X basis (in the same register R).
• Again, the verifier may choose to apply a Z gate, measure in the Z basis, or do nothing.
• In the third round, the verifier sends R back to the prover, together with a one-bit question,
either “X” or “Z”.
• The prover undoes the purified measurement in the X basis and returns the measurement
result corresponding to the verifier’s question.
Note that applying a phase flip gate to the purified measurement result of an observable is equivalent
to applying the observable itself directly as a gate. Measuring the purified measurement result of
an observable in the computational basis is equivalent to directly measuring the observable on the
state.
In the protocol, the verifier uniformly samples one of the following four tests uniformly at
random and performs it with the prover:
1. Z consistency test: The verifier measures in the first round, does nothing in the second
round, sends “Z” to the prover in the third round, and accepts if and only if the measurement
result from the first round matches the prover’s answer bit to the “Z” query in the third
round.

9

2. X consistency test (standard): The verifier does nothing in the first round, measures in
the second round, sends “X” to the prover in the third round, and accepts if and only if the
measurement result from the second round matches the prover’s answer bit to the “X” query
in the third round.
3. X consistency test (flipped): The verifier applies a phase flip in the first round, measures
in the second round, sends “X” to the prover in the third round, and accepts if and only if
the measurement result from the second round matches the prover’s answer bit to the “X”
query in the third round.
4. Anti-commuting test: The verifier measures in the first round, applies a phase flip in the
second round, sends “Z” to the prover in the third round, and accepts if and only if the
measurement result from the first round is opposite to the prover’s answer bit to the “Z”
query in the third round.
If we interpret the observable applied by the prover in the final round as a unitary operator,
then both Z and X can be applied together in the last round, and in different orders. The anticommutation relation XZ = −ZX between those observables is precisely the statement we aim
to prove. The anti-commuting test already provides an initial equation in the form of an anticommutation relation, while the consistency tests serve to shift the operations in this equation to
the observable used in the final round. Indeed can view ZX and XZ as a sequence of operations,
Z followed by X in the case of XZ. These operations can be distributed across different stages of
the interaction. For instance, we can apply Z in both the first and last rounds. Another example is
that applying a phase flip in the first round and measuring in the second corresponds to applying
Z followed by X. The relationship between applying Z and X in different rounds is enforced by
the consistency tests.
The preceding operation justifies the flipped version of the consistency test as a means to
induce different sequences of observables. From the perspective of non-local games, there is another
explanation why this test is important. Intuitively, without flipping, the prover is only constrained
to play the game with a single initial state of their choosing. By introducing flipping (which the
verifier only performs before all measurements), the prover is forced to play the game across multiple
initial states. By comparing the protocol with non-local games, we can derive several interesting
observations.
Comparison with non-local games. To illustrate the underlying intuition, we present a construction based on a single-prover variant of a non-local game. Since we did not identify any
particular advantage gained by using the non-local games framework, our main results on quantum
IOPs and strong quantum IOPs are not based on the non-local game-based tests described here.
Therefore, we omit the formal statement.
We use the Magic Square game as an illustrative example, but the construction extends naturally
to other non-local games.

r1
r2
r3

c1
(1) I ⊗ Z
(4) X ⊗ I
(7) X ⊗ Z

c2
(2) Z ⊗ I
(5) I ⊗ X
(8) Z ⊗ X

c3
(3) Z ⊗ Z
(6) X ⊗ X
(9) Y ⊗ Y

The protocol consists of 6 rounds (12 messages), each corresponding to either a row (indexed r1,
r2, r3 from top to bottom) or a column (indexed c1, c2, c3 from left to right) in the Magic Square
10

game. The rounds follow a fixed order: r2, c3, r1, c2, r3, c1.3 In each round, the honest prover
sends a purified measurement of the relevant row or column (2 qubits, the third can be inferred).
The verifier either measures in the Z basis or applies a Z gate to some of the qubits or does nothing,
then sends the qubits back. The honest prover then undoes the purified measurement.
At the end of the interaction, the verifier sends an index in {1, . . . , 9} (corresponding to the
9 positions in the Magic Square), and the prover returns a single bit. The only tests applied
are consistency checks: ensuring consistency at the intersection of rows and columns, and consistency between the first 6 rounds and the final round. These tests also include various forms of
flipping prior to the two measurements for consistency checking. Since there are only a constant
number of flipping choices, we can perform each possible tests with constant probability. The anticommutation relationship manifests itself in the final round, specifically between position 2 (the
second element of the first row) and position 4 (the first element of the second row).
Intuitively, requiring the prover to sequentially measure all rows or columns forces them to adopt
a quantum strategy. In effect, the prover is committing to answers for all possible questions. Note
that, since the game has no classical solution, it’s impossible for the prover to respond correctly to
every question in a single round.
Surprisingly, without all the flipping tests, although soundness is preserved, the protocol is not
robust in the sense that it fails to enforce anti-commuting relationships. We were able to construct
counterexamples that pass the single-prover version of the Magic Square tests using only commuting
operators. However, in all of these counterexamples, the initial state is uniquely determined by
the operators used. Another perspective for understanding the flipping test is by comparing it to
the role of consistency relations between the two provers. In the multi-prover setting, consistency
relations can be used to switch which player an operation is applied to. This plays a crucial
role in proving the robustness of the Magic Square game. Such “player switching” also plays an
important role after establishing the anti-commutation relation between X and Z. This switching
helps derive relations between elements of the Weyl–Heisenberg group: The goal is to show that
X(a)Z(b)X(c)Z(d) = (−1)bc X(a + c)Z(b + d), with a key subgoal being the ability to “flip” the
middle operators Z(b)X(c). Consistency checks are used to enable “player-switching”, which in
turn allows us to derive that X(a)Z(b)X(c)Z(d) − X(a)Z(b)X(c) ⊗ Z(d) = 0, thereby making it
possible to flip Z(b)X(c) within X(a)Z(b)X(c).
Other difficulties in analyzing the robustness. Note that in the middle of the protocol, the
honest prover does not necessarily apply a purified observable, but may instead apply an arbitrary
unitary. This creates a difficulty for us, as we would prefer to formulate the prover’s action in the
middle round as an observable, i.e., an operator that is both Hermitian and squares to the identity,
so that it can be directly compared with the observable in the final round. Moreover, the prover
might apply an additional unitary to their state before the next round of interaction, which may
allow them to cheat. However, this exhausts the flexibility that the prover may have.
To address these issues, we can reinterpret the verifier’s honest measurement or phase-flip gate
as part of the prover’s operation, absorbing them into the prover’s action and treating them as the
prover’s observables. While the prover may still apply additional unitaries between rounds, this
3

While a specific order is not strictly required, not every ordering will work. The order emerges from deduction.
In particular, we need to preserve the following sequence: the index of the row containing position 4 must appear
first, followed by the index of the column containing position 9 (the third element of the third row), and then the
index of the row containing position 2. Likewise, the index of the column containing position 2 should appear first,
followed by the index of the row containing position 9, and then the index of the column containing position 4. This
ordering enables us to transform the pair (2, 4) into an expression involving 9 in the middle, and eventually into (4,
2).

11

does not significantly impact our analysis.
Many-qubits tests. We follow the standard approach from [NV16] to extend the single-qubit
test to a many-qubit test. Specifically, in each round, the prover sends the verifier the measurement
of their witness in the basis corresponding to that round: Z in the first round, X in the second, and
in the third round, acts according to the verifier’s question. The prover always responds with the
Hadamard encoding of the purified measurement result. Although the prover runs in exponential
time in terms of time complexity, they can still be implemented by a logarithmic-depth circuit using
CNOT gates with arbitrary fan-out.
Testing the energy of a Clifford-Hamiltonian. To estimate the observable X(a)Z(b)Y (c),
we can leverage the first and second rounds of the qubits test. Measuring an observable is equivalent
to applying the controlled version of that observable as a unitary, with a control qubit initialized
in the |+⟩ state, followed by a measurement of the control qubit in the X basis. In our setting,
the verifier performs a CNOT gate on positions b + c in the first round, and another CNOT on
positions a + c in the second round, along with an additional application of the phase gate c times
on the control qubit. This procedure allows us to test the energy of a Clifford-Hamiltonian.
The challenge of making the communication polynomial. Note that the construction we
described has exponential communication complexity. In each round, whether measuring observables of the form X(a) or Z(b), the prover must simultaneously send the measurement results for
all a, b ∈ Fn2 , so they cannot anticipate which specific position the verifier will read in that round.
We attempted to follow the approach of [dlS22] to reduce the protocol length to polynomial.
Instead of using a λ-biased set as in [dlS22], we chose to use a classical locally testable code. This
choice stems from the fact that, although possible, it is complicated to test whether the prover is
indeed sending a superposition of inner products between a λ-biased set and some string, i.e., the
expected purified measurement result.
Moreover, in the setting of [dlS22], using any error-correcting code yields similar results. However, a crucial property required in their analysis is that the prover’s state must be totally mixed.
This assumption is essential for ensuring that the representation π(a)X = U (a)XU (a)† forms a
unitary representation, which is necessary for applying the Poincaré inequality. In the multi-prover
setting, this property holds without loss of generality, as the provers can be assumed to start with
EPR pairs 4 . However, in our setting, the single prover is allowed to choose an arbitrary initial
state, so this assumption no longer holds.

3

Organization

In Section 4 we introduce the necessary notation and conventions used throughout the paper. We
also define the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem and show an amplification of the gap. In Section 5,
we formally define quantum interactive oracle proofs (qIOPs) and their variants. Section 7 extends
the discussion to testing many qubits, and based on this, Section 8 presents our construction of
strong quantum IOPs. Appendix A presents our approach to testing single qubits. While not
directly connected to the main results, this section elaborates the ideas behind testing qubits in
the single-prover setting that was already given earlier.
4

This is because the game is a synchronous game.

12

Acknowledgments. T.V. is supported by AFOSR Grant No. FA9550-22-1-0391 and the Swiss
State Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI). Parts of this work was completed
while T.V. was at the Weizmann Institute in Israel, where he was supported by a research grant
from the Center for New Scientists. B.S. is supported by a scholarship from the Weizmann School
of Science. The authors would like to thank Prof. Zvika Brakerski for helpful discussions.

4

Preliminaries

In this section, we present the notation and conventions used throughout the paper to ensure clarity
and consistency.
Register and space notations.
• Registers: Capital letters in sans serif font, such as X, Y, Z, are used to denote quantum
registers.
• Hilbert spaces: Capital calligraphic letters, such as X , Y, Z, represent the complex Hilbert
spaces associated with the respective registers.
• Quantum channels: Blackboard bold letters, such as P, Q, or capital Greek letters, such as
Φ, Ψ, are used for quantum channels.
• Algorithms: Monospace capital letters, such as A, B, C, denote algorithms.
Controlled unitaries.
operations.

To simplify our presentation, we introduce notation for controlled unitary

Definition 4.1 (Controlled unitary). Let P be a register and UP a unitary acting on it. Let R be
a one-qubit register. The controlled unitary C(UP , R) applies UP if the qubit in R is |1⟩:


IP 0
C(UP , R) =
0 UP
More generally, for a register R′ of dimension d and i ∈ [d], the controlled unitary C(UP , R, i)
applies UP if the qubit in register R is |i⟩:
C(UP , R, i) = diag(IP , . . . , IP , UP , IP , . . . , IP )
| {z }
| {z }
i−1

d−i

Purified measurements. We define purified measurements, which simulate measuring an observable and storing the result in a register.
Definition
Pr 4.2 (Purified measurement). Let P, R be registers and OP an
P observable decomposed
as O = i=1 ai Pi , where each Pi is an orthogonal projection and I = i Pi . The unitary that
performs the purified measurement and stores the outcome in R is:
P (OP , R) =

r
X

Pi,P · (X(ai ))R

i=1

Note that applying P (OP , R) and then measuring R is equivalent to directly measuring OP and
storing the result in R.
13

EPR basis.

We define the EPR basis as follows:

Definition 4.3 (EPR basis). Let |φ+ ⟩ = √12 (|00⟩ + |11⟩). The EPR basis states are:
|E00 ⟩ = φ+ φ+ ,
|E10 ⟩ = (Z ⊗ I) φ+ φ+ (Z ⊗ I),
|E01 ⟩ = (X ⊗ I) φ+ φ+ (X ⊗ I),
|E11 ⟩ = (ZX ⊗ I) φ+ φ+ (XZ ⊗ I).
Subregisters and substrings.

We introduce notation for accessing subregisters and substrings:

Definition 4.4. Let A = (A1 , . . . , An ) be a tuple of registers, and S = {s1 , . . . , sk } ⊂ [n] with
s1 < · · · < sk . Define AS = (As1 , . . . , Ask ).
Definition 4.5. Let n, m ∈ Z+ , w ∈ Fn2 , T = (Ti )i∈[n] , and s = (s1 , . . . , sm ) ∈ [n]m . Define:
w(s) = (ws1 , . . . , wsm ),

T(s) = (Tsj )j∈[m] .

Inner product with respect to a state.
Definition 4.6. For a positive semidefinite operator σ, define:
⟨A, B⟩σ = Tr(A† Bσ),

4.1

∥A∥2σ = Tr(A† Aσ) .

Gap amplification of the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem

The Clifford-Hamiltonian problem was introduced in [BJSW16]. A Clifford-Hamiltonian is a local
Hamiltonian such that each local term has the form C † (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 C, with C being an element of
the 5-fold Clifford group. When choosing a Hamiltonian problem for amplification, we care about
two key parameters: the energy gap and the ℓ1 -norm of the Hamiltonian. The ℓ1 -norm refers to
the sum of the absolute values of the coefficients when decomposing the Hamiltonian into a linear
combination of observables. In Kitaev’s clock construction, the minimal energies for both YES
and NO instances are very close to 0, making it a poor starting point for gap amplification. The
standard approach for amplification begins by shifting the Hamiltonian H, for example, replacing
it with I − H. However, this shifting causes the ℓ1 -norm to grow beyond 1, and when repeated, it
can blow up exponentially.
In practice, since we ultimately measure observables, all we need is that after shifting, the
Hamiltonian becomes a sum of observables. Then, the ℓ1 -norm is naturally 1 before amplification
(i.e., repetition). A key advantage of using Clifford-Hamiltonian terms is that they are projections
P , which allows us to shift them to 1 − 2P , yielding observables. Then, we can amplify the gap
through repetition.
Note that


Y
I +Z
C † (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 C =
C † · I ⊗j−1 ⊗
⊗ I ⊗(5−j) · C,
2
j∈[5]

which may indicate that we can also transform a Clifford projection directly into a sum of XZHamiltonians. This may suggest that we can now measure XZ-Hamiltonians. However, the transformation does not preserve the ℓ1 norm. After amplification, the situation becomes even worse:
a Clifford Hamiltonian with ℓ1 norm 1 may be transformed into a sum of XZ-Hamiltonians with
exponentially larger ℓ1 norm. As a result, although amplification increases the spectral gap, the
14

exponential blow-up in the norm causes the effective gap to shrink exponentially, rendering amplification ineffective.
The following definition describes a specific type of local Hamiltonian term used in QMAcomplete constructions. Each term projects onto a Clifford-transformed all-zero state on a subset
of qubits, while acting as the identity on the remaining qubits.
Definition 4.7 (Clifford-Hamiltonian projection). A Hamiltonian (hermitian matrix) H is a
Clifford-Hamiltonian projection iff H acts non-trivially on a set S of qubits as C † 0|S| 0|S| C,
where C is an element of the |S|-fold Clifford group. More specifically,
H = (C † |0|S| ⟩⟨0|S| |C)S ⊗ I[n]−S .
This definition generalizes the projection above to a full Hamiltonian composed of multiple such
projections. Averaging them ensures the spectrum of H lies between 0 and 1.
n

n

Definition 4.8 (Clifford-Hamiltonian). A Hamiltonian H ∈ C2 ⊗ C2 is a Clifford-Hamiltonian
if it is the uniform average of a polynomial number m = poly(n) of Clifford-Hamiltonian projection
terms Hi . That is,
H=

1 X
Hi .
m
i∈[m]

Moreover, H is k-local if each Hi acts non-trivially on at most k qubits.
This problem asks whether the ground-state energy of a given local Clifford-Hamiltonian lies
below a(n) or above b(n), with a promise that one of the two holds.
Definition 4.9 (Local Clifford-Hamiltonian problem). Let k ∈ Z+ and let a, b : Z+ → R+ be
non-decreasing functions such that ∀n ∈ Z+ , a(n) < b(n). The local Clifford-Hamiltonian problem
LCH(k, a, b) is the promise problem (Syes , Sno ) defined by:
n

n

n

n

• Syes : the set of k-local Clifford-Hamiltonians H ∈ C2 ⊗ C2 such that λmin (H) ≤ a(n),
• Sno : the set of k-local Clifford-Hamiltonians H ∈ C2 ⊗ C2 such that λmin (H) ≥ b(n).
This theorem from [BJSW16] shows that the local Clifford-Hamiltonian problem is QMAcomplete for 5-local terms and polynomial small completeness-soundness gaps. It provides a concrete and structured Hamiltonian family for studying QMA.
Theorem 4.10 (Theorem 2 in [BJSW16]). There exist polynomials p and q such that the problem
LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n))
is QMA-complete.
This lemma presents a gap amplification technique that enhances the spectral gap between
YES and NO instances of the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem. Specifically, the transformation H ′ =
(1−2H)⊗N increases the gap exponentially. However, this comes at the cost of breaking the locality
structure of the Hamiltonian. The proof leverages the spectral properties of Hermitian operators
and the multiplicative behavior of their tensor powers.
Lemma 4.11 (Gap amplification of the Clifford-Hamiltonian problem). Let (Syes , Sno ) = LCH(k, a, b)
with a, b ∈ (0, 0.1). Let H ∈ Syes ∪ Sno , and define H ′ = (1 − 2H)⊗N for some odd N ∈ Z+ . Then:
15

1. If H ∈ Syes , then λmax (H ′ ) ≥ (1 − 2a)N .
2. If H ∈ Sno , then λmax (H ′ ) ≤ (1 − 2b)N .
Furthermore, let p, q be as in Theorem 4.10. For k = 5, a = 2−p(n) , b = 1/q(n), and N = q 2 (n),
there exists a polynomial s such that:
1. If H ∈ Syes , then λmax (H ′ ) ≥ 1 − 2−s(n) .
2. If H ∈ Sno , then λmax (H ′ ) ≤ 2−s(n) .
Proof. If H ∈ Syes , then
λmax (H ′ ) ≥ (1 − 2a)N ≥ 1 − 2aN ≥ 1 − 2−s(n) .
If H ∈ Sno , then
λmax (H ′ ) ≤ (1 − 2b)N = (1 − 2b)1/(2b)·2bN ≥ 1 − 2−s(n) .

4.2

Probabilistically checkable proofs of proximity

In this section, we recall the notion of probabilistically checkable proofs of proximity (PCPPs),
introduced in [BGH+ 04], and their application to the canonical P-complete problem Circuit
Value. These notions play a central role in our deductions.
Definition 4.12 ([BGH+ 04]). We define the P-complete language Circuit Value as CktVal =
{(C, w) : C(w) = 1}, where C is a Boolean circuit and w is an input string. For a pair language
L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ × {0, 1}∗ , we define L(x) = {y : (x, y) ∈ L}.
The following definition formalizes a proof system in which the verifier can efficiently check
whether a given input is close to being valid, without reading the entire input.
Definition 4.13 (PCPs of Proximity (PCPPs), [BGH+ 04]). Let s, δ : Z+ → [0, 1] be functions. A
verifier V is said to be a probabilistically checkable proof of proximity (PCPP) system for a pair
language L with proximity parameter δ and soundness error s if, for every pair of strings (x, y),
the following conditions hold:
• Completeness: If (x, y) ∈ L, then there exists a proof string π such that V (x) accepts the
oracle y ◦ π with probability 1.
• Soundness: If y is δ(|x|)-far from L(x), then for every π, the verifier V (x) accepts the oracle
y ◦ π with probability strictly less than s(|x|).
If s and δ are not explicitly specified, they are assumed to be constants in the interval (0, 1).
The following theorem, due to [BGH+ 04], establishes that the Circuit Value problem admits
a PCPP.
Theorem 4.14 ([BGH+ 04]). There exists a constant δ0 ∈ (0, 1) such that for all n ∈ Z+ and all
δ < δ0 , the language Circuit Value has a PCP of proximity (for circuits of size n) with the
following parameters:
• randomness complexity O(log n),
• query complexity O(1),
• perfect completeness, and
• soundness error 1 − Ω(δ) for proximity parameter δ.
16

4.3

Group stability

In this section, we review several mathematical tools and foundational results that will be used
throughout our analysis. We do not directly copy from existing literature, either because the
results are not explicitly stated or because they do not fully align with our requirements. We
begin by introducing the σ-weighted Hilbert–Schmidt positive semi-definite Hermitian form and
seminorm, which allow us to reason about approximate representations and operator comparisons
in the presence of a quantum state. We then recall a fundamental stability result for approximate
representations of the Pauli group due to Gowers and Hatami, which will serve as the core analytic
tool in our many-qubits test.
We define a positive semi-definite Hermitian form and seminorm with respect to a positive
semidefinite operator σ as follows. Similar definitions already appear in [Vid11] and in much of the
literature on nonlocal games.
Definition 4.15. For a positive semidefinite operator σ, define:
⟨A, B⟩σ = Tr(A† Bσ),

∥A∥2σ = Tr(A† Aσ).

The following useful properties are well-known.
Lemma 4.16. Let σ be a positive semidefinite operator. Then for any operators A, B:
∥A∥2σ ≥ 0,
∥A + B∥2σ ≤ 2∥A∥2σ + 2∥B∥2σ ,
∥AB∥2σ ≤ ∥A∥2 · ∥B∥2σ ,
and if C † C = I, then
⟨CA, CB⟩σ = ⟨A, B⟩σ .
Proof. The first and last items follow by definition. For the second,
∥A + B∥2σ = tr((A + B)† (A + B)σ)
= 2tr(A† Aσ) + 2tr(B † Bσ) − tr((A − B)† (A − B)σ)
≤ 2∥A∥2σ + 2∥B∥2σ .
For the third,
∥AB∥2σ = tr(A† ABσB † )
≤ ∥A† A∥ · tr(BσB † )
= ∥A∥2 · ∥B∥2σ .

We next recall the triangle inequality for the σ-seminorm, see e.g. [NW19, Fact 4.28].
Lemma 4.17 (Triangle inequality for σ-seminorm). Let σ be a positive semidefinite operator. Then
for any operators A and B,
∥A + B∥σ ≤ ∥A∥σ + ∥B∥σ .
We now introduce several definitions that will be useful in the context of group representations
and approximate representations of group.
17

Definition 4.18 (Unitary group). Define U (Cd ) as the group of d × d unitary matrices.
Definition 4.19 (Approximate representation). Given a finite group G, a dimension d ≥ 1, ε ≥ 0,
and a d-dimensional positive semidefinite matrix σ with trace 1, an (ε, σ, D1 , D2 )-representation of
G is a function f : G → U (Cd ) satisfying:
Ex∼D1 ,y∼D2 ℜ (⟨f (xy), f (x)f (y)⟩σ ) ≥ 1 − ε.
We now state a stability theorem due to Gowers and Hatami, which allows us to conclude that
approximate representations of the Pauli group are close to the Pauli group itself, up to isometry.
We state the theorem specifically for the Weyl-Heisenberg group and for approximate representations satisfying f (−x) = −f (x), f (1) = I. This is because we not only want the approximate
representation to be close to some representation of the Weyl-Heisenberg group, but we also want
it to correspond to the canonical representation ±X(a)Z(b). The conditions f (−x) = −f (x) and
f (1) = I serve to uniquely identify this representation. The work of [MNZ24] approaches this issue
differently: they first obtain a general representation of the Weyl-Heisenberg group and then show
how to isolate the canonical representation ±X(a)Z(b). They also did not state the result explicitly
as a theorem. For these reasons, even though the proof is well-known, we include our own version,
that emphasizes the perspective of representation theory.
Theorem 4.20 (Gowers-Hatami stability theorem, [GH17]). Let Pn denote the n-qubit Weyl–Heisenberg
group, and let f : Pn → U (Cd ) be an (ε, σ, Uniform(Pn ), µ)-representation of Pn satisfying:
f (−x) = −f (x),

f (1) = I.
′

′

Then there exists d′ ≥ d, an isometry V : Cd → Cd , and a representation g : Pn → U (Cd ) such
that g(x) = ρ(x) ⊗ I, and
Ex∼µ ∥f (x) − V † g(x)V ∥2σ ≤ Θ(ε),
where ρ(±X(a)Z(b)) = ±X(a)Z(b).
Proof. Note that N = |Pn | = 2 · 4n , the only irreducible representation that is not one-dimensional
ρ(±X(a)Z(b)) = ±X(a)Z(b) has dimension d0 = 2n .
Define V as follows: for u ∈ Cd ,
r
N
V (u) =
· E f (x)u ⊗ ρ(x).
2d0 x∈Pn
V is an isometry: for any u, v ∈ Cd ,
u† V † V v = tr((V u)† V v)
N
· tr( E u† f (x)† f (y)v ⊗ ρ(x)† ρ(y))
=
x,y∈Pn
2d0
N
=
· ( E u† f (x)† f (y)v · tr(ρ(x−1 y)))
2d0 x,y∈Pn
1
=
( E u† f (x)† f (x)v · tr(ρ(I)) + E u† f (x)† f (−x)v · tr(ρ(−I)))
x∈Pn
2d0 x∈Pn
†
=uv.
Let, for v ∈ Cd , O ∈ Cd0 ×d0 ,
(g(x))(v ⊗ O) = v ⊗ Oρ(x−1 ) .
18

Note that g(−I) = −I. Among all the irreducible representations of Pn , the only one that maps
−I to −I is ρ. Then, for any u, v ∈ Cd ,
u∗ V ∗ g(x)V v = tr((V u)∗ g(x)V u)
N
· tr( E u† f (z)† f (y)v ⊗ ρ(z)† ρ(y)ρ(x−1 ))
=
z,y∈Pn
2d0
N
=
· E u† f (z)† f (y)v · tr(ρ(z)† ρ(y)ρ(x−1 ))
2d0 z,y∈Pn
1
=
· ( E u† f (z)† f (zx)v · tr(I) + E u† f (z)† f (−zx)v · tr(−I))
z∈Pn
2d0 z∈Pn
†
†
= E u f (z) f (zx)v .
z∈Pn

Therefore,
E ℜ(⟨f (x), V ∗ g(x)V ⟩σ ) =

x∼µ

=
=
=

E

ℜ(tr(f (x)† f (z)† f (zx)σ))

E

ℜ(tr(f (zx)† f (z)f (x)σ))

E

ℜ(⟨f (z)† f (zx), f (x)⟩σ )

E

ℜ(⟨f (zx), f (z)f (x)⟩σ )

x∼µ,z∈R Pn
x∼µ,z∈R Pn
x∼µ,z∈R Pn
x∼µ,z∈R Pn

≥ 1−ε.
As a result,
E ∥f (x) − V † g(x)V ∥2σ

x∼µ

= E tr((f (x)† − V † g(x)† V )(f (x) − V † g(x)V )σ)
x∼µ

= 2 − 2ℜ( E tr(f (x)† · V † g(x)V )σ)
x∼µ

≤ Θ(ε) .

Remark 4.21. The original version of this theorem generalizes the Fourier transform to matrixvalued functions and non-Abelian groups. Notably, we proved that for any approximate representation of the Weyl-Heisenberg group, the only non-one-dimensional irreducible representation always
contributes a significant component.
Remark 4.22. We follow the approach from [Vid20], and the idea of switching distributions was
proposed in [MNZ24]. However, it is possible to modify the energy consistency test to directly verify
the correctness of a single observable such as X(a), Y (b), or Z(c). By using self-correction, we
can enforce the correctness for each individual a, b, and c, thereby avoiding the need to switch the
distribution.
The following theorem builds on the above and provides a central technical tool in our manyqubits tests.
Theorem 4.23 (Robustness of the many qubits tests). Let n, d ∈ Z+ , δ ∈ (0, 1), and σ ∈ Cd ⊗ Cd .
Let µ1 be a distribution over 0, 1n . Sample (b, a) ∼ µ1 , then sample r uniformly at random from
0, 1n . Define µ2 as the distribution of (b + r, a). Let ρ(±X(a)Z(b)) = ±X(a)Z(b). Let fX , fZ :
{0, 1}n → U (Cd ) such that:
19

• fX (a)2 = fZ (b)2 = I, fX (a)† = fX (a), fZ (b)† = fZ (b) for all a, b ∈ {0, 1}n ,
• fX (a)fX (b) = fX (a + b), fZ (a)fZ (b) = fZ (a + b), for all a, b ∈ {0, 1}n ,
• E(b,a)∼µ1 ∥fZ (b)fX (a) − (−1)a·b fX (a)fZ (b)∥2σ ≤ δ,
• E(b,a)∼µ2 ∥fZ (b)fX (a) − (−1)a·b fX (a)fZ (b)∥2σ ≤ δ,
′

′

Then there exists d′ ≥ d, an isometry V : Cd → Cd , and a representation g : Pn → U (Cd ) such
that g(x) = ρ(x) ⊗ I and
E(b,a)∼µ1 ∥fX (a)fZ (b) − V † g(X(a)Z(b))V ∥2σ ≤ Θ(δ) .
Proof. Using that any element of Pn has a unique representative of the form ±X(a)Z(b) for a, b ∈
{0, 1}n , we define f (±X(a)Z(b)) = ±fX (a)fZ (b). Next we need to verify that f is an approximate
representation. Note that
fX (a0 )fZ (b0 )fX (a1 )fZ (b1 ) − (−1)b0 ·a1 fX (a0 + a1 )fZ (b0 + b1 )
= fX (a0 )fZ (b0 )fX (a1 )fZ (b1 ) − (−1)b1 ·a1 fX (a0 )fZ (b0 )fZ (b1 )fX (a1 )
+ (−1)b1 ·a1 fX (a0 )fZ (b0 )fZ (b1 )fX (a1 ) − (−1)b1 ·a1 fX (a0 )fZ (b0 + b1 )fX (a1 )
+ (−1)b1 ·a1 fX (a0 )fZ (b0 + b1 )fX (a1 ) − (−1)b0 ·a1 fX (a0 )fX (a1 )fZ (b0 + b1 )
+ (−1)b0 ·a1 fX (a0 )fX (a1 )fZ (b0 + b1 ) − (−1)b0 ·a1 fX (a0 + a1 )fZ (b0 + b1 ) .
Therefore
E

(b0 ,a0 )∼U nif orm(Pn ),(b1 ,a1 )∼µ1

5

∥fX (a0 )fZ (b0 )fX (a1 )fZ (b1 ) − (−1)b0 ·a1 fX (a0 + a1 )fZ (b0 + b1 )∥2ρ ≤ Θ(δ) .

Formulation of Quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs

This section formalizes the model of Quantum Interactive Oracle Proofs (QIOPs), a quantum
analogue of classical IOPs with limited quantum access by the verifier. We first specify basic
notation. We then introduce fundamental notation and primitives such as the notion of a query
and of a quantum channel with queries. We then define what constitutes a qIOP system, along
with variations that capture different resource constraints.

5.1

Notation

We use sans serif font A, X, etc. to denote quantum registers and calligraphic font A, X , etc., to
denote the associated complex Hilbert space. We let L(H) denote the linear operators on H, and
C(H) the set of quantum channels on H, i.e. completely positive and trace-preserving linear maps
on L(H).
We use d(A) to denote the dimension of a register A and call a register trivial if d(A) = 1. If
A is a register of dimension dA , we define a computational basis measurement channel MA ∈ C(A)
on it by setting:
dA
X
MA =
MiA , MiA (ρA ) = |i⟩⟨i| ρA |i⟩⟨i| .
i=1

This channel models standard basis measurements for quantum registers.
20

5.2

Quantum channels with queries

The notion of query channel is the core primitive which we use for modeling quantum access in
qIOPs.
Definition 5.1 (Query). Let W = (W1 , . . . , Wn ), R = (R1 , . . . , Rm ), and R′ be qubit registers. Let
k ∈ [n] and {s1 , . . . , sk } ⊆ [n]. Let S = (Ws1 , . . . , Wsk ) be a subregister of W. Then, a query
channel on S with input register R and output register R′ is a quantum channel that acts only on
the registers S and R, and maps S to S and R to R′ . Moreover, the query set of Φ is defined as
{s1 , . . . , sk }.
A quantum channel with query consists of a single invocation of the query operation. Specifically, the channel first selects (through measurement) a query set {s1 , . . . , sk }, and then applies
a query channel of registers S and R. This structure models computation with oracle-style access,
where the query simulates a single round of interaction with an oracle.
Definition 5.2 (Quantum channel with queries). Let k, W, R, and R′ be as in Definition 5.1.
Let I = (R1 , . . . , Rk·⌈log(n)⌉ ) be a subregister of R. We refer to W as the witness register, R as the
reference register, and R′ as the post-processed reference register. Let Ss denote the subregister
(Ws1 , . . . , Wsk ) indexed by s = (s1 , . . . , sk ) ∈ [n]k . For each s, let ΦRSs ,s be a query channel of
registers Ss with input register R and output register R′ as in Definition 5.1.
A quantum channel Λ is called a quantum channel with queries if it decomposes as:
X
Λ=(
ΦRSs ,s ⊗ MsI ) ◦ Ψ,
s

where Ψ ∈ C(R) is a quantum channel.
Definition 5.3. For a channel Ψ, we denote by t(Ψ) its time complexity. This is the smallest
number of elementary gates used to implement Ψ.5 We often abuse notation and use t(Ψ) to
denote an upper bound on the time complexity of channel Ψ.
Complexity parameters.
lowing parameters:

Given a quantum channel with queries, we associate with it the fol-

• The proof length is l(Λ) = n.
• The query complexity is q(Λ) = k.
• The time complexity is t(Λ).
The following definition formalizes the notion of a quantum algorithm with queries. Specifically,
it models such an algorithm as being specified by a classical polynomial-time algorithm that outputs
a quantum channel with queries.
Definition 5.4 (Quantum algorithm with queries). An algorithm A is said to be a quantum algorithm with queries if A is a classical polynomial-time algorithm that, given an input x ∈ {0, 1}∗ ,
outputs a description of a quantum channel with queries. Let Ax denote the quantum channel
produced by A(x).
The complexity of A is characterized by three parameters, proof length l(n), query complexity
q(n), and time complexity t(n), each defined as an upper bound on the corresponding resource used
by the channel Ax for any input x of length n.
Moreover, we use A(x, ρW ) to denote Ax (ρW ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|R ). We use A(x) to denote Ax (|0⟩⟨0|W ⊗
|0⟩⟨0|R ). Finally, we use the witness register of Ax to denote the witness register of A(x).
5

For this, we assume that some finite universal gate set, made of single and two-qubit gates, has been fixed.

21

private: P

Prover

P0

P1
(M1 , J1 )

W0
Verifier

Vx,1

W1
Vx,2

private: R

decision in J2

Figure 1: An example of a m = 3-message quantum interactive proof.

5.3

Quantum interactive oracle proof systems

Before introducing quantum interactive oracle proof systems in full generality, we first use the notation introduced in the previous subsection to formulate the well-known quantum PCP conjecture,
which will serve as a guiding example to help clarify the definitions.
Definition 5.5 (Quantum probabilistically checkable proof systems). A quantum probabilistically
checkable proof system for a promise problem (Syes , Sno ) is a quantum algorithm with queries V
such that:
1. Efficient: V has polynomial time complexity.
2. Completeness: For any x ∈ Syes , there exists a quantum state ρ such that Pr[V(x) = 1] ≥ 23 .
3. Soundness: For any x ∈ Sno and any quantum state ρ, Pr[V(x) = 1] ≤ 13 .
Definition 5.6 (Quantum probabilistically checkable proofs). Let l, q : Z+ → Z+ . Define QPCP(l, q)
as the set of promise problem (Syes , Sno ) that have a quantum probabilistically checkable proof system
with proof length l and query complexity q.
Remark 5.7. Our definition matches the standard (non-adaptive definition) of quantum PCPs [AAV13,
GJMZ23, BHW24].
Conjecture 5.8 (qPCP conjecture). QMA ⊆ QPCP(poly, O(1))
We now introduce the central definition of a quantum interactive oracle proof (qIOP) system,
which serves as a quantum analogue of classical interactive oracle proof systems.
A qIOP system consists of a sequence of algorithms V1 , . . . , Vn , where each Vi is a quantum
algorithm with queries. The verifier and prover begin with initial state |0⟩. During the interaction,
the verifier is allowed to read from and modify the prover’s message registers as a way of responding
to the prover’s messages. The verifier is also allowed to retain part of the prover’s message register
and return it in later rounds of the interaction. While the verifier operates under several complexity
constraints, the malicious prover is assumed to be computationally unbounded. Soundness and
completeness are defined analogously to classical interactive proof systems. Moreover, the verifier
is always allowed to send classical messages to the prover.
We first review the definition of a quantum interactive proof, and then proceed to our definition
of a quantum interactive oracle proof. See Figure 1 for an illustration of the 3-message case.
Definition 5.9 (Quantum interactive proof systems). Let m ∈ Z+ be the total number of messages,
and let h = ⌊m/2 + 1⌋. An m-message quantum interactive oracle proof system is defined by a tuple
of quantum algorithms with queries V = (V1 , V2 , . . . , Vh ). The tuple Vx = (Vx,1 , . . . , Vx,h ) represents
the quantum channels with queries produced by the algorithm Vi on input x. Each quantum channel
′ ) and (quantum) reference register
Vx,i , for i ∈ [h], acts on a (quantum) witness register (Wi−1 , Wi−1
22

R, and it returns a message register (Ji , Mi ) where Ji is classical and Mi quantum, together with
private registers (Wi′ , R).6 Summarizing, the verifier channel Vx,i acts on the registers as follows:


′
(Wi−1 , Wi−1
), R −→ (Mi , Ji ), (Wi′ , R) .
If m is odd, define the index set I = {0, . . . , h − 1}; if m is even, let I = {1, . . . , h − 1}. A prover
strategy is specified by a collection of quantum channels {Pi }i∈I and a quantum register P, where
each Pi acts on the registers as follows:
((Mi , Ji ), P) −→ (Wi , P).
Let the first (classical) bit of the register Jh in the output of Vx,h represent the verifier’s final
decision to accept or reject. Let ω(Vx ) denote the value of the interactive game defined by Vx . That
is, ω(Vx ) is the maximum acceptance probability of Vx over all possible prover strategies {Pi }i∈I .
The following properties must be satisfied:
• Consistent: Unless otherwise specified, we initialize Wi , Wi′ , R, Mi to |0⟩, whereas P may be
initialized in an arbitrary quantum state. The register Ji is initialized to the all-zero string.
• Efficient: Each verifier’s algorithm Vi must be implementable in polynomial time and have
polynomial time complexity as defined in Definition 5.4.
In the next definition we present a general model of quantum interactive oracle proofs, where
the verifier is allowed to generate and send an arbitrary quantum state to the prover, rather than
being restricted to sending only registers from the prover’s message. In this definition, we denote
by M′i the message register generated by the verifier in round i. The full message register of the
verifier in round i, denoted by Mi , includes both M′i and some registers received from the prover in
the current and previous rounds.
In a later section, we provide a relatively “simple” construction of a general quantum interactive
oracle proof, illustrating that this definition may be too permissive to yield meaningful or interesting
results. For this reason, we subsequently introduce a more restricted definition where the M′i
registers are required to be trivial.
Definition 5.10 (General quantum interactive oracle proof systems). Let m ∈ Z+ . An m-message
general quantum interactive oracle proof system consists of an m-message quantum interactive proof
system V satisfying the same structure as in Definition 5.9, but with the following modifications to
the register structure.
As before, in the ith round, for i ∈ [h] where h = ⌊m/2 + 1⌋, the verifier receives the quantum
message register Wi−1 from the prover. In addition, the verifier has in their possession a register
′
Wi−1
that stores (parts of ) previously received messages from the prover, and a register R that is
′
their private (reference) register. The register Wi−1
decomposes as
′
′
′
′
Wi−1
= (W0,i−1
, W1,i−1
, . . . , Wi−2,i−1
),
′
where Wj,i−1
denotes the part of the prover’s jth message (i.e., Wj ) that has so far not been sent
back to the prover.
′
For each Wj,i−1
, the verifier sends a subregister Nj,i to the prover in the ith round, and keeps
′ . In addition, the verifier produces a quantum message register M′ and
the remaining part as Wj,i
i
6
For the present definition the registers Wi′ are not needed and can be assumed to be trivial without loss of
generality. We include them for future consistency.

23

a classical message register Ji . The verifier sends back the total message register (Mi , Ji ) to the
prover, where
Mi = (M′i , (N0,i , N1,i , . . . , Ni−1,i )).
Finally, we define the following resource bounds of the protocol:
• Proof length: The verifier V has proof length l : Z+ → Z+ if
X
li (n),
l(n) ≥
i∈[n]

where li (n) is the proof length of Vi .
• Query complexity: The verifier V has query complexity q : Z+ → Z+ if
X
q(n) ≥
qi (n),
i∈[n]

where qi (n) is the query complexity of Vi .
′ , any quantum register touched by
Remark 5.11. Because Vx,i has witness register Wi−1 , Wi−1
gates in Vx,i is going to be counted in the query complexity.

Definition 5.12 (Restricted quantum interactive oracle proof systems). An m-message restricted
quantum interactive oracle proof system consists of an m-message general quantum interactive
oracle proof system such that for each i, M′i is a trivial quantum register.
Definition 5.13 (Strong quantum interactive oracle proof systems). An m-message strong quantum interactive oracle proof system consists of an m-message quantum interactive oracle proof
system satisfying that (using the notation in Definition 5.9 and Definition 5.12) for each i ∈ [h],
M′i is trivial (no new quantum message sent by the verifier) and Ni−1,i = Wi−1 (all prover quantum
′
messages are sent back to him). As a consequence, Mi = Wi−1 , Wi−1
is always trivial, and Vx,i
has witness register Wi−1 only.
Definition 5.14 (Quantum interactive oracle proof systems for a promise problem). Let m ∈ Z+
be the total number of messages. An m-message restricted quantum interactive oracle proof system
(resp. general quantum interactive oracle proof system, strong quantum interactive oracle proof
system) for a promise problem (Syes , Sno ) satisfies the following, where ω(Vx ) is defined as in
Definition 5.12 (resp. Definition 5.10, Definition 5.13).
• Completeness: There exists a constant c ∈ (0, 1] such that for all x ∈ Syes , the maximum
acceptance probability ω(Vx ) ≥ c. That is, there exists an honest prover strategy under which
the verifier accepts every yes-instance with probability at least c.
• Soundness: There exists a constant s ∈ [0, c) such that for all x ∈ Sno , the maximum acceptance probability ω(Vx ) ≤ s. That is, no prover strategy can cause the verifier to accept a
no-instance with probability greater than s.
We define three classes of quantum interactive oracle proof systems. The class QIOP(r, l, q)
consists of all promise problems that admit an r-message restricted quantum interactive oracle
proof (qIOP) system with proof length bounded by l(n) and query complexity bounded by q(n).
Here, the query complexity captures the total number of qubits accessed in the prover’s message
by the verifier across all rounds.
24

Definition 5.15 (Quantum interactive oracle proofs). Let r, l, q : Z+ → Z+ . Let QIOP(r, l, q)
(resp. GQIOP(r, l, q), SQIOP(r, l, q)) be the set of promise problem (Syes , Sno ) that has an rmessage restricted (resp. general, strong) quantum interactive oracle proof system with proof length
l and query complexity q.
Each of these models assumes a polynomial-time verifier and allows for a quantum prover that is
computationally unbounded. The number of interaction rounds is bounded by r(n), which is always
taken to be constant. These complexity classes help characterize how much quantum information
the verifier may access or process.

6

Quantum IOPs with Shared EPR Pairs and Classical Communication

In our first construction, the verifier prepares EPR pairs and sends one half of each to the prover,
thereby establishing shared entanglement.
In this section, we proceed to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 6.1. QMA ⊆ GQIOP(O(1), poly, O(1)).

6.1

Commitment in the Interactive Oracle Proof Model

In the interactive oracle proof setting, the verifier leverages the prover’s computational power to
evaluate certain functions of the input. In our specific setting, in will be the case that the prover
holds a string that the verifier cannot directly access, while the verifier holds a circuit unknown to
the prover. The combination of this string and the circuit determines whether the input belongs
to the language. The trivial solution is problematic: if the verifier simply sends the circuit to the
prover, the prover can cheat by evaluating it on a different input rather than the one initially given.
An interactive oracle commitment provides a solution by allowing the prover to commit to their
input at the outset. Later, the verifier sends a circuit, and the commitment ensures that the prover
evaluates it honestly on the committed input.
In the following definition, the first requirement enforces an interactive oracle-style interaction,
while the second requires the prover to be capable of committing to any string and performing any
computation. (Note that the following definition refers to the classical setting.)
Definition 6.2 (Interactive Oracle Commitment). An interactive oracle commitment scheme is
specified by a classical probabilistic polynomial-time interactive machine V and a function D : F∗2 →
F∗2 satisfying the following:
1. The verifier’s query complexity is a constant.
2. There exists an honest polynomial time prover P, such that for any n, any s ∈ Fn2 , for
any circuit C of size poly(n) with a single-bit output, any ε ∈ (0, 1), at the end of the
interaction between P(s) and V(C, ε), the verifier outputs C(s) with probability 1. Moreover,
the communication complexity between P and V is poly(n).
3. Soundness: For any polynomial size circuit C with a single bit output, any ε ∈ (0, 1), and any
prover P, let m be the prover’s first message, at the end of the interaction,
Pr[V(C, ε) outputs C(D(m)) or rejects] ≥ 1 − ε .

25

Remark 6.3. For the honest prover, the first message m is the commitment and satisfies D(m) = s.
Moreover, Im(D) = F∗2 .
We will construct an interactive oracle commitment (IOC) protocol using a PCP of Proximity
(PCPP) for the Circuit Value problem and a family of error-correcting codes with polynomial
rate, constant distance, and efficient encoding and decoding.
First, we recall a fundamental result about the existence of error correction codes. These codes
form the basis of the prover’s commitment in our protocol.
Definition 6.4 (Codeword tester for error-correcting code). Let C ⊆ Fn2 be a binary errorcorrecting code. A deterministic tester for C is a classical algorithm T : Fn2 → {0, 1} such that
(
1 if x ∈ C,
T(x) =
0 otherwise.
That is, T accepts a string if and only if it is a valid codeword in C.
Theorem 6.5 (Error correction codes, [SS96]). There exist families of linear error-correcting codes
with polynomial rate, constant relative distance, and deterministic polynomial-time encoding and
decoding algorithms, along with a deterministic polynomial-time tester for checking codeword membership.
We now describe the structure of the prover in the interactive oracle commitment protocol. The
prover uses a codeword encoding of its message to commit to a value and later proves consistency
of this value through interaction with the verifier.
Definition 6.6 (Construction of the Prover in the Interactive Oracle Commitment Protocol).
• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier a string E(s), where E is the encoding
function of the code from Theorem 6.5.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends the prover a description of a Boolean circuit C.
• The prover’s second step: The prover responds with a string C(s) ◦ w, where w is a witness
such that the verifier in Theorem 4.14 accepts the oracle E(s) ◦ w when invoked on input
x = C(D(·)) + C(s) + 1.
• The verifier’s second step: The verifier decides whether to accept, and if so, produces an
output.
Next, we describe the behavior of the verifier in the interactive oracle commitment protocol.
The verifier checks the proximity of the prover’s message to a codeword and verifies the correctness
of the claimed output using a PCPP verifier.
Definition 6.7 (Construction of the Verifier in the Interactive Oracle Commitment Protocol).
• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier a string m.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends the prover a description of a Boolean circuit C.
• The prover’s second step: The prover sends the verifier a string r ◦ w.

26

• The verifier’s second step: The verifier accepts and outputs r if and only if the verifier from
Theorem 4.14, when run a constant number of times, accepts each time on input

x = C(D(·)) + r + 1 ∧ T (·),
with implicit input y = m and proof π = w, where D is the decoding circuit and T is the code
tester from Theorem 6.5
The following lemma states that the protocol defined above satisfies the requirements of an
interactive oracle commitment. In particular, the verifier satisfies completeness and soundness
properties.
Lemma 6.8. The verifier described in Definition 6.7 satisfies the requirements of an interactive
oracle commitment.
Proof. By Definition 6.7, Theorem 6.5, and Theorem 4.14, the verifier’s query complexity is constant.
Completeness: Using Theorem 6.5 and Theorem 4.14, if the prover is honest and provides a
valid encoding and witness, the verifier will accept with probability 1. Moreover, the communication
complexity between the prover and verifier is polynomial in the input size.
Soundness: Let S = {t | C(D(t)) = r∧T (t) = 1}. If dist(m, S) > δ, then Pr[V(C, ε) accepts] ≤
ε, and therefore,
Pr[V(C, ε) either outputs C(D(m)) or rejects] ≥ 1 − ε.
If dist(m, S) ≤ δ, then there exists s such that C(s) = r and dist(m, E(s)) ≤ δ. Hence D(m) = s
and C(D(m)) = r, and the verifier will either accept with correct output or reject. Thus,
Pr[the verifier V(C, ε) either outputs C(D(m)) or rejects] = 1.

6.2

Quantum IOPs with shared EPR pairs

Theorem 6.9 (Restatement of Theorem 6.1). QMA ⊆ GQIOP(3, poly, O(1)).
We begin by defining the verifier and prover used in the proof of Theorem 6.1. Following this,
we proceed to prove the theorem.
A naive approach would be for the prover to teleport N copies of the witness to the verifier,
sending along the corresponding one-time pads required for the teleportation. The verifier would
then measure their half of the EPR pairs, apply the appropriate corrections using the received
one-time pads, and decide whether to accept based on the result. Note that the verifier’s half of
the EPR pairs is stored in private registers, and thus does not contribute to the query complexity.
In the construction that follows, the prover and verifier follow a protocol inspired by this naive
approach. However, instead of directly transmitting the one-time pads, the prover commits to
them using a commitment scheme. The verifier then uses their ability to extract functions of the
committed value to recover the necessary information for correcting the measurement outcomes.
At the start of the protocol, the verifier holds a register R′ and the prover holds a register R,
such that the joint quantum state on RR′ consists of shared EPR pairs.
Definition 6.10 (Honest prover strategyP
for Theorem 6.1). Let p, q be as in Theorem 4.10, and
1
2n
2n be a 5-local Clifford Hamiltonian
let s, N be as in Lemma 4.11. Let H = m
i∈[m] Hi ∈ C ⊗ C
with m = poly(n), such that either λmin (H) ≤ 2−p(n) or λmin (H) ≥ 1/q(n).
27

Let RR′ be quantum registers initialized to the maximally entangled state:
√

1

2nN
X−1

2nN

i=0

|i⟩R |i⟩R′ .

• The prover holds registers Wi = (Wi,1 , Wi,2 , . . . , Wi,n ) for i ∈ [N ]. Let |φ⟩ be the eigenstate
corresponding to the maximum eigenvalue of 1 − 2H. The prover prepares N copies of |φ⟩
and stores them in the registers Wi .
• For each i ∈ [N ] and j ∈ [n], the prover measures the joint system Wi,j R(i−1)∗n+j in the EPR
basis as defined in Definition 4.3, and stores the measurement result in (s0,i,j , s1,i,j ).
• Let
s = (sk,i,j )(k,i,j)∈{0,1}×[N ]×[n] .
The prover then engages in the interactive oracle commitment protocol defined in Definition 6.2, using s as input.
Definition 6.11 (Verifier strategy for Theorem 6.1). Under the same setup assumptions as in
Definition 6.10, the verifier performs the following actions:
• For each i ∈ [N ], the verifier samples li ∈ [m] independently and uniformly at random.


• For each i ∈ [m], let Hi = Ci† (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 Ci ⊗ I. For j ∈ [5], define


Oi,j = Ci† · (I ⊗j−1 ⊗ Z ⊗ I ⊗(5−j) ) · Ci ⊗ I,
and let
Oi,j = (−1)di,j X(ai,j )Z(bi,j )Y (ci,j )
be its Pauli representation as in Lemma 6.13.
• For each i ∈ [N ], the verifier measures the register
R′ i = (R′ (i−1)∗n+1 , . . . , R′ (i−1)∗n+n )
using the observables Oli ,j for j = 1 to 5, and stores the measurement outcomes in ri,j .
• The verifier constructs the Boolean circuit:
M
_

C(x) =
1⊕
rli ,j ⊕ ali ,j x0,i ⊕ bli ,j x1,i ⊕ cli ,j x1,i ⊕ cli ,j x0,i ,
i∈[N ]

j∈[5]

where x = (xk,i,j )k∈{0,1},i∈[N ],j∈[n] .
• The verifier runs the interactive oracle commitment protocol in Definition 6.2 with the circuit
C and ε = 0.001.
• The verifier accepts if and only if the interactive oracle commitment accepts and its output is
0.
Remark 6.12. Note that in our construction, after the verifier sends the half EPR pairs in the
first round, all remaining communication is classical. If we instead assume that the verifier and
the prover share EPR pairs at the beginning, then the protocol becomes fully classical.
28

Proof of Theorem 6.1. Let V be the verifier in Definition 6.11. We will show that V is 3-message
non-adaptive quantum classical interactive oracle proof system with N n-shared EPR pairs for
LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) and thus
LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) ∈ GQIOP(3, poly, O(1), poly).
By Theorem 4.10, LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) is QMA-complete. Therefore,
QMA ⊆ GQIOP(3, poly, O(1), poly) .
By Definition 6.10, Definition 6.11, and Definition 5.12, V is consistent, has polynomial time
complexity, is efficient, has proof length poly(n), and has query complexity O(1). Moreover, the
completeness and soundness properties are as follows.
Completeness: Let ri′ be the random variable that has the distribution of measuring |φ⟩
under 1 − 2Hli . By quantum teleportation, the state of the verifier after receiving s0 , s1 is
X(s1 )Z(s0 ) |φ⟩⊗N . By Lemma 6.16, Definition 6.10, and Definition 6.11, given l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , s0 , s1 ,
hM
i


Pr C((s0 , s1 )) = 0 | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , s0 , s1 = Pr
ri′ = 0 .
(1)
i∈[N ]

Thus, by Lemma 6.17, we can conclude that
ω(V ) = Pr[Verifier accepts]
X
=
Pr[l1 , l2 , · · · , lN ] · Pr[Verifier accepts | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN ]
l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]

X

=

1
Pr[s0 , s1 ] · Pr[Verifier accepts | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , s0 , s1 ]
mN
Nn

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m],s0 ,s1 ∈F2

X

=

1
1
· ( N n )2 · Pr[C((s0 , s1 )) = 0 | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , s0 , s1 ]
N
m
2
Nn

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m],s0 ,s1 ∈F2

=

X
l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]

M
1
·
Pr[
ri′ = 0]
mN
i∈[N ]

O
1
⊗N
·
Pr[The
outcome
of
measuring
|φ⟩
under
(1 − 2Hli ) is 0]
mN
i∈[N ]
l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]
N
X
I + i∈[N ] (1 − 2Hli )
1
⊗N
=
· ⟨φ|
|φ⟩⊗N
mN
2
=

X

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]

I + (1 − 2H)⊗N
|φ⟩⊗N
2
1 (⟨φ| (1 − 2H) |φ⟩)N
= +
2
2
≥ 1 − Θ(2−s(n) ) ,
= ⟨φ|⊗N

where the fourth step follows from the completeness of the interactive oracle commitment.
Soundness: Let the first message sent by the prover in the interactive oracle commitment be
M , and let (s0 , s1 ) be such that D(M ) = (s0 , s1 ). Without loss of generality, the whole quantum
29

state after the prover sends the message is
√

1

2nN
X−1

2nN

i=0

(U PM |0⟩W |i⟩R ) |i⟩R′ ,

where W is arbitrary register, U is an arbitrary unitary acting on WR, and {PM }M ∈Fh is and
2
arbitrary orthogonal projective measurement acting on WR, where h = |E(12N n )| is the output
length of the encoding circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5.
For i ∈ [N ], define an orthogonal projection
(1)

Qi

= Cl†i

O I + (−1)ali ,j s0,i +bli ,j s1,i +cli ,j (s0,i +s1,i ) Z
2

j∈[5]

Cl i ,

(0)

Qi

(1)

= I − Qi

.

Note that
(j)

X(s1 )Z(s0 )Qi

=

1
2

+ (−1)j

1
2

− H li



X(s1 )Z(s0 ) .

The probability of the verifier accepting can be bounded as follows:
ω(V ) = Pr[Verifier accepts]
X
=
Pr[l1 , l2 , · · · , lN ] · Pr[Verifier accepts | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN ]
l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]

1
Pr[M ] · Pr[Verifier accepts | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ] .
mN
h

X

=

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m],M ∈F2

By the soundness of the interactive oracle commitment,
Pr[the verifier in interactive oracle commitment either outputs C(s0 , s1 ) or reject] ≥ 1 − ε.
Thus,
Pr[Verifier accepts | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ]
= Pr[Verifier in interactive oracle commitment accepts and outputs 0 | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ]

≤ max Pr[C(s0 , s1 ) = 0 | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ] , ε .
Let
ri = 1 ⊕

_

(rli ,j ⊕ ali ,j s0,i ⊕ bli ,j s1,i ⊕ cli ,j s1,i ⊕ cli ,j s0,i ) .

j∈[5]

Then,
Pr[C(s0 , s1 ) = 0 | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ] =

X

Pr[r1 , r2 , · · · , rN | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ] .

⊕i∈[N ] ri =0

Moreover, we have that
Pr[r1 , r2 , · · · , rN | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ] · Pr[M ]
=

1
2nN

2nN
X−1

N
Y

i=0

j=1

(U PM |0⟩W |i⟩R )

(r )

Qj j |i⟩R′

30

2

=

=

1

2nN
X−1

N
Y

i=0

j=1

(U PM |0⟩W |i⟩R )(X(s1 )Z(s0 ))R′

2nN

2nN −1

1

X

2nN

(U PM |0⟩W |i⟩R )

i=0

(r )

Qj j |i⟩R′

2

N
Y
1
1
( + (−1)rj ( − Hlj ))X(s1 )Z(s0 ) |i⟩R′
2
2

2

.

j=1

We use ρ to denote
1
2nN

nN

nN

i=0

l=0

2X
−1
X 2 X−1
(U PM |0⟩W |i⟩R )X(s1 )Z(s0 ) |i⟩R′
(⟨0|W ⟨l|R PM U † ) ⟨l|R′ X(s1 )Z(s0 ).
M ∈Fh
2

Note that
2nN −1

1 X  X
tr
(⟨0|W ⟨i|R PM |0⟩W |i⟩R )
tr(ρ) = nN
2
i=0

M

=

1

2

 2nN
X−1

(⟨0|W ⟨i|R I |0⟩W |i⟩R )

tr
nN



i=0

= 1.
Since ρ is a quantum state,
X

ω(V ) ≤ ε +

1
Pr[M ] ·
mN
h

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m],M ∈F2

X

Pr[r1 , r2 , · · · , rN | l1 , l2 , · · · , lN , M ]

⊕i∈[N ] ri =0

N

X

= ε+

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m],⊕i∈[N ] ri =0

X

= ε+

l1 ,l2 ,··· ,lN ∈[m]

Y 1
1
1
tr[
( + (−1)rj ( − Hlj ))ρ]
mN
2
2
j=1

I + ⊗i∈[N ] (1 − 2Hli )
1
tr[
ρ]
N
m
2

I + (1 − 2H)⊗N
ρ]
2
1
1
≤ + ε + · 2−s(n) .
2
2
= ε + tr[

6.3

Technical claims

Lemma 6.13. For any k ∈ Z+ and any element of the k-fold Clifford group C there exists a, b, c ∈
Fk2 , d ∈ F2 , such that
C † (Z ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C = (−1)d X(a)Z(b)Y (c)
|
{z
}

(2)

k−1

and a ∧ b = b ∧ c = c ∧ a = 0. We call (−1)d X(a)Z(b)Y (c) the Pauli representation of C † (Z ⊗
I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C.
|
{z
}
k−1

31

Proof. Because Z ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I is an element of the k-fold Pauli group and C is an element of
|
{z
}
k−1

the k-fold Clifford group, C † (Z ⊗I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C is an element of the k-fold Pauli group. Suppose
|
{z
}
k−1

C † (Z ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C = (−1)d ie X(a)Z(b)Y (c)
{z
}
|
k−1

where a, b, c ∈ Fk2 , d, e ∈ F2 and a ∧ b = b ∧ c = c ∧ a = 0.
Because
(−1)d ie X(a)Z(b)Y (c) = C † (Z ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C
|
{z
}
k−1

†

= (C (Z ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I )C)†
|
{z
}
k−1

= ((−1) i X(a)Z(b)Y (c))† ,
d e

thus e = 0.
x

A
B = B I+(−1)
Lemma 6.14. Let A, B be matrices. For x ∈ F2 , I+(−1)
2
2
x
x
I+(−1) A
I+(−1) A
B
=
B
if
[A,
B]
=
0.
2
2

x+1 A

if {A, B} = 0,

Proof. Part 1: Because AB = −BA,
I + (−1)x A
I + (−1)x+1 A
B=B
.
2
2
Part 2: Because AB = BA,
I + (−1)x A
I + (−1)x A
B=B
.
2
2

Lemma 6.15. For any observable Oi such that Oi2 = I,
N
X
O (I + (−1)ri Oi )
I + i∈[N ] Oi
=
2
2
L
i∈[N ] ri =0 i∈[N ]

Proof. The lemma follows from
X
L

O (I + (−1)ri Oi )
2

i∈[N ] ri =0 i∈[N ]

X

+

O (I + (−1)ri Oi )
2

L

i∈[N ] ri =1 i∈[N ]

= I.

and
X
L

O (I + (−1)ri Oi )

i∈[N ] ri =0 i∈[N ]

2

X

−
L

O (I + (−1)ri Oi )

i∈[N ] ri =1 i∈[N ]

32

2

=

O
i∈[N ]

Oi .

Lemma 6.16. Let C be an element of the 5-fold Clifford group. Let |φ⟩ be a quantum state. Let
r′ be the random variable that has the distribution of measuring |φ⟩ under 1 − 2C † (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 C. Let
Oj = (C † I ⊗ I · · · ⊗ I ⊗Z ⊗ I ⊗ I · · · ⊗ I C) ⊗ I,
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
j−1

5−j

and let
Oj = (−1)dj X(aj )Z(bj )Y (cj )
be the Pauli representation of Oj as defined in Lemma 6.13. Let s0 , s1 ∈R Fn2 . Let (r1 , r2 , · · · , r5 ) be
the random variable that has the distribution of the measurement
outcomes of measuring Z(s0 )X(s1 ) |φ⟩
W
under Oj from j = 1 to j = 5 sequentially. Let r = 1 ⊕ j∈[5] (rj ⊕ aj s0 ⊕ bj s1 ⊕ cj s1 ⊕ cj s0 ).
Then, the random variables r and r′ have the same distribution.
Proof. The distribution of r′ can be described by Pr[r′ W
= 1] = ⟨φ| H |φ⟩.
′′
Let rj = aj s0 ⊕ bj s1 ⊕ cj s1 ⊕ cj s0 . Because r = 1 ⊕ j∈[5] (rj ⊕ rj′′ ), the distribution of r can be
described by
′′
5
Y
I + (−1)rj O6−j
Pr[r = 1] = ∥
· X(s1 )Z(s0 ) |φ⟩ ∥2 .
2
j=1

Note that Oj = (−1)dj X(aj )Z(bj )Y (cj ), by Lemma 6.14, we have that for j ∈ [m],
′′

I + (−1)rj Oj
I + Oj
· X(s1 )Z(s0 ) = X(s1 )Z(s0 ) ·
2
2
Thus,
Pr[r = 1] = ∥

′′
5
Y
I + (−1)rj O6−j

2

j=1

= ∥X(s1 )Z(s0 )

5
Y
I + O6−j

2

j=1

=∥

5
Y
j=1

= ⟨φ|

· X(s1 )Z(s0 ) |φ⟩ ∥2
· |φ⟩ ∥2

I + O6−j
· |φ⟩ ∥2
2

5
Y
j=1

C † I ⊗ I · · · ⊗ I ⊗Z + ⊗ I ⊗ I · · · ⊗ I C |φ⟩
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
5−j

j−1

= ⟨φ| H |φ⟩ .

1 P
Lemma 6.17. Let Oi for i ∈ [m] be observables. Let H = m
i∈[m] Oi . Let |φ⟩ be a quantum
′
state. Let li ∈ [m] for i ∈ [N ]. Let ri be the random variable that has the distribution of measuring
|φ⟩ under Oli . Then,
M
O
ri′ = 0] = Pr[The outcome of measuring |φ⟩⊗N under
Oli is 0]
(3)
Pr[
i∈[N ]

i∈[N ]

33

Proof. This is because
′

Pr[

M

Y

X

ri′ = 0] =

′
i∈[N ] ri =0 i∈[N ]

L

i∈[N ]

⟨φ|

(I + (−1)ri Oli )
|φ⟩ ,
2

and
Pr[The outcome of measuring |φ⟩

⊗N

under

O

(1 − 2Hli ) is 0] = ⟨φ|

i∈[N ]

⊗N

I+

N

i∈[N ] Oli

2

|φ⟩⊗N .

The conclusion follows from Lemma 6.15.

7

Many Qubits Tests

In this section, we consider the extended Pauli matrices X(g), Z(g). We design a protocol that
forces the prover’s strategies to align with these matrices. Specifically, an honest prover using
these matrices can succeed in the protocol. Conversely, any prover that succeeds with sufficiently
high probability must exhibit an approximate anti-commuting relationship when |g| is odd and
an approximate commuting relationship when |g| is even, similar to the relationship between Z(g)
and X(g). Since the test is a generalization of the single-qubit test sketched in Section 2.3, we
recommend that the reader review that section first.

7.1

Error Correcting Code

In this section we recall the properties of a specific family of error-correcting codes that play a
central role in our construction. While we focus on the Hadamard code, most of our arguments
apply to any code that satisfies a set of essential properties, such as local testability and selfcorrection. These properties are crucial for constructing interactive proof systems that are robust
to errors and support verification with only limited access to the communicated data.
Theorem 7.1 (Locally testable and self-correctable codes). The family of Hadamard codes {Ck }
satisfies the following properties:
1. The code has rate r = 1/ exp(k) and relative distance d = Θ(1).
n(k)×k

2. It is a linear code with generator matrix Gk ∈ F2
, where n(k) denotes the length of the
encoded message as a function of the message length k.
3. The code admits deterministic encoding and decoding algorithms, denoted by E and D respectively.
Furthermore, there exists ε ∈ (0, 0.001), κ, κ′ ∈ (0, 1), and qL , qS ∈ Z+ such that:
1. Local Testing: For all n, the code Cn is κ-locally testable with query complexity qL . That is,
there exists a non-adaptive probabilistic polynomial-time oracle machine L with query complexity qL , such that:
(a) For any k ∈ Z+ and x ∈ Fk2 ,

Pr[LE(x) (1k ) = 1] = 1.

34

n(k)

(b) For any k ∈ Z+ and w ∈ F2

,

Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1] ≤ 1 − κ · dist(w, Cn ).
2. Self-Correction: For all n, the code Cn is self-correctable with query complexity qS . There
exists a non-adaptive probabilistic polynomial-time oracle machine S with query complexity qS
n(k)
such that for any k ∈ Z+ and any w ∈ F2
satisfying
dist(w, Cn ) < κ′ · d/2,
it holds for all p ∈ [n(k)] that
Pr[Sw (1k , p) = (E ◦ D(w))p ] ≥ 1 − ε.
Remark 7.2. For i ∈ {0, 1}k , let n(i) ∈ Z denote the integer whose binary representation is i.
Then, the n(i)-th row of Gk equals i, i.e., Gk,n(i),· = i.
We now define the randomness-aware views of the testing and correction procedures.
Definition 7.3 (Randomness-aware evaluation of local tester and self-corrector). Let {Cn } be the
code defined in Theorem 7.1.
• Define Lw (1k ; r) as the output of Lw (1k ) when using randomness r ∈ Fl2L , where lL is the
randomness complexity of L.
• Define Sw (1k , p; r) as the output of Sw (1k , p) when using randomness r ∈ Fl2S , where lS is the
randomness complexity of S.
Next, we define unitary operations that simulate the decoding, local testing, and self-correction
functionalities on quantum registers. These operations will be used in our quantum protocol constructions.
Definition 7.4 (Unitary decoding operator). Let D be the decoding algorithm from Theorem 7.1.
n(k)
For k ∈ Z+ , w ∈ F2 , and a ∈ Fk2 , define the decoding unitary
DC (|a⟩ |w⟩) = |a ⊕ D(w)⟩ |w⟩ .
Definition 7.5 (Unitary validity test operator). Let L be as in Definition 7.3. For k ∈ Z+ ,
n(k)
l (k)
w ∈ F2 , r ∈ F2L , and all a ∈ F2 , define
E
L(|a⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩) = a ⊕ Lw (1k ; r) |w⟩ |r⟩ .
Definition 7.6 (Unitary self-correction operator). Let S be as in Definition 7.3. For k ∈ Z+ ,
n(k)
l (k)
w ∈ F2 , r ∈ F2S , a ∈ F2 , and p ∈ [n(k)], define
E
Sp (|a⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩) = a ⊕ Sw (1k , p; r) |w⟩ |r⟩ .

35

7.2

Honest prover’s strategy

The honest prover interacts with the verifier over three rounds. We first describe the prover’s
actions in the first two rounds, and treat the third round separately.
In the first round, the honest prover performs a purified measurement of the k-qubit witness in
the Z basis and encodes the k-bit outcome using the Hadamard code. He then sends the resulting
state to the verifier. After receiving the same register back from the verifier, the prover applies the
inverse of the same operation.
In the second round, the prover again performs a purified measurement of the witness, this time
in the X basis, and encodes the outcome in the Hadamard code. As in the first round, the prover
sends the state to the verifier and later applies the inverse process after receiving the register back.
In the third round, the verifier sends a bit indicating a basis (X or Z), and the honest prover
performs a purified measurement of the witness in the corresponding basis and encodes the result
using the Hadamard code.
We now define the prover’s actions in the first two rounds more precisely. These rounds follow
a common template parameterized by observables O. The honest prover uses different values of
O, specifically Oa = Z(a), a ∈ Fk2 in the first round and Ob = X(b), b ∈ Fk2 in the second round.
We now define the template for the honest prover’s actions in the first two rounds. The detailed
implementation of this template will be described later.
Definition 7.7 (Template of the honest prover’s actions). Let k, n ∈ Z+ . Let P be a register of k
qubits, R = (Rj )j∈[n] a register of n qubits. P, R are initially held by the prover. For j ∈ [n], let Oj
be observables on register P.
• The prover’s first step: The prover applies the following unitary
Y
P (Op,P , Rp ).
p∈[n]

The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier. The prover
applies the following unitary
Y
(
P (Op,P , Rp ))−1 .
p∈[n]

Remark 7.8. When we implement the template, Oj , j ∈ [n] always commute with each other.
Then, we describe the honest prover’s actions in the last round:
Definition 7.9 (The honest prover’s actions in the last round). Let k, n ∈ Z+ . Let P be a register
of k qubits, R = (Rj )j∈[n] a register of n qubits. P, R are initially held by the prover. For q ′ ∈
[2], j ∈ [n], let Oq′ ,j be observables on register P.
• The verifier sends the prover q ′ ∈ [2].

36

• The honest prover acts as in Definition 7.7 with Op = Oq′ ,p for p ∈ [n].
Remark 7.10. When we implement the template, for q ′ ∈ [2], j1 , j2 ∈ [n], Oq′ ,j1 always commutes
with Oq′ ,j2 .
Remark 7.11. Note that the prover’s second step in Definition 7.7 is not necessary for Definition
7.9. But for the ease of presentation, we keep it. In this section, the same holds for other definitions
for the last rounds. Therefore, our protocol essentially contains 6 messages, instead of 7 messages.
Now we summarize the honest prover’s actions:
Definition 7.12 (Many qubits tests, honest prover). Let k, n ∈ Z+ . Let Gk = [g1 , g2 , · · · , gn ]T ∈
Fn2 ⊗ Fk2 be as in Definition 7.3. Let P be a register of k qubits, R a register of n qubits. P, R are
initially held by the prover and initialized to |0⟩.
The honest prover’s actions are defined as follows:
• The honest prover prepares the witness in register P.
• The honest prover acts as in Definition 7.7 with Op = Z(gp ) for p ∈ [n].
• The honest prover acts as in Definition 7.7 with Op = X(gp ) for p ∈ [n].
• The honest prover acts as in Definition 7.9 with O1,p = Z(gp ), O2,p = X(gp ) for p ∈ [n].

7.3

Verifier’s strategy

Then we present the verifier’s action. For ease of presentation, we first abstract the process of
applying a Z gate on a self-corrected qubit.
Definition 7.13 (The verifier’s purified forms, Read out with self-correction). Let Sp be as in
Definition 7.6. Let R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register of n qubits. Let S be a register. Define
ep,SRT = S †
O
S
p,SRTS · ZS · Sp,SRTS .
Remark 7.14. Here, Sp performs self-correction on the codeword stored in register R at position
p, and stores the self-corrected result in register S. To perform the self-correction, the algorithm
requires some classical randomness, which is stored in TS . Consequently, the quantum state stored
in TS is the all-|+⟩ state. Note that although we describe the algorithm in this way, in the actual
execution, the verifier samples classical randomness.
In the first two rounds, the verifier can respond in various ways to the prover’s messages. Later,
we will show how the verifier chooses to respond in the whole protocol. In the following definition,
M, F, m, f can be viewed as the input to the template. M indicates whether or not to measure. m
indicates which register to measure. F indicates whether or not to flip. f indicates which register
to flip.
Definition 7.15 (Template of the verifier’s action for the consistency checks in the first two
rounds). Let R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let S be a register held by the verifier and initialized with
|0⟩. Let TS be a register held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩, where lS is defined as in
Definition 7.3. Let M, F ∈ {0, 1}, m, f ∈ [n].

37

• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. If F = 1, the
ef,SRT . If M = 1, the verifier measures
verifier measures TS , then the verifier applies O
S
em,SRT and outputs the measurement result r. The
TS . Then, the verifier measures O
S
verifier sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
Then, we describe the verifier’s action in the last round:
Definition 7.16 (The verifier’s action for the consistency checks in the last round). Let q ′ ∈
[2], m ∈ [n].
• The verifier sends q ′ to the prover.
• The verifier acts as in Definition 7.15 with M = 1, F = 0, m = m, f = 0.
Now, we introduce the verifier’s action in the many qubits tests. The verifier has two types of
checks: consistency checks and anti-commuting checks. We first introduce the consistency check.
In this check, the verifier checks the consistency between the first two rounds and the last round.
More specifically, the verifier checks that the answer in the final round matches the answer from
the previous rounds.
Definition 7.17 (Many qubits tests, consistency checks). Let D be a distribution over [n]. Let
R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let S be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let TS,i
for i ∈ [3] be a register held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩. The verifier’s actions are
defined as follows:
• The verifier samples u ∈R [2], sets Mu = 1, and sets Mi = 0 for i ̸= u, i ∈ [2].
• If M1 = 1, the verifier sets Fi = 0 for i ∈ [2]. If M2 = 1, the verifier sets F1 ∈R F2 ,
F2 = 0.
• The verifier samples f1 , f2 ∼ D.
• The verifier repeats the verifier’s actions in Definition 7.15 twice. In the i-th time, the
verifier acts as in Definition 7.15 with M = Mi , F = Fi , m = fi , f = fi ; if Mi = 1 he
sets ri to be the output.
• In the end, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.16 with q ′ = u, m = fu . Let r′ be the
output of the verifier.
• The verifier accepts iff ru = r′ .
Then, we introduce the anti-commuting tests, where the verifier checks the consistency corresponding to the first Z measurement and the Z measurement in the last round with an X applied
in the middle.
Definition 7.18 (Many qubits tests, anti-commuting tests). Let D be a distribution over [n]. Let
Gk = [g1 , g2 , · · · , gn ]T ∈ Fn2 ⊗ Fk2 be defined as in Definition 7.3. Let R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let
S be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let TS,i for i ∈ [3] be a register held by
the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩. The verifier’s action are defined as follows:
38

• The verifier sets M1 = 1, F1 = 0, M2 = 0, F2 = 1.
• The verifier samples (f1 , f2 ) ∼ D.
• The verifier repeats the verifier’s action in Definition 7.15 for 2 times. In the i-th time,
the verifier acts as in Definition 7.15 with M = Mi , F = Fi , m = fi , f = fi , if Mi = 1,
sets ri be the output.
• In the end, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.16 with q ′ = 1, m = f1 . Let r′ be the output
of the verifier.
• The verifier accepts iff r1 = r′ ⊕ (gf1 · gf2 ).
In the end, we define the validity checks, where we check that the prover indeed sends the
verifier an instance of the error correction code.
Definition 7.19 (Template of the verifier’s validity checks). Let R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let
L be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let TL be a register held by the verifier
and initialized with H ⊗lL |0⟩. Let TS be a register held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩.
Let t ∈ {0, 1}, F ∈ {0, 1}, f ∈ [n].
• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. If F = 1,
ef,SRT .
the verifier measures TS , then applies O
S
– If t = 0, the verifier sends the prover the register R.
– If t = 1, the verifier measures TL , then the verifier applies LLRTL and measures ZL
and outputs the measurement result r. The verifier sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
Then, we describe the verifier’s action in the last round:
Definition 7.20 (The verifier’s validity checks in the last round). Let t ∈ {0, 1}. Let q ′ ∈ [2].
• The verifier sends q ′ to the prover.
• The verifier acts as in Definition 7.19 with t = t, F = 0, f = 0.
We now specify the verifier’s parameters used during the validity checks.
Definition 7.21 (Many qubits tests, validity checks). Let D be a distribution over [n]. Let R =
(Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let S, L be registers held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let TS,i for
i ∈ [3] be a register held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩. Let TL,i for i ∈ [3] be a register
held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lL |0⟩. The verifier’s actions are defined as follows:
• The verifier samples u ∈R [3]. The verifier sets tu = 1 and ti = 0 for i ̸= u, i ∈ [3].
• The verifier samples Fi ∈R {0, 1} for i ∈ [u − 1]. The verifier sets Fi = 0 for i ≥ u.
• The verifier samples f1 , f2 ∼ D.
• The verifier samples q ′ ∈R [2].

39

• The verifier repeats the verifier’s actions in Definition 7.19 twice. In the i-th time, the
verifier acts as in Definition 7.19 with t = ti , F = Fi , f = fi and if ti = 1 sets ri to be
the output.
• In the end, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.20 with t = t3 , q ′ = q ′ and if t3 = 1 sets r3
to be the output.
• The verifier accepts iff ru = 1.
Before describing the verifier’s actions in the many-qubits test, we first present the distribution
used by the verifier during the test.
Definition 7.22 (Verifier distribution forP
many qubits tests). Let p, q be as in Theorem 4.10, and
n
n
1
let s, N be as in Lemma 4.11. Let H = m i∈[m] Hi ∈ C2 ⊗ C2 be a 5-local Clifford Hamiltonian,
where m = poly(n), and either λmin (H) ≤ 2−p(n) or λmin (H) ≥ 1/q(n).
For each i ∈ [m], let


Hi = Ci† (|0⟩⟨0|)⊗5 Ci ⊗ I,


Oi,j = Ci† (I ⊗(j−1) ⊗ Z ⊗ I ⊗(5−j) )Ci ⊗ I.
Each Oi,j admits a Pauli representation
Oi,j = (−1)di,j X(ai,j )Z(bi,j )Y (ci,j ),
and l ∈ [m]N . Define
as described in Lemma 6.13. Let t ∈ F5N
2
O Y ti,j
O(t, l) =
Oli ,j ,
i∈[N ] j∈[5]

which has Pauli representation:
O(t, l) = (−1)d(t,l) X(a(t, l))Z(b(t, l))Y (c(t, l)).
Define the measurement distributions used in the test as follows:
Nn
• Sample t ∈R F5N
2 , r ∈R F2 , and li ∈R [m] for each i ∈ [N ].

• Define µ1 as the distribution over the pair (b(t, l) + c(t, l), a(t, l) + c(t, l)).
• Define µ2 as the distribution over the pair (b(t, l) + c(t, l) + r, a(t, l) + c(t, l)).
Now we put everything together and define the actions of the verifier in the many qubits tests.
Definition 7.23 (Many qubits tests, verifier). Let R be a register.
The verifier’s actions are defined as follows:
1. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.17 with D = µ1 ,
2. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.18 with D = µ1 ,
3. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.21 with D = µ1 ,
4. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.17 with D = µ2 ,
5. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.18 with D = µ2 ,

40

6. With probability 1/6, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.21 with D = µ2 ,

7.4

General prover’s actions

Before we state our main theorem in this section, we first introduce a general prover’s actions.
Definition 7.24 (The canonical prover’s actions). Let P be a register, R be a register of n qubits.
P, R are initially hold by the prover and initialized by |0⟩. For q ′ ∈ [2], let Uq′ ′ be a unitary. For
i ∈ [2], let Ui be a unitary.
The canonical prover’s actions in the first two rounds are defined as follows: At round i,
• The prover’s first step: The prover applies a unitary Ui,PR . The prover sends the verifier
the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
The canonical prover’s actions in the last round are defined as follows:
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends q ′ ∈ [2] to the prover.
• The prover’s first step: The prover applies a unitary Uq′ ′ ,PR . The prover sends the verifier
the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
Remark 7.25. Note that any prover’s actions can be purified into a canonical prover’s actions
described above.
For the ease of presentation, we introduce prover’s and verifier’s purified forms and clean forms.
Definition 7.26 (The prover’s purified forms). Let P, S, TS be a register, R be a register of n qubits.
For q ′ ∈ [2], let Uq′ ′ be a unitary. For a ∈ Fk2 , define the prover’s hermitian forms in the last round
as:
′
† e
′
e′ ′
O
q ,j,SPRTS = (Uq ′ ,PR ) · Oj,SRTS · Uq ′ ,PR .

Remark 7.27. The verifier’s purified forms are defined in Definition 7.13.
Definition 7.28 (The verifier’s clean forms). Let P, D be a register, R be a register of n qubits. Let
DC be defined as in Definition 7.4. For a ∈ Fk2 , define the verifier’s hermitian forms in the first
two rounds as:
†
ODR (a) = DC,DR
ZD (a)DC,DR .

Remark 7.29. The unitary DC decodes the quantum state stored in register R and stores it in
register D. The overall operator effectively applies Z(a) directly on the quantum state protected by
the classical error correction code.
41

Definition 7.30 (The prover’s clean forms). Let P, D be a register, R be a register of n qubits. For
q ′ ∈ [2], let Uq′ ′ be a unitary. For a ∈ Fk2 , define the prover’s hermitian forms in the last round as:
Oq′ ′ ,DPR (a) = (Uq′ ′ ,PR )† ODR (a)Uq′ ′ ,PR .
For ease of presentation, we introduce transition actions.
Definition 7.31 (Transition actions). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition 7.24. For i < j,
define the transition action from i to j as:
Ui→j = Uj · · · Ui+2 Ui+1 .
Definition 7.32 (Transition actions with flips in the purified forms). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined
as in Definition 7.24. For F ∈ {0, 1}2 , f ∈ [n]2 , define the transition action with flips in the purified
forms as:
e1,F,f,SPRT = O
e F1
U
S
f1 ,SRTS U1 ,
e2,F,f,SPRT = O
e F2
e
U
S
f2 ,SPRTS U2 · U1,F,f,SPRTS .
Definition 7.33 (Transition actions with flips in the clean forms). Let Gk = [g1 , g2 , · · · , gn ]T ∈
Fn2 ⊗ Fk2 be defined as in Definition 7.3. Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition 7.24. For
F ∈ {0, 1}2 , f ∈ [n]2 , define the transition action with flips in the clean forms as:
U1,F,f = O(gf1 )F1 U1 ,
U2,F,f = O(gf2 )F2 U2 · U1,F,f .

7.5

Main theorem

Now, we state our main theorem in this section.
Theorem 7.34 (Many qubits tests). Let V be the verifier defined in Definition 7.23. Then,
1. Completeness: V accepts the prover in Definition 7.12 with probability 1.
2. Soundness: Let P be the prover defined in Definition 7.24. Let O1′ (·), O2′ (·) be defined as in
Definition 7.30. If V accepts P with probability greater than 1 − δ, then approximate anticommuting / commuting relationships of O1′ (a), O2′ (b) hold under the state
†
ρ = U0→2 |000⟩PRD ⟨000|PRD U0→2
.

More specifically,
E

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b) − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)∥2ρ = Θ(δ),

E

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b) − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)∥2ρ = Θ(δ).

(a,b)∼µ1

and
(a,b)∼µ2

Before proving the main theorem, we first establish several lemmas that will aid in the proof.
We begin by examining some basic properties of Definition 7.30 and Definition 7.28.

42

Lemma 7.35 (Properties of the prover’s hermitian forms). Let Oq′ ′ (a) for q ′ ∈ [2], a ∈ Fk2 be as in
Definition 7.30.
1. For q ′ ∈ [2], a ∈ Fk2 ,

Oq′ ′ (a) = (Oq′ ′ (a))† ,

2. For q ′ ∈ [2], a ∈ Fk2 ,

(Oq′ ′ (a))2 = I,

3. For q ′ ∈ [2], a, b ∈ Fk2 ,
4. For q ′ ∈ [2], a, b ∈ Fk2 ,

[Oq′ ′ (a), Oq′ ′ (b)] = 0,
Oq′ ′ (a) · Oq′ ′ (b) = Oq′ ′ (a ⊕ b).

Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward calculation.
Lemma 7.36 (Properties of the verifier’s hermitian forms). Let O(a) for a ∈ Fk2 be defined as in
Definition 7.28.
1. For a ∈ Fk2 ,
2. For a ∈ Fk2 ,

O(a) = (O(a))† ,
(O(a))2 = I,

3. For a, b ∈ Fk2 ,
[O(a), O(b)] = 0,
4. For a, b ∈ Fk2 ,
O(a) · O(b) = O(a ⊕ b).
Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward calculation.
Next, we examine the relationship between the overall success probability and the success
probabilities in each configuration.
Lemma 7.37. Let V, P be defined as in Theorem 7.34. Let Dc be the distribution of M, F in
Definition 7.17. Let Dv be the distribution of u in Definition 7.21.
Then
Pr[ V accepts P ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ),
if and only if
• For any u ∈ [3], F ∈ {0, 1}2 , q ′ ∈ [2] in the support of Dv ,
Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ).
• For any M, F ∈ {0, 1}2 in the support of Dc ,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ).
43

• Moreover,
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ).
Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward application of the union bound.
The following lemma describes the relationship between the success probability of the local test
(see Definition 7.5) and the coefficients of the underlying quantum state.
For the next lemmas, recall notation from Theorem 7.1.
Lemma 7.38. Let
|ψ⟩ = |φ⟩PR ⊗ |0⟩L ⊗ H ⊗lL |0⟩TL ,
where
|φ⟩ =

X

αw |φw ⟩P |w⟩R ,

w∈Fn
2

for some arbitrary (normalized) coefficients αw . Then
X
∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ IPRTL ) · LLRTL |ψ⟩ ∥2 =
|αw |2 · Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1],
w∈Fn
2

and
∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ IPRTL ) · LLRTL |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ 1 −

κ · κ′ · d 
1−
2

X


|αw |2 .

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

Proof. Note that
E
L(|a⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩) = a ⊕ Lw (1k ; r) |w⟩ |r⟩ ,
thus
Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1] = ∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ IPRTL ) · LLRTL (|φw ⟩P |w⟩R |0⟩L H ⊗lL |0⟩TL )∥2 ,
and
X

|αw |2 · Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1] = ∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ IPRTL ) · LLRTL (|ψ⟩)∥2 .

w∈Fn
2

Moreover, by the guarantees of Theorem 7.1,
Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1] ≤ 1 − κ · dist(w, Cn ).
Thus
X

|αw |2 · Pr[Lw (1k ) = 1]

w∈Fn
2

≤

X

|αw |2 · (1 − κ · dist(w, Cn ))

w∈Fn
2

X

≤

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2
κ · κ′ · d 

= 1−

2

X

|αw |2 +
1−

|αw |2 · (1 − κ · κ′ · d/2)

dist(w,Cn )≥κ′ ·d/2


|αw |2 .

X
dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

44

The following lemma characterizes the relationship between the difference of the purified and
clean forms and the coefficients of the underlying quantum state.
Lemma 7.39. Let
|ψ⟩ = |φ⟩PR ⊗ |0⟩SD ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS ,
and
|φ⟩ =

X

αw |φw ⟩P |w⟩R .

w∈Fn
2

Then
X

ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ 4 − (4 − 4ε)
∥O
S

|αw |2 .

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

Proof. Note that
†
ODR (a) = DDR
ZD (a)DDR ,

thus
ODR (gp ) |0⟩ |w⟩ = (−1)(E◦D(w))p |0⟩ |w⟩ .
Moreover, note that
ep,SRT = Sp† · Z · Sp ,
O
S
and
E
Sp (|a⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩) = a ⊕ Sw (1k , p; r) |w⟩ |r⟩ ,
thus
ep |0⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩ = (−1)Sw (1k ,p;r) |0⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩ .
O
Then, we have that
ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2
∥O
S
ep,SRT |ψ⟩)† (ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩)],
= 2 − 2ℜ[(O
S

(4)

and
ep,SRT |ψ⟩)† (ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩)
(O
S
X
X
w k
=(
E αw (−1)S (1 ,p;r) |0⟩ |φw ⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩)† (
E αw (−1)(E◦D(w))p |0⟩ |φw ⟩ |w⟩ |r⟩)
w

=

X
w

r

w
w

r

k

E |αw |2 · (−1)S (1 ,p;r)+(E◦D(w))p .

(5)

r

Note that
dist(w, Cn ) < κ′ · d/2 =⇒ ∀p ∈ [n], Pr[Sw (1k , p) = (E ◦ D(w))p ] ≥ 1 − ε,
45

thus
X
w

w

r

w

X

≥

k

E |αw |2 · (−1)S (1 ,p;r)+(E◦D(w))p

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

r

X

≥ (1 − 2ε)

X

X

|αw |2 −

X

|αw |2

dist(w,Cn )≥κ′ ·d/2

|αw |2

dist(w,Cn )≥κ′ ·d/2

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

= (2 − 2ε)

k

|αw |2 E(−1)S (1 ,p;r)+(E◦D(w))p −

|αw |2 − 1.

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

Plugging back into (4) and (5),
X

ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ 2 − 2((2 − 2ε)
∥O
S

|αw |2 − 1)

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

= 4 − (4 − 4ε)

X

|αw |2 .

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

Lemma 7.40 (Implication of the local testing). Let |ψ⟩ be in Lemma 7.38. Then
ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ 4ε +
∥O
S


8 − 8ε 
2
.
1
−
∥(|1⟩⟨1|
⊗
I
)
·
L
|ψ⟩
∥
PRT
LRT
L
L
L
κ · κ′ · d

Furthermore, for ε, κ, κ′ , d defined as in Theorem 7.1,


ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − ∥(|1⟩⟨1| ⊗ IPRT ) · LLRT |ψ⟩ ∥2 .
∥O
S
L
L
L
Proof. By Lemma 7.38 we have that
1−



2
2
≤
1
−
∥(|1⟩⟨1|
⊗
I
)
·
L
|ψ⟩
∥
PRT
LRT
L
L
L
κ · κ′ · d

X

|αw |2 .

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

Thus,
4 − (4 − 4ε)

X

|αw |2

dist(w,Cn )<κ′ ·d/2

≤ 4ε +


8 − 8ε 
2
1
−
∥(|1⟩⟨1|
⊗
I
)
·
L
|ψ⟩
∥
PRTL
LRTL
L
κ · κ′ · d

Using Lemma 7.39,
ep,SRT |ψ⟩ − ODR (gp ) |ψ⟩ ∥2 ≤ 4ε +
∥O
S


8 − 8ε 
2
1
−
∥(|1⟩⟨1|
⊗
I
)
·
L
|ψ⟩
∥
.
PRTL
LRTL
L
κ · κ′ · d

Then, we start to consider the implication of the validity checks in the first two rounds.

46

Lemma 7.41. Let
|φ⟩ = |0⟩PRDS ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,1 ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,2 · · · ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,u ,
then for u ∈ [2],
eu,F,f |φ⟩ − O(gf )Fu Uu U
eu−1,F,f |φ⟩ ∥2 ]
[∥U
u


≤ Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, u, D ] .
E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

eu−1,F,f |φ⟩, |φ′′ ⟩ = |φ′ ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩ ⊗ H ⊗lL |0⟩ . Then
Proof. Let |φ′ ⟩ = Uu U
L
TL
Pr[ validity check passes | F, u ]
=

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ I) · LLRTL ( φ′′ )∥2 .

Moreover,
E

eu−1,F,f |φ⟩ ∥2 ]
eu,F,f |φ⟩ − O(gf )Fu Uu U
[∥U
u

E

e Fu φ′ − O(gf )Fu φ′ ∥2 ]
[∥O
u
fu

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

=

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

e Fu φ′′ − O(gf )Fu φ′′ ∥2 ]
[∥O
u
fu


≤
E [Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − ∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ I) · LLRTL φ′′ ∥2 ]
(f1 ,f2 )∼D


= Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, u, D ] ,
=

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

where the inequality is by Lemma 7.40.
Lemma 7.42 (Implication of the validity checks I). Let
|φ⟩ = |0⟩PRDS ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,1 ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,2 · · · ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,u ,
then for u ∈ [2],
eu,F,f |φ⟩ − Uu,F,f |φ⟩ ∥2 ]
[∥U

X 
≤ Θ(ε) +
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, u = v, D ]
E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

v≤u

Proof. This lemma follows from the triangle inequality and Lemma 7.41.
Then, we start to consider the implication of the validity checks in the last round.
Lemma 7.43. Let Gk = [g1 , g2 , · · · , gn ]T ∈ Fn2 ⊗ Fk2 be defined as in Definition 7.3. Let
|φ⟩ = |0⟩PRDS ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,1 ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,2 · · · ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,u .
Then for q ′ ∈ [2],
′
2
e
e
e′ ′ U
[∥O
q ,fq′ 2,F,f |φ⟩ − Oq ′ (gfq′ )U2,F,f |φ⟩ ∥ ]


≤ Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u = 3, D ]

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

47

e2,F,f |φ⟩, |φ′′ ⟩ = |φ′ ⟩ ⊗ |0⟩ ⊗ H ⊗lL |0⟩ . Then by definition,
Proof. Let |φ′ ⟩ = Uq′ ′ U
L
TL
Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u = 3, D ]
=

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ I) · LLRTL ( φ′′ )∥2 .

Moreover,
E

′
2
e′ ′ U
e
e
[∥O
q ,fq′ 2,F,f |φ⟩ − Oq ′ (gfq′ )U2,F,f |φ⟩ ∥ ]

E

ef ′ φ′ − O(gf ′ ) φ′ ∥2 ]
[∥O
q
q

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

=

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

ef ′ φ′′ − O(gf ′ ) φ′′ ∥2 ]
[∥O
q
q


≤
E [Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − ∥(|1⟩⟨1|L ⊗ I) · LLRTL ( φ′′ )∥2 ]
(f1 ,f2 )∼D


= Θ(ε) + Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u = 3, D ] ,
=

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

where the inequality is by Lemma 7.40.
Lemma 7.44 (Implication of the validity checks II). Let
|φ⟩ = |0⟩PRDS ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,1 ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,2 · · · ⊗ H ⊗lS |0⟩TS,u ,
then for q ′ ∈ [2],
′
2
e′ ′ U
e
[∥O
q ,fq′ 2,F,f |φ⟩ − Oq ′ (gfq′ )U2,F,f |φ⟩ ∥ ]

X 
≤ Θ(ε) +
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] .

E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

u∈[3]

Proof. This lemma follows from the triangle inequality, Lemma 7.42, and Lemma 7.43.
Lemma 7.45 (Implication of the consistency checks). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition
7.24. Let P, R be defined as in Definition 7.24. Let D be the sampling distribution of M, F in
Definition 7.17. For any M, F ∈ {0, 1}2 in the support of D. Let Mu = 1.
Then
E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

′
∥(Uu→2,PR ODR (gfu )Uu,F,f,DPR − Ou,DPR
(gfu )U2,F,f,DPR ) |0⟩DPR ∥2

≤ Θ(1 − Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D])
X
+
Θ(1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ]) + Θ(ε).
F,q ′ ,u

Proof. By a straightforward calculation,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D]
e′
X I +a·O
ef
I +a·O
u,fu
u
eu,F,f |0⟩ ∥2
∥
=
E
· Uu→2 ·
·U
2
2
(f1 ,f2 )∼D
a∈{±1}

48

=

†
e e
e†
e′
e† O
e
e′ e
2I + U
u,F,f fu Uu→2 Ou,fu U2,F,f + U2,F,f Ou,fu Uu→2 Ofu Uu,F,f

⟨0|

E

4

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

= 1−

2
ef U
e
e′ e
∥Uu→2 O
u u,F,f |0⟩ − Ou,fu U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥

E

4

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

|0⟩

.

Moreover,
2
ef U
e
e′ e
∥Uu→2 O
u u,F,f |0⟩ − Ou,fu U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥

≥ ∥Uu→2 O(gfu )Uu,F,f |0⟩ − Ou′ (gfu )U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥2
e′ U
e2,F,f |0⟩ ∥2
− ∥O′ (gf )U2,F,f |0⟩ − O
u

u

u,fu

2
ef U
e
− ∥Uu→2 O
u u,F,f |0⟩ − Uu→2 O(gfu )Uu,F,f |0⟩ ∥

≥ ∥Uu→2 O(gfu )Uu,F,f |0⟩ − Ou′ (gfu )U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥2

X 
− Θ(ε) −
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] .
F,q ′ ,u

Therefore,
E

(f1 ,f2 )∼D

∥Uu→2 O(gfu )Uu,F,f |0⟩ − Ou′ (gfu )U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥2

≤ 4(1 − Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D])

X 
+ Θ(ε) +
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] .
F,q ′ ,u

Lemma 7.46 (Implication of the anti-commuting tests). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition 7.24. Let P, R be defined as in Definition 7.24.
Then,
E

(m1 ,m2 )∼D

∥O1′ (m1 )O(m2 )U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)gm1 ·gm2 O(m2 )U2 O(m1 )U1 |0⟩ ∥2

≤ Θ(1 − Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D])
X
+
Θ(1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ]) + Θ(ε).
F,q ′ ,u

Proof. By a straightforward calculation,
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D]
e′
e
I + (−1)gm1 ·gm2 · a · O
1,m1
em · U2 · I + a · Om1 · U1 |0⟩ ∥2
·O
2
2
2
(m1 ,m2 )∼D
a∈{±1}


†
em U1 + U † O
em U † O
em O
e′ O
em U0→2
em O
e′ O
em U2 O
2I + (−1)gm1 ·gm2 · U0→2
O
2
2
1
1 2
2
2
1,m1
1,m1
1
=
E
⟨0|
|0⟩
4
(m1 ,m2 )∼D
gm1 ·gm2 O
e′ O
e
e m U2 O
em U1 |0⟩ ∥2
∥O
2
1
1,m1 m2 U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)
= 1−
E
.
4
(m1 ,m2 )∼D
=

E

X

∥

49

Moreover,
gm1 ·gm2 e
em U1 |0⟩ ∥2
e′ O
e
Om2 U2 O
∥O
1,m1 m2 U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)
1

≥ ∥O1′ (m1 )O(m2 )U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)gm1 ·gm2 O(m2 )U2 O(m1 )U1 |0⟩ ∥2
′
em U0→2 |0⟩ − O1′ (m1 )O(m2 )U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2
e1,m
O
− ∥O
2

1

em U1 |0⟩ − O(m2 )U2 O(m1 )U1 |0⟩ ∥2
e m U2 O
− ∥O
1
2
≥ ∥O1′ (m1 )O(m2 )U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)gm1 ·gm2 O(m2 )U2 O(m1 )U1 |0⟩ ∥2

X 
− Θ(ε) −
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] .
F,q ′ ,u

Therefore,
E

(m1 ,m2 )∼D

∥O1′ (m1 )O(m2 )U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)gm1 ·gm2 O(m2 )U2 O(m1 )U1 |0⟩ ∥2

≤ 4(1 − Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D])

X 
+ Θ(ε) +
Θ 1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] .
F,q ′ ,u

The following lemmas will be instrumental in proving the soundness of Theorem 7.34.
Lemma 7.47. Let
†
ρ = U0→2 |00⟩PRD ⟨00|PRD U0→2
.

Then
E
X

(a,b)∼D

≤

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b) − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)∥2ρ

Θ(1 − Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D])

M,F

+ Θ(1 − Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D])
X
+
Θ(1 − Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ]) + Θ(ε).
F,q ′ ,u

Proof. We have that,
E

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b) − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)∥2ρ

E

†
⟨00|PRD U0→2
(h.c.) · (O1′ (a)O2′ (b) − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a))U0→2 |00⟩PRD

E

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b)U0→2 |00⟩PRD − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)U0→2 |00⟩PRD ∥2 .

(a,b)∼D

=

(a,b)∼D

=

(a,b)∼D

We use |α(a, b)⟩ ≈δ,D |β(a, b)⟩ to denote E(a,b)∼D ∥ |α(a, b)⟩ − |β(a, b)⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(δ).
By Lemma 7.37, 7.45, and 7.46, we establish the following relationship:
O1′ (a)O2′ (b)U0→2 |0⟩
50

≈δ,D O1′ (a)O(b)U2 U1 |0⟩
≈δ,D (−1)a·b O(b)U2 O(a)U1 |0⟩
≈δ,D (−1)a·b O2′ (b)U2 O(a)U1 |0⟩
≈δ,D (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)U0→2 |0⟩ .
Therefore,
E

(a,b)∼D

∥O1′ (a)O2′ (b)U0→2 |00⟩PRD − (−1)a·b O2′ (b)O1′ (a)U0→2 |00⟩PRD ∥2 ≤ Θ(δ).

The following lemmas will be instrumental in proving the completeness of Theorem 7.34.
Lemma 7.48 (The honest prover in the canonical prover’s form). Let
Y
Y
R1 =
P ((Z(gp ))P , Rp ), R2 =
P ((X(gp ))P , Rp ).
p∈[n]

p∈[n]

The prover in Definition 7.12 is the prover in Definition 7.24 with:
U1 = R1 ,
U2 = R2 · R1−1 ,
U1′ = R1 · R2−1 ,
U2′ = I.
Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward calculation.
Lemma 7.49 (Properties of the honest prover). For i ∈ [2], let Ui be defined as in Lemma 7.48.
For q ′ ∈ [2], let Uq′ ′ be defined as in Lemma 7.48. Then:
• For any u ∈ [2],
e ′ Uu→2 = Uu→2 O
ej .
O
u,j
• Moreover,
gj1 ·gj2 e
e′ O
e
ej
O
Oj2 U2 O
1,j1 j2 U2 = (−1)
1

Proof. Let Ri be defined as in Lemma 7.48.
Part I: It is sufficient to show that
′
eu,j
ej Ru ,
R2−1 O
R2 = Ru−1 O

which follows from
e ′ R2 = (Z(gj ))P ,
R2−1 O
1,j
−1 e ′
R O R2 = (X(gj ))P ,
2

2,j

51

and
ej R1 = (Z(gj ))P ,
R1−1 O
ej R2 = (X(gj ))P .
R−1 O
2

Part II: It is sufficient to show that
ej R1 ,
ej R2 R−1 O
ej R2 = (−1)gj1 ·gj2 R−1 O
ej R1 R−1 O
R1−1 O
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
which follows from
(Z(gj1 ))P (X(gj2 ))P = (−1)gj1 ·gj2 (X(gj2 ))P (Z(gj1 ))P .

Proof of Theorem 7.34.
Completeness: For i ∈ [2], let Ui be defined as in Lemma 7.48. For q ′ ∈ [2], let Uq′ ′ be defined
as in Lemma 7.48. Let D be the sampling distribution of M, F in Definition 7.17.
By Definition 7.12 and Definition 7.23, the verifier’s validity checks pass with probability 1.
Following the proof of Lemma 7.45,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F ] = 1 −

2
e
emu U
eu,F,f |0⟩ − O
e′
∥Uu→2 O
u,mu U2,F,f |0⟩ ∥
.
4
(f1 ,f2 )∼D

E

Following the proof of Lemma 7.46,
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ] = 1 −

gm1 ·gm2 O
e m U2 O
e′ O
e
em U1 |0⟩ ∥2
∥O
2
1
1,m1 m2 U0→2 |0⟩ − (−1)
4
(m1 ,m2 )∼D

E

Therefore, by Lemma 7.37, we only need to prove that for any M, F ∈ {0, 1}2 in the support of D,
letting Mu = 1,
e′
e
O
u,mu Uu→2 = Uu→2 Omu ,
and
gm1 ·gm2 e
e′ O
e
e m U1 .
O
Om2 U2 O
1,m1 m2 U0→2 = (−1)
1

Both parts follow directly from Lemma 7.49.
Soundness: The soundness follows from Lemma 7.47.

8

Strong Quantum IOPs with Logarithmic-Depth Honest Prover

In this section we present the complete construction of our strong quantum IOP. In addition to
the many-qubits test introduced in Section 7, we also introduce the energy test and the energy
consistency test. Furthermore, we separate the Pauli measurement component from the energy
consistency test for clarity.
The high-level idea is as follows: the verifier randomly samples a term from the amplified
Clifford Hamiltonian and instructs the prover to measure according to it. However, the prover
may not follow the honest strategy, so we must correlate the prover’s measurement strategy with
52

a reference that is known to be close to the honest strategy; this is achieved via the many-qubits
test.
Note that a 5-local Clifford projection is not itself a Pauli measurement. To address this, we
decompose each projection into 5-local Pauli measurements. Since the Hamiltonian is applied to
N copies of the original witness, the honest prover will obtain 5N measurement outcomes. As the
verifier cannot read all 5N bits, we follow the approach in Section 6, using a PCPP proof to certify
that the measurement result would cause the verifier to accept.
To test the correctness of the 5N outcomes, we draw inspiration from the equality test [BK97].
Specifically, we compute the inner product of the 5N -bit string with a random mask. For the
honest prover, this inner product corresponds to a Pauli measurement obtained by multiplying
the 5N local Pauli operators selected according to the random mask. If any of the 5N individual
outcomes deviate from honest measurement results, the resulting inner product is unlikely to match
the actual measurement outcome of the composed Pauli observable. This composed measurement
can be obtained from the many-qubits test.
To obtain Pauli measurements we do not use the observables derived from the third round of
interaction in the many-qubits tests. Instead, we rely on the prover’s messages in the first two
rounds: the purified measurement results in the Z basis and the X basis. Measuring an observable
is equivalent to applying a controlled observable with a control qubit in the state |+⟩ and measuring
the control qubit in the Hadamard basis. To measure an observable of the form X(a)Z(b)Y (c), we
combine a controlled-Z(b + c) from the first round, a controlled-X(a + c) from the second round,
and apply the phase factor ic directly via the verifier. We note that our approach to measuring Y
observables is significantly simpler than the method used in prior work, such as [CGJV19].
Theorem 8.1 (Restatement of Theorem 8.17). QMA ⊆ SQIOP(O(1), O(exp ◦poly), O(1)).
Remark 8.2. For the honest prover, the quantum circuit can be implemented with logarithmic
depth. In the multi-qubit test, the prover performs a purified measurement of their witness in either
the Z or X basis. Switching between these bases requires only a single layer of Hadamard gates.
Using unbounded fan-out CNOT gates, the witness can be copied in the computational basis an exponential number of times. An inner product is then computed for each copy with the corresponding
index, resulting in a Hadamard code encoding of the witness. The deepest part of this computation,
the inner product, requires only logarithmic depth.
The strong quantum IOP protocol is based on this multi-qubit test. In the energy consistency
test, the prover’s behavior for Pauli measurements matches that of the multi-qubit test. The energy
test requires a measurement of the witness, which consists of N copies of the original witness. Each
copy is measured using a local Clifford projection, which is also constant-depth.
The other components of the energy consistency test involve providing a PCPP proof for the
inner product with a random mask. Similarly, in the energy test, the prover supplies an errorcorrecting encoding of the measurement result along with a PCPP proof that convinces the verifier
to accept. These steps are classical and therefore their computational complexity (beyond being
polynomial time) is not considered.
The section is organized as follows. In Section 8.1, we present a construction that allows the
verifier to perform Pauli measurements, where the prover behaves identically to the many-qubits
test. This forms a component of the energy consistency test, which checks that the measurement
used in the energy test matches that of the many-qubits test. Section 8.2 presents the full construction of the verifier and honest prover behavior in both the energy test and energy consistency test.
In Section 8.3, we describe the general strategy of a malicious prover in a without-loss-of-generality
form. Finally, in Section 8.4, we prove the main theorem of this section.
53

8.1

Measurement in the Pauli bases

We define the verifier’s strategy for measuring observables of the form X(a)Z(b)Y (c). We begin by
describing the verifier’s general actions in the first two rounds of the protocol, without specifying the
parameters. Then, we detail how the verifier instantiates this template to implement measurements
of X(a)Z(b)Y (c).
Definition 8.3 (Template of the verifier’s actions for measurements in the first two rounds). Let
R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let S be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let M be
a register held by the verifier. Let TS be a register held by the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩.
em,SRT be defined as in Definition 7.13.
Let m ∈ [n]. Let O
S
• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
em,SRT , M). The verifier sends the prover the
measures TS . Then, the verifier applies C(O
S
register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
Definition 8.4 (Measure X(a)Z(b)Y (c)). Let a, b, c ∈ {0, 1}k such that a ∩ b = b ∩ c = c ∩ a = ∅.
Let R = (Rj )j∈[n] be a register. Let S be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |0⟩. Let
M be a register held by the verifier and initialized with |+⟩. Let TS,i for i ∈ [3] be a register held by
the verifier and initialized with H ⊗lS |0⟩. The verifier’s actions are defined as follows:
• The verifier sets m1 = b + c, m2 = a + c.
• The verifier repeats the verifier’s actions in Definition 7.15 twice. In the i-th time, the
verifier acts as in Definition 7.15 with m = mi .
|c|

• In the end, the verifier applies the phase gate |c| times as SM . Then, the verifier applies
HM , measures the register M under ZM , and outputs the measurement result.

8.2

Energy tests and energy consistency tests

In this section, we describe the actions of the verifier and the prover in the energy test and the
energy consistency test.
To perform the energy test, the verifier begins by sending the prover the indices li ∈ [m], for
i ∈ [N ], corresponding to the Hamiltonian terms the verifier wishes to test. The honest prover is
expected to return the measurement outcomes of all observables Oli ,j for i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [5], along
with a PCPP proof certifying that these outcomes will lead the verifier to accept.
However, since the prover may not be honest, the energy consistency test is introduced to ensure
integrity. In this test, the verifier randomly samples a binary mask, and the prover is expected to
compute the inner product between the measurement outcomes and the mask. Classically, if even
a single reported outcome is incorrect, the entire inner product will be incorrect with probability
exactly 1/2.
Importantly, the verifier can directly measure this inner product as a single Pauli observable,
since it corresponds to the product of all Oli ,j with li , j under the mask. This measurement can be
performed in the first two rounds of the protocol, allowing the verifier to compare the result with
the prover’s claimed value.
54

We begin this section by recalling the relevant PCPP construction, and then present the strategies of the honest prover and verifier in both tests.
Definition 8.5 (Energy tests and energy consistency tests, the honest prover’s actions in the last
round). Let P be a register of k qubits. Let p, q be as in Theorem 4.10, s, N be as in Lemma 4.11.
Use the notation for H, Oi,j , and ai,j , bi,j , ci,j from Definition 7.22 Let
M
_

xi,j ,
C(x) =
1⊕
i∈[N ]

j∈[5]

where x = (xi,j )i∈[N ],j∈[5] . Let E be the encoding circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5, D the decoding
circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5, and T the code tester circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5.
• The verifier sends the prover li ∈ [m] for i ∈ [N ].
• For i ∈ [N ], j ∈ [5], the honest prover measures P under observable
I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I ⊗Oli ,j ⊗ I ⊗ I ⊗ · · · ⊗ I ,
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
N −i

i−1

and stores the measurement result in ri,j . Let
r = (ri,j )i∈[N ],j∈[5] .
• The honest prover sends the verifier E(r), C(r), and w, where w is a witness such that
the verifier in Theorem 4.14 with explicit input the circuit C(D(·))+C(r)+1 and implicit
input the input of the circuit E(r) accepts the PCPP witness w.
• The verifier sends the prover t ∈R F5N
2 .
• Let C ′ (r) = r · t. The prover sends the verifier C ′ (r) and w′ , where w′ is a witness such
that the verifier in Theorem 4.14 with explicit input V (C ′ (D(·)) + C ′ (r) + 1) and implicit
input E(r) accepts the witness w′ .
Remark 8.6. If C(D(e′ )) + r′ + 1 = 1, which means that C(D(e′ )) = r′ , then the verifier accepts
with probability 1 using the explicit input, the circuit C(D(·)) + r′ + 1, and the implicit input, the
input of the circuit e′ , along with the PCPP witness w.
Definition 8.7 (Energy tests and energy consistency tests, honest prover). The honest prover’s
actions are defined as follows:
• The honest prover acts as in Definition 7.12 for the first two rounds.
• The verifier sends the prover a symbol “EnergyTests” or “QubitsTests”.
• If the symbol is “QubitsTests”, the honest prover continues as in Definition 7.12. If the
symbol is “EnergyTests”, the honest prover acts as in Definition 8.5.
Definition 8.8 (Energy tests and energy consistency tests, the verifier’s actions in the last round).
Let c, e ∈ {0, 1}. Let t ∈ F5N
2 . Let li ∈ [m] for i ∈ [N ]. Let E be the encoding circuit of the codes
in Theorem 6.5, D be the decoding circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5, T be the code tester circuit
of the codes in Theorem 6.5.

55

• The verifier sends li ∈ [m] for i ∈ [N ] to the prover.
• The prover sends the verifier M, o, w: the implicit input of the PCPP, the value supposed
to be C(D(M )) (which is also used to build the explicit input of the PCPP), and the
witness of the PCPP.
• The verifier sets a1 = 1 if and only if o = 0 and the verifier in Theorem 4.14, when run a
constant number of times, accepts each time with the following parameters: explicit input
x = C(D(·)) + o + 1 ∧ T (·), implicit input y = M , PCPP proof π = w.
• The verifier sends t to the prover.
• The prover sends the verifier o′ , w′ . The verifier sets a2 = 1 if and only if o′ = e and the
verifier in Theorem 4.14, when run a constant number of times, accepts each time with
the following parameters: x = C ′ (D(·)) + o′ + 1 ∧ T (·), y = M , π = w′ .
• If c = 0, the verifier accepts iff a1 = 1. If c = 1, the verifier accepts iff a2 = 1.
Definition 8.9 (Energy tests and energy consistency tests, verifier). Let p, q be as in Theorem
4.10, s, N be as in Lemma 4.11. Let H, Hi , and Oi,j be as in Definition 8.5.
The verifier’s actions are defined as follows:
1. The verifier samples t ∈R F5N
and samples li ∈R [m] for i ∈ [N ]. Let
2
Y
t
O=
Olii,j
,j ,
i∈[N ],j∈[5]

with Pauli representation
O = (−1)d X(a)Z(b)Y (c) .
2. (Qubits tests:) With probability 1/3, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.23 and sends
the prover a symbol “QubitsTests” after the end of the first two rounds.
3. (Energy tests:) With probability 1/3, the verifier repeats the verifier’s action in Definition
7.15 for 2 times. Each time, the verifier acts as in Definition 7.15 with M = 0, F =
0, m = 0, f = 0. In the end, the verifier sends the prover a symbol “EnergyTests” and
acts as in Definition 8.8 with c = 0, e = 0.
4. (Energy consistency tests:) With probability 1/3, the verifier acts as in Definition 8.4
with a = a, b = b, c = c. Let e be the output. In the end, the verifier sends the prover a
symbol “EnergyTests” and acts as in Definition 8.8 with c = 1, e = e + d, t = t, li = li for
i ∈ [N ].

8.3

General prover’s actions

To state the main theorem of this section, we first introduce the behavior of a malicious prover.
Definition 8.10 (Energy tests, the canonical prover’s actions). Let P be a register. Let h =
|E(15N )| be the output length of the encoding circuit of the codes in Theorem 6.5. Let g denote the

56

length of the witness used by the verifier in Theorem 4.14, where the circuit has input size h. For
l ∈ [m]N , let Pl = {Pl,M,o,w }M ∈Fh ,o∈F2 ,w∈Fg be a projective measurement acting on P.
2

2

The canonical prover’s actions in the last round of the energy tests are defined as follows:
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends li ∈ [m] for i ∈ [N ] to the prover.
• The prover’s first step: The prover measures according to Pl,P . The prover sends the
verifier the measurement result M and o, w.
• The verifier’s second step: The verifier sends the prover t ∈ F5N
2 .
• The prover’s second step: The prover sends verifier o′ , w′ .

8.4

Main theorem

Lemma 8.11 (Implication of the energy consistency tests). Let
X
X
′
=
Pl,t
1D(M )·t=0 Pl,M,o,w −
1D(M )·t=1 Pl,M,o,w .
M,o,w

M,o,w

If for any M, F, D, u, q ′ ,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F, D] ≥ 1 − ε′
Pr[ validity check passes | F, q ′ , u, D ] ≥ 1 − ε′
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes | D] ≥ 1 − ε′ .
Then
E

l∈[m]N ,t∈F5N
2

′
− V † ((−1)d · X(a)Z(b)Y (c) ⊗ I)V )U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2
∥(Pl,t

≤ Θ(ε + δ + ε′ ),
where a, b, c, d are defined as in Definition 8.9, ε is the self-correction parameter from Theorem 7.1
and δ is the PCPP proximity parameter from Theorem 4.14.
Proof. By Lemma 7.45,
E ∥O(a + c)U2 O(b + c)U1 |0⟩ − O2′ (a + c)U2 O(b + c)U1 |0⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(ε + ε′ ),
and
E ∥O2′ (a + c)U2 O(b + c)U1 |0⟩ − O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c)U2 U1 |0⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(ε + ε′ ).
By Lemma 7.42,
ea+c U2 O
eb+c U1 |0⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(ε + ε′ ).
E ∥O(a + c)U2 O(b + c)U1 |0⟩ − O
Therefore, by combining the three inequalities above and the triangle inequality
ea+c U2 O
eb+c U1 |0⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(ε + ε′ ) .
E ∥O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c)U2 U1 |0⟩ − O
57

(6)

To analyze the energy consistency test, note that according to Definition 8.4 and Definition 8.9,
during the energy consistency test, the verifier first measure X(a)Z(b)Y (c) by leveraging the first
two rounds. In the rest of the proof, instead of e, we use s to denote the measurement result.
1
ea+c U2 O
eb+c U1 |−⟩ |0⟩)
√ (U2 U1 |+⟩M |0⟩ + ic ·O
M
2
1
ea+c U2 O
eb+c U1 |0⟩) |0⟩
= (U2 U1 |0⟩ + ic · O
M
2
1
eb+c U1 |0⟩) |1⟩ .
ea+c U2 O
+ (U2 U1 |0⟩ − ic · O
M
2
We have that
Pr[energy consistency test passes]
X
eb+c U1 |0⟩ 2
ea+c U2 O
U2 U1 |0⟩ + (−1)s ic · O
= E
Pr[verifier accepts|l, t, M, o′ , w′ ] · Pl,M,o,w
2
l∈[m]N
s∈F2
t∈F5N
M,o,w
2

≤

E

X

l∈[m]N

Pr[verifier accepts|l, t, M, o′ , w′ ]

s∈F2
t∈F5N
M,o,w
2

· Pl,M,o,w

U2 U1 |0⟩ + (−1)s ic · O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c)U2 U1 |0⟩ 2
+ Θ(ε + δ) ,
2

(7)

where the last step follows from (6).
Let S = {x|C ′ (D(x)) = s + d ∧ T (x) = 1}. If dist(M, S) > δ,
Pr[a2 = 1|l, t, M, o′ , w′ ] ≤ Pr[verifier accepts|l, t, M, o′ = s + d, w′ ] ≤ ε.
If dist(M, S) ≤ δ,
Pr[a2 = 1|l, t, M, o′ , w′ ] ≤ 1 = 1C ′ (D(M ))=s+d .
As a result,
Pr[verifier accepts|l, t, M, o′ , w′ ] ≤ 1D(M )·t=s+d + ε.
Plugging back into (7),
Pr[energy consistency test passes] ≤ Θ(ε + δ)
X
X
I + (−1)d+s · ic · O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c)
U0→2 |0⟩
+ El∈[m]N
(
1D(M )·t=s Pl,M,o,w )
2
5N
t∈F2

s∈F2
M,o,w

2

M,o,w

(8)
Let
′
Pl,t
=

X

1D(M )·t=0 Pl,M,o,w −

M,o,w

X

1D(M )·t=1 Pl,M,o,w

M,o,w

For any matrix R,
′
X I + (−1)s Pl,t
I + (−1)s R
·
U0→2 |0⟩
2
2

s∈F2

58

2

=1−

1 ′
P U0→2 |0⟩ − RU0→2 |0⟩
4 l,t

2

,

.

Thus by taking
R = (−1)d · ic · O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c),
and Eq. (8), we have that
E

l∈[m]N ,t∈F5N
2

′
(Pl,t
− (−1)d · ic · O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c))U0→2 |0⟩

2

≤ Θ(1 − Pr[energy consistency test passes]) + Θ(ε + δ).

(9)

Furthermore, according to Lemma 7.47 and Definition 7.30, we can apply Theorem 4.23,
E ∥(−1)d · ic · O2′ (a + c)O1′ (b + c)U0→2 |0⟩ − V † ((−1)d · X(a)Z(b)Y (c) ⊗ I)V U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(δ).
(10)
As a result of Eq. (9) and Eq. (10),
E

l∈[m]N ,t∈F5N
2

′
− V † ((−1)d · X(a)Z(b)Y (c) ⊗ I)V )U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2
∥(Pl,t

≤ Θ(ε + δ + ε′ ).

The following lemma is a quantum analogue of the classical equality test via inner product with
a random mask.
Lemma 8.12 (Implications of using a random mask). Let d′ > d. Let {Ps }s∈Fn2 be an orthogonal
′
′
projective measurement on Cd . Let Oi be observables on Cd for i ∈ [n]. Let V : Cd → Cd be an
isometry. For t ∈ Fn2 , let
Y t
O(t) =
Oi i .
Moreover, let
P (t) =

X

(−1)st · Ps .

s

Then
X

Y I + (−1)si Oi

Ps − V †

s

i∈[n]

2

2

V

ρ

≤ E ∥P (t) − V † O(t) V ∥2ρ + 1 − E ∥V † O(t) V ∥2ρ .
t

t

Proof. Note that
E ∥P (t) − V † O(t) V ∥2ρ = 1 + E tr(V † O(t) V V † O(t) V ρ) − 2 E ℜ(tr((P (t) )† V † O(t) V ρ))
t
t
t
X
† (t)
2
= 1 + E ∥V O V ∥ρ − 2 E
ℜ(tr(((−1)st · Ps )† V † O(t) V ρ)) .
t

t

Moreover,
X
s

Ps −V †

Y I + (−1)si Oi
i∈[n]

2

2

V

ρ

59

s

(11)

=

X

X

tr(Ps ρ) +

s

Y I + (−1)si Oi

tr(V †

s

−2

X

i∈[n]

ℜ(tr(Ps† V †

s

≤ 2−2

X

2
2

Y I + (−1)si Oi

ℜ(tr(Ps† V †

s

2

i∈[n]

Y I + (−1)si Oi
2

i∈[n]

Y I + (−1)si Oi
i∈[n]

VV†

V ρ)

V ρ))

V ρ)) ,

(12)

where the middle term was bounded using that V is an isometry. Moreover,
Y I + (−1)si Oi
2

i∈[n]

1 X Y ti
Oi (−1)si ti = E(−1)st O(t) .
t
2n
n

=

i

t∈F2

Therefore, plugging back into (12),
X

∥Ps − V †

s

Y I + (−1)si Oi
2

i∈[n]

≤ 2 − 2E
t

≤ E ∥P
t

(t)

X

V ∥2ρ

ℜ(tr(Ps† (−1)st V † O(t) V ρ))

s

− V † O(t) V ∥2ρ + 1 − E ∥V † O(t) V ∥2ρ ,
t

where the second inequality is by (11).
Lemma 8.13 (Further implication of the energy consistency tests).
E
l

X

X

s

M,o,w

1D(M )=s Pl,M,o,w − V †

Y I + (−1)si Oi,j
2

i∈[n]

2

V

ρ

√
≤ Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) .

Proof. Let
′
Pl,t
=

X

X

1D(M )·t=0 Pl,M,o,w −

M,o,w

1D(M )·t=1 Pl,M,o,w .

M,o,w

By Lemma 8.12 with
n = 5N,
X
Ps =
1D(M )=s Pl,M,o,w ,
M,o,w

Oi,j = (−1)dli ,j X(ali ,j )Z(bli ,j )Y (cli ,j ),
we have that
X
s

X

1D(M )=s Pl,M,o,w − V †

M,o,w

Y
i∈[N ],j∈[5]

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
V
2

2
ρ

′
≤ E ∥Pl,t
− V † O(t, l)V ∥2ρ + 1 − E ∥V † O(t, l)V ∥2ρ .
t

t

By Lemma 8.11,
′
E E ∥Pl,t
− V † O(t, l)V ∥2ρ ≤ Θ(ε + δ + ε′ ).
l t

60

(13)

Note that, by Lemma 4.17,
E E ∥V † O(t, l)V ∥ρ
l t

′
′
≥ E E ∥Pl,t
∥ρ − E E ∥Pl,t
− V † O(t, l)V ∥ρ
l t

l t
′
= 1 − E E ∥Pl,t − V † O(t, l)V ∥ρ
l t

q
′ − V † O(t, l)V ∥2
E E ∥Pl,t
ρ
l t
√
≥ 1 − Θ( ε + ε′ + δ).

≥ 1−

Therefore,
E E ∥V † O(t, l)V ∥2ρ
l t

≥ (E E ∥V † O(t, l)V ∥ρ )2
l t
√
≥ (1 − Θ( ε + ε′ + δ))2
√
≥ 1 − Θ( ε + ε′ + δ).
Plugging back into (13),
E
l

X

X

s

M,o,w

Y

1D(M )=s Pl,M,o,w − V †

i∈[N ],j∈[5]

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
V
2

2
ρ

√
≤ Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) .

Lemma 8.14 (Implication of the energy tests).
Pr[energy test passes] ≤ ε +

X

E

l∈R [m]N

2

1C(D(M ))=0 · Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩

.

M,o,w

Proof. Let S = {t|C(D(t)) = 0 ∧ T (t) = 1}. If dist(M, S) > δ,
Pr[a1 = 1|l, M, o, w] ≤ Pr[verifier accepts|l, M, o = 0, w] ≤ ε.
If dist(M, S) ≤ δ,
Pr[a1 = 1|l, M, o, w] ≤ 1 = 1C(D(M ))=0 .
Then,
Pr[energy test passes] =

X

E

l∈R [m]N

≤ ε+
= ε+

Pr[a1 = 1|l, M, o, w] · ∥Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2

M,o,w

E

l∈R [m]N

E

l∈R [m]N

X

1C(D(M ))=0 · ∥Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩ ∥2

M,o,w

X
M,o,w

61

1C(D(M ))=0 · Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩

2

.

Lemma 8.15 (The role of the energy consistency test in the energy test).
X

E

l∈R [m]N

1C(D(M ))=0 · Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩

2

M,o,w

√
≤ Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) + 1.01 ·

X

E

l∈R [m]N

Y

1C(s)=0 V †

s

i∈[N ],j∈[5]

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
V U0→2 |0⟩
2

2

.

Proof. For any n > 0,
∥a + b∥2 ≤

1 + n2
∥a∥2 + (1 + n2 )∥b∥2 ,
n2

because
2
1
1
2
2
2
†
†
.
∥a∥
+
n
∥b∥
−
a
b
−
b
a
=
a
−
nb
n2
n

0≤
Therefore
X

E

l∈R [m]N

=

E

l∈R

1D(M )=s · Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩

2

M,o,w

X

E

X

1C(s)=0

s

l∈R [m]N

+

2

M,o,w

X

[m]N

≤ 101

1C(D(M ))=0 · Pl,M,o,w U0→2 |0⟩

1C(s)=0 (

s

X
M,o,w

101
E
100 l∈R [m]N

X
s

X

l∈R [m]N

2

2

i∈[N ],j∈[5]

E

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
V )U0→2 |0⟩
2

i∈[N ],j∈[5]
s
i,j
2
I + (−1) Oli ,j
V U0→2 |0⟩

Y

1C(s)=0 V †

√
≤ Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) + 1.01 ·

Y

1D(M )=s · Pl,M,o,w − V †

1C(s)=0 V †

s

Y
i∈[N ],j∈[5]

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
V U0→2 |0⟩
2

2

,

Where the last inequality is by Lemma 8.13.
Lemma 8.16 (Estimating the energy of Clifford Hamiltonians via Pauli measurements). Let H,
Hi , Oi,j and C be as in Definition 8.5. Then,
E

l∈R [m]N

= ⟨φ|

X

Y

1C(s)=0

s

i∈[N ],j∈[5]

1 + (1 − 2H)⊗N
2

I ⊗ I ··· ⊗ I ⊗
|
{z
}
i−1

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
⊗ I ⊗ I · · · ⊗ I |φ⟩
|
{z
}
2
N −i

|φ⟩ .

Proof. Note that
Hi =

Y I + (−1)0 Oi,j
j∈[5]

2

X

=

Y I + (−1)xj Oi,j

1⊕∨j∈[5] xj =1 j∈[5]

2

.

and
I − Hi = I −

Y I + Oi,j
j∈[5]

2

X

=

Y I + (−1)xj Oi,j

1⊕∨j∈[5] xj =0 j∈[5]

62

2

.

2

Thus,
1 1
1 1
1 X O
(1 − 2Hli )
+ (1 − 2H)⊗N = + · N
2 2
2 2 m
N
i∈[N ]

l∈[m]

1 X 1 1 O
( +
= N
(1 − 2Hli ))
m
2 2
N
i∈[N ]

l∈[m]

=

=

=

N
Y
1
1
( + (−1)ri ( − Hli ))
2
2

X

E

l∈R [m]N

⊕k∈[N ] rk =0 i=1

N
Y

X

E

l∈R [m]N

l∈R [m]N

Y I + (−1)si,j Ol ,j

⊕k∈[N ] rk =0 i=1 1⊕∨j∈[5] si,j =ri j∈[5]

X

E

X

Y

1C(s)=0

s

i∈[N ],j∈[5]

i

2

I + (−1)si,j Oli ,j
.
2

Theorem 8.17. QMA ⊆ SQIOP(O(1), O(exp ◦poly), O(1)) .
Proof. Let V be the verifier in Definition 8.9. We will show that V is O(1)-message non-adaptive
strong quantum interactive oracle proof system for LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) and thus
LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) ∈ SQIOP(O(1), O(exp ◦poly), O(1)).
By Theorem 4.10, LCH(5, 2−p(n) , 1/q(n)) is QMA-complete. Therefore,
QMA ⊆ SQIOP(O(1), O(exp ◦poly), O(1)).
By Definition 8.7, Definition 8.9, and Definition 5.12, V is consistent, has polynomial time
complexity, is efficient, has proof length O(exp ◦poly), has query complexity O(1). Moreover, the
completeness and soundness results are as follows. Let
p = Pr[The verifier opts to execute the “EnergyTests” subroutine].
Completeness: By Theorem 7.34, “Qubits tests” passes with probability 1. By Definition 8.7
and Definition 8.9, the energy consistency tests pass with probability 1 and the energy tests pass
with probability
⟨φ|

1 + (1 − 2H)⊗N
|φ⟩ .
2

As a result,
1 + (1 − 2H)⊗N
|φ⟩
2
≥ 1 − p · Θ(2−s(n) ).

Pr[V accepts] = 1 − p + p · ⟨φ|

Soundness: Assume that
Pr[energy consistency test passes]) ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
63

Pr[ consistency check passes ]) ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
Pr[ validity check passes ] ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ] ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ ) .
Then by combining Lemma 8.14, Lemma 8.15, and Lemma 8.16,
√
1 + (1 − 2H)⊗N
Pr[energy test passes] ≤ Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) + 1.01 · ⟨φ|
|φ⟩ .
2
Moreover, by Definition 8.9, the acceptance probability of the verifier have two part, the acceptance probability of the energy test and the the acceptance probability of the other tests. According
to the inequality above,
√
1 + (1 − 2H)⊗N
Pr[V accepts] ≤ 1 − p + p · (Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) + 1.01 · ⟨φ|
|φ⟩)
2
√
≤ 1 − p + p · (Θ( ε + ε′ + δ) + 0.505 + Θ(2−s(n) ))
≤ 1 − 0.4p,

(14)

where the last step follows by taking ε, ε′ , δ small enough.
If one of the followings is not true
Pr[energy consistency test passes]) ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
Pr[ consistency check passes ]) ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
Pr[ validity check passes ] ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ )
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ] ≥ 1 − Θ(ε′ ) ,
then
Pr[V accepts] ≤ p + (1 − p) · (1 − Θ(ε′ ))
= 1 − (1 − p) · Θ(ε′ ) .

(15)

Note that ε is the self-correction parameter from Theorem 7.1 and δ is the PCPP proximity
parameter from Theorem 4.14. As a result, we can take p = 1/3 and choose ε = δ = ε′ sufficiently
small. We can set ε to be any fixed small constant, at the cost of increasing the query complexity of
the self-correction procedure by a larger constant factor. By repeating the PCPP verifier a constant
number of times, we can obtain a PCPP with an arbitrarily small constant proximity parameter
and an arbitrarily small constant soundness error. By Eq. (14) and Eq. (15), we get that
Pr[V accepts] ≤ max{1 − (1 − p) · Θ(ε′ ), 1 − 0.4p} ≤ 1 − c ,
where c is a small constant.

64

A

Single Qubit Tests

Our single qubit test starts with two rounds corresponding to X and Z measurement. The game
is as follows: in each round, the honest prover sends the purified measurement of X for the first
round, Z for the second round. The verifier either measures under the Z bases or applies the Z
gates on some of the qubits, then the verifier sends all the registers from the prover’s message back,
the honest prover undoes the purified measurement.
In the end, there is an additional round. The verifier sends a symbol either “X” or “Z”. The
honest prover returns the result of the measurement.
The verifier performs the anti-commuting tests and the consistency checks. More specifically,
the verifier checks the consistency corresponding to the first Z measurement and the Z measurement
in the last round with an X applying in the middle. Moreover, the verifier checks the first two rounds
consisting with the last rounds. We will show that the anti-commuting relationship will appear at
the last round.

A.1

Honest prover’s strategy

Now we define the exact way the honest prover acts in each of the first two rounds. The honest
prover uses different O in different rounds. Later, we will describe the details of the implementation
of the template.
Definition A.1 (Template of the honest prover’s actions in the first two rounds). Let P be a
register of 1 qubit, R be a register of 1 qubit. P, R are initially hold by the prover. Let O1 , O2 be
observables on register P.
• The prover’s first step: The prover applies the following unitary
P (OP , R).
The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier. The prover
applies the following unitary
(P (OP , R))−1 .
Then, we describe the honest prover’s actions in the last round:
Definition A.2 (The honest prover’s actions in the last round). Let P be a register of 1 qubits. P
is initially hold by the prover.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends the prover q ′ ∈ [2].
• The prover’s first step: The prover measures P under observable Z if q ′ = 1, under
observable X if q ′ = 2 and returns the measurement result.
Now we summarize the honest prover’s actions:

65

Definition A.3 (Single qubit tests, honest prover). Let P be a register of 1 qubits, R be a register
of 1 qubits. P, R are initially hold by the prover and initialized by |0⟩.
The honest prover’s actions are defined as follows:
• The honest prover acts as in Definition A.1 with O = Z.
• The honest prover acts as in Definition A.1 with O = X.
• In the end, the honest prover acts as in Definition A.2.

A.2

Verifier’s strategy

Then we present the verifier’s action. For the ease of the presentation, we first abstract the process
of applying a specific unitary operation on a single qubit within the prover’s message.
In the first two rounds, the verifier can respond in various ways to the prover’s messages. Later,
we will show how the verifier chooses to respond in the whole protocol of the single qubit tests. In
the following definition, M, F can be viewed as the input to the template. M indicates whether or
not to measure. F indicates whether or not to flip.
Definition A.4 (Template of the verifier’s action in the first two rounds). Let R be a register. Let
M, F ∈ {0, 1}.
• The prover’s first step: The prover sends the verifier the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. If F = 1,
verifier applies ZR . If M = 1, verifier measures ZR and outputs the measurement result.
The verifier sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
Then, we describe the verifier’s action in the last round, where q ′ = 1 corresponding to a symbol
“X”, q ′ = 2 corresponding to a symbol “Z”:
Definition A.5 (The verifier’s action in the last round). Let q ′ ∈ [2].
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends q ′ to the prover.
• The prover’s first step: The prover returns a single bit r′ .
Now, we introduce the verifier’s action in the single qubit tests. The verifier has two types of
checks: consistency checks and anti-commuting checks. We first introduce the consistency check.
In this check, the verifier checks the consistency between the first two rounds and the last round.
More specifically, the verifier checks that the answer in the final round matches the answer from
the previous round.
Definition A.6 (Single qubit tests, consistency check). Let R be a register. The verifier’s action
are defined as follows:
• The verifier samples u ∈R [2], sets Mu = 1, and sets Mi = 0 for i ̸= u, i ∈ [2].
• If M1 = 1, the verifier sets Fi = 0 for i ∈ [2]. If M2 = 1, the verifier sets F1 ∈R F2 ,
F2 = 0.
• The verifier repeats the verifier’s action in Definition A.4 for 2 times. In the i-th time,

66

the verifier acts as in Definition A.4 with M = Mi , F = Fi , if Mi = 1, sets ri be the
output.
• In the end, the verifier acts as in Definition A.5 with q ′ = u. Let r′ denote the bit that
the verifier received from the prover.
• The verifier accepts iff ru = r′ .
Then, we introduce the anti-commuting tests, where the verifier checks the consistency corresponding to the first Z measurement and the Z measurement in the last round with an X applies
in the middle.
Definition A.7 (Single qubit tests, anti-commuting tests). Let R be a register. The verifier’s
action are defined as follows:
• The verifier sets M1 = 1, F1 = 0, M2 = 0, F2 = 1.
• The verifier repeats the verifier’s action in Definition A.4 for 2 times. In the i-th time,
the verifier acts as in Definition A.4 with M = Mi , F = Fi , if Mi = 1, sets ri be the
output.
• In the end, the verifier acts as in Definition A.5 with q ′ = 1 (corresponding to the symbol
“Z”). Let r′ denote the bit that the verifier received from the prover.
• The verifier accepts iff r1 = r′ ⊕ 1.
Now we put everything together and define the action of the verifier in the single qubit tests.
Definition A.8 (Single qubit tests, verifier). Let R be a register.
The verifier’s action are defined as follows:
1. With probability 1/2, the verifier acts as in Definition A.6,
2. With probability 1/2, the verifier acts as in Definition A.7.

A.3

Main theorem

Before we state our main theorem in this section, we first introduce a general prover’s actions.
Definition A.9 (The canonical prover’s actions). Let P be a register, R be a register of 1 qubits.
P, R are initially hold by the prover and initialized by |0⟩. For q ′ ∈ [2], let Oq′ ′ be an observable such
that (Oq′ ′ )2 = I. For i ∈ [2], let Ui be a unitary.
The canonical prover’s actions in the first two rounds are defined as follows: At round i,
• The prover’s first step: The prover applies a unitary Ui,PR . The prover sends the verifier
the register R.
• The verifier’s first step: The verifier receives the register R from the prover. The verifier
sends the prover the register R.
• The prover’s second step: The prover receives the register R from the verifier.
The canonical prover’s actions in the last round are defined as follows:

67

• The verifier’s first step: The verifier sends q ′ ∈ [2] to the prover.
• The prover’s first step: The prover measures the observable Oq′ ′ ,PR and returns the measurement result.
Remark A.10. Note that any prover’s actions can be purified into a canonical prover’s actions
described above.
For the ease of presentation, we introduce transition actions.
Definition A.11 (Transition actions). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition A.9.
For i < j, i, j ∈ {0, 1, 2}, define the transition action from i to j as:
Ui→j = Uj · · · Ui+2 Ui+1 .
Now, we state our main theorem in this section.
Theorem A.12 (Single qubit tests). Let V be the verifier defined in Definition A.8. Then,
1. Completeness: V accepts the prover in Definition A.3 with probability 1.
2. Soundness: Let P be the prover defined in Definition A.9. Let O1′ , O2′ be defined as in Definition
A.9. If V accepts P with probability greater than 1 − δ, then the approximate anti-commuting
relationship of O1′ , O2′ hold under the state
†
.
ρ = U0→2 |00⟩PR ⟨00|PR U0→2

More specifically,
tr((O1′ O2′ + O2′ O1′ )2 ρ) < Θ(δ).
Before proving the main theorem, we first introduce the necessary notations. Following this,
we will establish several lemmas that will aid in the proof of the main theorem.
Definition A.13 (Transition actions with flips). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition A.9.
For u ∈ [2], F ∈ {0, 1}2 , define the transition action with flips as:
U1,F = ZRF1 U1 ,
U2,F = ZRF2 U2 ZRF1 U1 .
Next, we examine the relationship between the overall success probability and the success
probabilities in each configuration.
Lemma A.14. Let V, P be defined as in Theorem A.12. Let D be the distribution of M, F in
Definition A.6. Then
Pr[ V accepts P ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ) ,
if and only if:
• for any M, F ∈ {0, 1}2 in the support of D,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ) ;
• and
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ] ≥ 1 − Θ(δ) .
68

Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward calculation.
Lemma A.15. Let O1 , O2 ∈ Cn×n be observables, O12 = O22 = I, O1† = O1 , O2† = O2 . Let |φ⟩ ∈ Cn
be a quantum state. Then
X
a∈{±1}

I + a · O1
I + a · O2
·U ·
|φ⟩
2
2

2

= ⟨φ|

2I + U † O1 U O2 + O2† U † O1 U
|φ⟩ .
4

Proof. We have that
X
a∈{±1}

=

X

I + a · O1
I + a · O2
·U ·
|φ⟩
2
2
⟨φ|

I + a · O2†
I + a · O1
I + a · O2
· U† ·
·U ·
|φ⟩
2
2
2

⟨φ|

2I + U † O1 U O2 + O2† U † O1 U + a(O2 + U † O1 U + O2† + O2† U † O1 U O2 )
|φ⟩
8

a∈{±1}

=

X
a∈{±1}

= ⟨φ|

2

2I + U † O1 U O2 + O2† U † O1 U
|φ⟩ .
4

Lemma A.16 (Implication of the consistency check). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in Definition
A.9. Let P, R be defined as in Definition A.9. Let D be the distribution of M, F in Definition A.6.
For any M, F ∈ {0, 1}2 in the support of D, let u ∈ {0, 1} be such that Mu = 1. Then
∥(Ou′ U2,F − Uu→2 ZR Uu,F ) |00⟩PR ∥2 = 4 · (1 − Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F ]) .
Proof. By a straightforward calculation,
Pr[ consistency check passes | M, F ]
X I + a · O′
I +a·Z
u
=
· Uu→2 ·
· Uu,F |0⟩ ∥2
∥
2
2
a∈{±1}

= ⟨0|

†
†
†
2I + Uu,F
ZUu→2
Ou′ U2,F + U2,F
Ou′ Uu→2 ZUu,F

4

|0⟩ .

Moreover, we have that
∥Ou′ U2,F |0⟩ − Uu→2 ZR Uu,F |0⟩ ∥2
†
†
†
= 2 − ⟨0| Uu,F
ZUu→2
Ou′ U2,F + U2,F
Ou′ Uu→2 ZUu,F |0⟩ .

Lemma A.17 (Implication of the anti-commuting tests). Let Ui for i ∈ [2] be defined as in
Definition A.9. Let P, R be defined as in Definition A.9.
Then,
∥(O1′ ZU0→2 + ZU2 ZU1 ) |00⟩PR ∥2 = 4 · (1 − Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ]).
69

Proof. By a straightforward calculation,
Pr[ anti-commuting test passes ]
X I − a · O′
I +a·Z
1
· Z · U2 ·
· U1 |0⟩ ∥2
=
∥
2
2
a∈{±1}

= ⟨0|

†
2I − U0→2
ZO1′ ZU2 ZU1 − U1† ZU2† ZO1′ ZU0→2
|0⟩ .
4

Moreover, we have that
∥O1′ ZU0→2 |0⟩ + ZU2 ZU1 |0⟩ ∥2
†
= 2 + ⟨0| U0→2
ZO1′ ZU2 ZU1 + U1† ZU2† ZO1′ ZU0→2 |0⟩ .

The following lemmas will be instrumental in proving the completeness of Theorem A.12.
Lemma A.18 (The honest prover in the canonical prover’s form). Let
R1 = P (ZP , R), R2 = P (XP , R).
The prover in Definition A.3 is the prover in Definition A.9 with:
U1 = R1 ,
U2 = R2 · R1−1 ,
and
O1′ = R2 · ZP · R2−1 ,
O2′ = R2 · XP · R2−1 .
Proof. This lemma follows from a straightforward calculation.
Lemma A.19 (Properties of the honest prover). For i ∈ [2], let Ui be defined as in Lemma A.18.
For q ′ ∈ [2], let Oq′ ′ be defined as in Lemma A.18. Then:
• For any u ∈ [2],
Ou′ Uu→2 = Uu→2 ZR .
• Moreover,
O1′ ZR U2 = −ZR U2 ZR
Proof.
Let Ri be defined as in Lemma A.18.
Part I: It is sufficient to show that
R2−1 Ou′ R2 = Ru−1 ZR Ru ,
70

which follows from
R2−1 O1′ R2 = ZP ,
R2−1 O2′ R2 = XP ,
and
R1−1 ZR R1 = ZP ,
R2−1 ZR R2 = XP .
Part II: It is sufficient to show that
ZP R2−1 ZR R2 = −R2−1 ZR R2 R1−1 ZR R1 ,
which follows from
ZP XP = −XP ZP .

Proof of Theorem A.12.
Completeness: For i ∈ [2], let Ui be defined as in Lemma A.18. For q ′ ∈ [2], let Oq′ ′ be defined
as in Lemma A.18. Let D be the sampling distribution of M, F in Definition A.6.
By Lemma A.14, Lemma A.16, and Lemma A.17, we only need to prove that for any M, F ∈
{0, 1}2 in the support of D, letting u be such that Mu = 1,
Ou′ Uu→2 = Uu→2 ZR ,
and
O1′ ZR U0→2 = −ZR U2 ZR U1 .
Both parts follow directly from Lemma A.19.
Soundness:
We use |α⟩ ≈δ |β⟩ to denote ∥ |α⟩ − |β⟩ ∥2 ≤ Θ(δ). We have that
†
)
tr((O1′ O2′ + O2′ O1′ )2 U0→2 |00⟩PR ⟨00|PR U0→2
†
(O1′ O2′ + O2′ O1′ )2 U0→2 |00⟩PR
= ⟨00|PR U0→2

= ∥O1′ O2′ U0→2 |00⟩PR + O2′ O1′ U0→2 |00⟩PR ∥2 .
By Lemma A.14, Lemma A.16, and Lemma A.17, we establish the following relationship:
O1′ O2′ U0→2 |0⟩
≈δ O1′ ZU2 U1 |0⟩
≈δ − ZU2 ZU1 |0⟩
≈δ − O2′ U2 ZU1 |0⟩
≈δ − O2′ O1′ U0→2 |0⟩ .
Therefore,
∥O1′ O2′ U0→2 |00⟩PR + O2′ O1′ U0→2 |00⟩PR ∥2 ≤ Θ(δ).

71

References
[AALV09] Dorit Aharonov, Itai Arad, Zeph Landau, and Umesh Vazirani. The detectability
lemma and quantum gap amplification. In Proceedings of the forty-first annual ACM
symposium on Theory of computing, pages 417–426, 2009.
[AAV13] Dorit Aharonov, Itai Arad, and Thomas Vidick. The quantum PCP conjecture.
CoRR, abs/1309.7495, 2013.
[ABCY22] Gal Arnon, Amey Bhangale, Alessandro Chiesa, and Eylon Yogev. A toolbox for
barriers on interactive oracle proofs. In Eike Kiltz and Vinod Vaikuntanathan, editors,
Theory of Cryptography - 20th International Conference, TCC 2022, Chicago, IL,
USA, November 7-10, 2022, Proceedings, Part I, volume 13747 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 447–466. Springer, 2022.
[ABN23] Anurag Anshu, Nikolas P. Breuckmann, and Chinmay Nirkhe. NLTS hamiltonians
from good quantum codes. In Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio, editors, Proceedings
of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, Orlando,
FL, USA, June 20-23, 2023, pages 1090–1096. ACM, 2023.
[ABOEM17] Dorit Aharonov, Michael Ben-Or, Elad Eban, and Urmila Mahadev. Interactive proofs
for quantum computations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04487, 2017.
[ALM+ 98] Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy.
Proof verification and the hardness of approximation problems. J. ACM, 45(3):501–
555, 1998.
[AN02] Dorit Aharonov and Tomer Naveh. Quantum np-a survey. arXiv preprint quantph/0210077, 2002.
[AS98] Sanjeev Arora and Shmuel Safra. Probabilistic checking of proofs: A new characterization of NP. J. ACM, 45(1):70–122, 1998.
[BCS16] Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, and Nicholas Spooner. Interactive oracle proofs.
In Martin Hirt and Adam D. Smith, editors, Theory of Cryptography - 14th International Conference, TCC 2016-B, Beijing, China, October 31 - November 3, 2016,
Proceedings, Part II, volume 9986 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 31–60,
2016.
[BFL90] László Babai, Lance Fortnow, and Carsten Lund. Non-deterministic exponential time
has two-prover interactive protocols. In 31st Annual Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, October 22-24, 1990, Volume I, pages
16–25. IEEE Computer Society, 1990.
[BGH+ 04] Eli Ben-Sasson, Oded Goldreich, Prahladh Harsha, Madhu Sudan, and Salil P. Vadhan. Robust PCPs of proximity, shorter PCPs and applications to coding. In László
Babai, editor, Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Chicago, IL, USA, June 13-16, 2004, pages 1–10. ACM, 2004.
[BH13] Fernando G. S. L. Brandão and Aram W. Harrow. Product-state approximations to
quantum ground states. In Dan Boneh, Tim Roughgarden, and Joan Feigenbaum,
editors, Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC’13, Palo Alto, CA,
USA, June 1-4, 2013, pages 871–880. ACM, 2013.
72

[BHW24] Harry Buhrman, Jonas Helsen, and Jordi Weggemans. Quantum PCPs: on
adaptivity, multiple provers and reductions to local hamiltonians. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.04841, 2024.
[BJSW16] Anne Broadbent, Zhengfeng Ji, Fang Song, and John Watrous. Zero-knowledge proof
systems for QMA. In Irit Dinur, editor, IEEE 57th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2016, 9-11 October 2016, Hyatt Regency, New
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA, pages 31–40. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
[BK97] László Babai and Peter G. Kimmel. Randomized simultaneous messages: Solution of
a problem of yao in communication complexity. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual
IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, Ulm, Germany, June 24-27, 1997,
pages 239–246. IEEE Computer Society, 1997.
[BKL+ 22] James Bartusek, Yael Tauman Kalai, Alex Lombardi, Fermi Ma, Giulio Malavolta,
Vinod Vaikuntanathan, Thomas Vidick, and Lisa Yang. Succinct classical verification of quantum computation. In Yevgeniy Dodis and Thomas Shrimpton, editors,
Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2022 - 42nd Annual International Cryptology
Conference, CRYPTO 2022, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 15-18, 2022, Proceedings, Part II, volume 13508 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 195–211.
Springer, 2022.
[CGJV19] Andrea Coladangelo, Alex Bredariol Grilo, Stacey Jeffery, and Thomas Vidick.
Verifier-on-a-leash: New schemes for verifiable delegated quantum computation, with
quasilinear resources. In Yuval Ishai and Vincent Rijmen, editors, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2019 - 38th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Darmstadt, Germany, May 19-23,
2019, Proceedings, Part III, volume 11478 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 247–277. Springer, 2019.
[CRSV17] Rui Chao, Ben W. Reichardt, Chris Sutherland, and Thomas Vidick. Overlapping
qubits. In Christos H. Papadimitriou, editor, 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
Science Conference, ITCS 2017, January 9-11, 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, volume 67
of LIPIcs, pages 48:1–48:21. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017.
[Din06] Irit Dinur. The PCP theorem by gap amplification. In Jon M. Kleinberg, editor,
Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, Seattle,
WA, USA, May 21-23, 2006, pages 241–250. ACM, 2006.
[dlS22] Mikael de la Salle. Spectral gap and stability for groups and non-local games (2022).
arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07084, 2022.
[FGL+ 91] Uriel Feige, Shafi Goldwasser, László Lovász, Shmuel Safra, and Mario Szegedy. Approximating clique is almost np-complete (preliminary version). In 32nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, San Juan, Puerto Rico, 1-4 October
1991, pages 2–12. IEEE Computer Society, 1991.
[FH14] Michael H Freedman and Matthew B Hastings. Quantum systems on non-khyperfinite complexes: a generalization of classical statistical mechanics on expander
graphs. Quantum Information & Computation, 14(1-2):144–180, 2014.

73

[FHM18] Joseph F Fitzsimons, Michal Hajdušek, and Tomoyuki Morimae. Post hoc verification
of quantum computation. Physical review letters, 120(4):040501, 2018.
[FK17] Joseph F Fitzsimons and Elham Kashefi. Unconditionally verifiable blind quantum
computation. Physical Review A, 96(1):012303, 2017.
[GH17] WT Gowers and O Hatami. Inverse and stability theorems for approximate representations of finite groups. Sbornik: Mathematics, 208(12):1787–1817, 2017.
[GJMZ23] Sam Gunn, Nathan Ju, Fermi Ma, and Mark Zhandry. Commitments to quantum
states. In Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio, editors, Proceedings of the 55th Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June
20-23, 2023, pages 1579–1588. ACM, 2023.
[GKK19] Alexandru Gheorghiu, Theodoros Kapourniotis, and Elham Kashefi. Verification of
quantum computation: An overview of existing approaches. Theory of computing
systems, 63:715–808, 2019.
[Gri19] Alex B. Grilo. A simple protocol for verifiable delegation of quantum computation
in one round. In Christel Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi, editors, 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
Programming, ICALP 2019, July 9-12, 2019, Patras, Greece, volume 132 of LIPIcs,
pages 28:1–28:13. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.
[KLVY23] Yael Kalai, Alex Lombardi, Vinod Vaikuntanathan, and Lisa Yang. Quantum advantage from any non-local game. In Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio, editors,
Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC
2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June 20-23, 2023, pages 1617–1628. ACM, 2023.
[LMS22] Alex Lombardi, Fermi Ma, and Nicholas Spooner. Post-quantum zero knowledge,
revisited or: How to do quantum rewinding undetectably. In 63rd IEEE Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2022, Denver, CO, USA,
October 31 - November 3, 2022, pages 851–859. IEEE, 2022.
[MNZ24] Tony Metger, Anand Natarajan, and Tina Zhang. Succinct arguments for QMA from
standard assumptions via compiled nonlocal games. CoRR, abs/2404.19754, 2024.
[NN24] Anand Natarajan and Chinmay Nirkhe. The status of the quantum PCP conjecture
(games version). CoRR, abs/2403.13084, 2024.
[NV16] Anand Natarajan and Thomas Vidick. Robust self-testing of many-qubit states.
CoRR, abs/1610.03574, 2016.
[NW19] Anand Natarajan and John Wright. NEEXP is contained in MIP∗ . In 2019 IEEE
60th annual symposium on foundations of computer science (FOCS), pages 510–518.
IEEE, 2019.
[NZ23] Anand Natarajan and Tina Zhang. Bounding the quantum value of compiled nonlocal games: From CHSH to BQP verification. In 64th IEEE Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2023, Santa Cruz, CA, USA, November
6-9, 2023, pages 1342–1348. IEEE, 2023.

74

[RRR16] Omer Reingold, Guy N. Rothblum, and Ron D. Rothblum. Constant-round interactive
proofs for delegating computation. In Daniel Wichs and Yishay Mansour, editors,
Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA, USA, June 18-21, 2016, pages 49–62. ACM, 2016.
[SS96] M. Sipser and D.A. Spielman. Expander codes. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 42(6):1710–1722, 1996.
[Vid11] Thomas Vidick. The complexity of entangled games. PhD thesis, UC Berkeley, 2011.
[Vid20] Thomas Vidick. Course FSMP, Fall’20: Interactions with quantum devices, 2020.
[Weh06] Stephanie Wehner. Entanglement in interactive proof systems with binary answers.
In Bruno Durand and Wolfgang Thomas, editors, STACS 2006, 23rd Annual Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, Marseille, France, February 23-25,
2006, Proceedings, volume 3884 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 162–171.
Springer, 2006.

75

