                                                            No Distributed Quantum Advantage
                                                  for 3-Coloring Rooted Trees and 2-Coloring Even Cycles∗
                                                        Pierre Fraigniaud†            Frédéric Magniez‡          Isabella Ziccardi§



                                                                                          Abstract
                                                   Significant effort has been devoted over the past decade to understanding whether quantum
                                               resources can provide advantages in distributed computing, and in particular whether they can
                                               help overcome locality constraints in networks, typically in Linial’s LOCAL model. Recently,
                                               Coiteux-Roy et al. (STOC 2024) showed that quantum resources do not help for 3-coloring
                                               unrooted trees: in particular, their lower bound holds in the stronger non-signaling model, which
arXiv:2607.04852v2 [cs.DC] 11 Jul 2026




                                               formalizes the principle of physical causality in distributed computing, and matches the known
                                               deterministic upper bound for 3-coloring trees in LOCAL. The case of rooted trees, however, was
                                               left open by their work.
                                                   For rooted trees, the deterministic Cole-Vishkin algorithm 3-colors n-node trees in O(log⋆ n)
                                               rounds, matching Linial’s classical Ω(log⋆ n) lower bound (FOCS 1987), which holds even for
                                               randomized algorithms. Extending this lower bound to the quantum setting appears challeng-
                                               ing, since Akbari et al. (STOC 2025) showed that no non-signaling lower bound is possible
                                               for 3-coloring bounded-degree rooted trees, generalizing earlier results of Holroyd and Liggett
                                               (Forum of Mathematics, Pi, 2016) on cycles. Nevertheless, in this paper, we show that any
                                               algorithm in quantum-LOCAL (without pre-shared entanglement) that properly 3-colors n-node
                                               rooted trees with probability at least 1 − O(1/ log n) must perform Ω(log⋆ n) rounds. That is,
                                               quantum resources provide no advantage for 3-coloring rooted trees. To get this result, we
                                               show a lower bound of Ω(log⋆ ∆) for 3-coloring any ∆-ary tree with success probability at least
                                               1−1/∆. The proof uses a color lifting technique that departs from the indistinguishability-based
                                               arguments underlying most prior non-signaling lower bounds, and instead bears similarity to
                                               Linial’s original argument.
                                                   We also show, as a separate result, that 2-coloring even-length n-node cycles with probability
                                               1−O(1/n) requires n/2−1 rounds in the quantum-LOCAL model, even with pre-shared entangled
                                               states. This improves the previously known ⌈(n − 2)/4⌉ lower bound of Gavoille, Kosowski, and
                                               Markiewicz (DISC 2009) by a factor of two, and shows that quantum algorithms cannot save
                                               even a single round over classical deterministic algorithms for 2-coloring even-length cycles.




                                           ∗
                                             Research supported in part by the French PEPR integrated project EPiQ (ANR-22-PETQ-0007), and the French
                                         ANR projects ANR-24-CE48-7768-01 (ENEDISC) and ANR-23-CE48-0010 (PREDICTIONS).
                                           †
                                             CNRS, Université Paris Cité, IRIF, Paris, France. Email: pierre.fraigniaud@irif.fr
                                           ‡
                                             CNRS, Université Paris Cité, IRIF, Paris, France. Email: frederic.magniez@irif.fr
                                           §
                                             CNRS, Université Paris Cité, IRIF, Paris, France. Email: isabella.ziccardi@irif.fr
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                         1
  1.1 Context and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       1
  1.2 Our Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  1.3 Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5

2 Computational Models and Probabilistic Framework                                                     6
  2.1 LOCAL and Quantum-LOCAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            6
  2.2 Non-Signaling Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7
  2.3 Finitely-Dependent Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  2.4 NS-FD Distributions and their Relation to Quantum-LOCAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              8

3 Lower Bounds for Rooted Trees                                                                       10
  3.1 Notation and Fork Dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        10
  3.2 Main Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
  3.3 Iterated Power Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
  3.4 The Lifted Coloring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
  3.5 The Base Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
  3.6 Proof of Theorem 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15

4 Lower Bound for Even-Size Cycles                                                                    15

5 Conclusion                                                                                          17

A From Distributed Quantum Algorithms to Non-Signaling Distributions                                  21
  A.1 Quantum Information Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          21
  A.2 Framework for Quantum Distributed Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             23
  A.3 Proof of Proposition 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    24

B Holroyd and Liggett’s Result                                                                        26
1     Introduction
1.1     Context and Motivation
From the origins of quantum information, the paradoxes and advantages of quantum resources were
discussed around nonlocal phenomena, such as the CHSH game [13], whose quantum advantage, as
permitted by the theory, was later confirmed experimentally. Since then, there has been growing
interest from computer scientists in the study of networks composed of quantum computers, where
nodes exchange qubits over communication links, with or without congestion, and with or without
pre-shared entanglement.
    In particular, significant efforts have been devoted to understanding whether quantum resources
can help overcoming obstacles related to locally-bounded computation. This issue has been ad-
dressed in the so-called LOCAL model [42], which assumes a set of n processing nodes connected by
a network modeled as a simple connected graph, and exchanging data via the edges of that graph.
The main purpose of this model is to capture locality. That is, computation proceeds as a sequence
of synchronous rounds, where, at each round, every node performs arbitrarily calculation, sends an
arbitrarily large message to each of its neighbors, and receives the messages from its neighbors. In
the quantum variant of LOCAL, the nodes are quantum computers, and the messages can include
qubits. The main complexity measure is the number of rounds, which also measures the maximum
distance between any two nodes exchanging information during the execution of an algorithm.
Many significant results have been recently established in this model, whether it be quantum lower
bounds [1, 6, 14], or the demonstration of quantum advantages [4, 5, 24].
    It was recently shown [14] that quantum resources do not help for 3-coloring trees. Establishing
this result uses the fact that the probability distribution defined by the collection of output values
produced by nodes performing an r-round quantum algorithm in LOCAL (with or without pre-
shared entanglement) is non-signaling at distance r. The non-signaling property [1, 2] (also referred
to as the φ-LOCAL model in [25]) formalizes the principle of physical causality within the framework
of distributed computing. It states that, in any r-round algorithm, a node cannot be influenced by
information originating more than r hops away from it. Equivalently, the distribution of outputs
of a node v in a graph G can only depend on nodes within distance at most r from v in G. This
principle holds independently from whether the node initially share pre-entangled quantum states,
or not. Lower bounds based on the non-signaling principle are essentially using indistinguishability
arguments: if a problem can be solved in one graph but not in another, the number of rounds must
be large enough for the algorithm to distinguish the two cases. The authors in [14] have shown
that any non-signaling distribution at distance r producing a proper 3-coloring of n-node trees with
probability at least ϵ satisfies r = Ω(log n − log log 1/ϵ), as long as ϵ > e−n . Interestingly, this lower
bound essentially matches the known O(log n)-round upper bound for 3-coloring trees in LOCAL,
which can be reached by a deterministic algorithm (see [7]). It follows that quantum resources
bring no advantages as far as 3-coloring n-node trees is concerned. The important case of rooted
trees was however left open in [14].

1.1.1    Quantum 3-Coloring Rooted Trees
Rooted trees play a central role in distributed computing, merely because spanning trees are basic
objects at the core of distributed algorithm design for graph problems [3, 37, 42] and most algorithms
for spanning tree construction actually produce rooted spanning trees. The deterministic algorithm
by Cole and Vishkin [15] can be used to compute a proper 3-coloring of any n-node rooted tree in
O(log⋆ n) rounds, which is tight thanks to Linial’s seminal Ω(log⋆ n) lower bound [36]. The latter
can actually be viewed as marking the beginning of the fruitful research line aiming at studying the

                                                    1
impact of locality in network computing. Yet, it is only known [38] that this lower bound extends
to the randomized variant of LOCAL. Whether quantum resources can help overcoming this lower
bound remains open, despite several attempts [1, 14, 21].
Question 1. Is there any quantum advantage for distributed 3-coloring rooted trees?
    Answering this question appears to face an important obstacle. As said before, the collection of
outputs of the nodes performing a quantum distributed algorithm on a graph is a joint probability
distribution over the nodes, and, compared to classical randomized algorithms, quantum algorithms
may induce stronger correlations between the outputs of distant nodes. The aforementioned non-
signaling property follows from the mere observation that such correlations remain constrained
by the fact that information cannot be propagated faster than the communication radius of the
algorithm (i.e., its number of rounds). Locality however impose another constraint, in the absence of
shared resources across nodes (such as shared randomness or a pre-shared quantum state): outputs
from distant parts of the network remain independent. This is referred to as the finite-dependence
property in the literature. It captures the fact that, in a r-round algorithm, two nodes which are
2r +1 hops away have radius-r neighbors that do not intersect, and therefore they have independent
outputs.
    Unfortunately, using solely non-signaling and finite dependence is not sufficient to establish
quantum lower bounds for coloring rooted trees. Indeed, it was recently shown in [1] that the
obstacle for proving non-signaling finitely-dependent lower bound in cycles proved in [29, 30] gen-
eralizes to any graph. Specifically, the authors in [1] show that, for any locally checkable labeling
(LCL) problem with O(log⋆ n)-round deterministic complexity in the LOCAL model, there exists
an output distribution that is both non-signaling and finitely dependent at constant distance. As
3-coloring is an LCL problem with round complexity O(log⋆ n), this result is apparently ruining any
hope to derive even super-constant lower bound in the quantum setting using only the non-signaling
and finite dependence properties. There is catch though.
    LCL problems are defined for graphs (or families of graphs, e.g., trees) for which the maximum
degree is upper bounded by a constant ∆. Therefore, while the results in [29, 30] are preventing
the design of quantum lower bounds ω(1) for 3-coloring cycles using solely the non-signaling and
finite dependence properties, and while [1] is preventing the same for 3-coloring rooted trees, the
latter holds only for rooted trees whose maximum degree is bounded by a constant ∆. Therefore, it
does not apply to general rooted trees, whose maximum degrees may be arbitrarily large. We shall
show how to exploit this catch. But before that, let us further explore the case of rooted trees with
bounded maximum degree, by considering the extreme case of rooted paths, and, by extension,
cycles with a consistent notion of clockwise and counter clockwise direction provided to the nodes.

1.1.2   Quantum 2-Coloring Even-Length Cycles
It is known since the seminal work of Linial [36] that 2-coloring even-size cycles is highly nonlocal:
There are no deterministic algorithms running faster than n2 − 1 rounds. The high nonlocality of
2-coloring cycles was confirmed in [25], which shows that no quantum algorithms, even using pre-
shared entanglement, can 2-color n-node cycles (n even) in less than ⌈ n−2 4 ⌉ rounds. The question
of whether quantum resources can help for the design of a 2-coloring algorithm twice faster than
the best classical algorithm was however left open.
Question 2. Is there any quantum advantage for distributed 2-coloring even-length cycles?
   As for Question 1, answering Question 2 appears to face an important obstacle. The lower
bound ⌈ n−2
         4 ⌉ in [25] was actually shown to be tight for non-signaling distributions, in the sense


                                                  2
that the global output distribution D consisting of choosing any one of the two possible 2-coloring
with probability 1/2 was shown to be non-signaling at distance ⌈ n−2
                                                                  4 ⌉, apparently ruining any hope
of improving the lower bound using solely the non-signaling property. There is however again
a catch. The output distribution D from [25] is defined only for n-node cycles. In contrast, a
quantum algorithm for an even-length cycles Cn can be executed in other graphs. A node noticing
the presence of nodes with degree different from 2 may output whatever, but a node having only
nodes of degree 2 in its view outputs one of the two colors as in a cycle, and the distribution of
outputs from these nodes is non signaling. We shall show how to exploit this fact for improving
the lower bound ⌈ n−2
                    4 ⌉.


1.2     Our Results
We provide a negative answer to both Questions 1 and 2. To our knowledge, our lower bounds are
the first fine-grain bounds for quantum-LOCAL, either in the “Ramsey regime” of round-complexity
O(log⋆ n), or in the “linear regime” of round-complexity Ω(n). We detail our result below, distin-
guishing the answer to Question 1 from the answer to Question 2.

1.2.1    Rooted Trees
We prove that any quantum-LOCAL algorithm for 3-coloring n-node ∆-ary rooted trees succeeding
with probability at least 1 − O(1/∆) requires Ω(log⋆ ∆) rounds. This holds for any ∆ large enough
                                                 ⋆
(∆ ≥ 300 suffices), and not exceeding n1/ log n . An important consequence (see Theorem 8) of
this result is obtained with, e.g., ∆ = Θ(log n), from which it results that any quantum-LOCAL
algorithm for 3-coloring n-node rooted trees succeeding with probability at least 1 − O(1/ log n),
requires Ω(log⋆ n) rounds.
    Our lower bound is established in the more general non-signaling, finitely-dependent frame-
work, using a technique that differs from the indistinguishability arguments on which essentially all
previous non-signaling lower bounds were based [14]. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the first lower bound exploiting the finitely-dependence property. Our technique can actually be
viewed as a form of round-elimination, applicable to non-signaling, finitely-dependent distributions
by exploiting the recursive structure of rooted trees.
    Recall that round-elimination [8] is now a standard technique for establishing lower bounds in
the classical LOCAL model. It essentially generalizes Linial’s original argument for establishing his
lower bound on 3-coloring cycles to arbitrary locally checkable labeling (LCL) problems, as defined
in [40]. Roughly, it provides a systematic way to transform any LCL problem Π into a problem
Π′ such that, for any r ≥ 1, Π is solvable in r rounds if and only if Π′ is solvable in r − 1 rounds.
Iterating the transformation r times eventually results in a problem Π′′ that should be solvable in
zero rounds whenever Π is solvable in r rounds. The lower bound follows from establishing that
Π′′ is not solvable in zero rounds. The key structural property underlying these arguments is that,
in any r-round randomized LOCAL algorithm, the output of every node v is a random variable Yv
that can be written as a function of the random bits Xw drawn at every node w in its radius-r
neighborhood, together with the view of the node v at distance r in G, i.e. all the data available
at the nodes at distance at most r from v (potential inputs, identifiers, etc), and structure of the
subgraph induced by these nodes. Formally, for every graph G,
                                                                 
                                     Yv = f (Xw )w , viewr (v, G) ,

where w ranges in the set of nodes with distance at most r from v, and viewr (v, G) is the view of node



                                                  3
v at distance r in G. This property is referred to as the block-factor property in [30]1 . The block
factor property offers an additional structural constraint beyond non-signaling and independence,
and the round-elimination technique for a problem Π exploits this structure as follows.
     Round-elimination is based on the fact that, for classical algorithms, each node may perform r−1
rounds only, and then can consider all possible outcomes of the last communication round by ranging
over all possible assignments of the random bits at the boundary of its radius-r neighborhood and
all possible views at distance r that could be observed in the rth communication round. The
corresponding set of outputs of the original algorithm defines a valid output for the related problem
Π′ . For 3-coloring, Linial showed that this transformation reduces any r-round q-coloring algorithm
for the cycle into a (r − 1)-round 2q -coloring algorithm for the cycles, eventually yielding the
Ω(log⋆ n) lower bound by iterating the argument using the fact that any zero-round algorithm must
use at least n colors [34, 36]. Naor generalizes Linial’s lower bound for randomized algorithms [39].
Round elimination thus relies crucially on the block-factor structure of the output.
     While a similar form of block-factor property still holds for quantum algorithms (see Proposi-
tion 22), the round-elimination technique itself does not, to our knowledge, directly generalize to
the quantum setting. In particular, due to the no-cloning property in quantum computing, our
weaker notion of block-factor depends only on the graph structure (including inputs, identifiers,
etc), but not on the quantum state Xw or on anything computed locally by w. Already in the two-
party setting, round elimination in quantum communication complexity is a much more complex
task with some known but limited results (see [33, 43]), and even an impossibility result whenever
it is required that the outputs are systematically correct [10]. Informally, the round elimination’s
simulation step requires a node to simulate every possible assignment of data at its boundary and
simulate the corresponding extra round of communication. In the quantum setting, however, this
direct simulation breaks down: entanglement across the boundary cannot be produced locally,
since a node cannot manufacture the entangled correlations that an additional round of communi-
cation would have created, without actually performing that communication. Nevertheless, we will
show that some form of round elimination can be performed to obtain a quantum lower bound for
3-coloring rooted trees.

1.2.2    Even-Size Cycles
We prove that any quantum algorithm that properly 2-colors even-size cycles with probability at
least 1 − O(1/n) requires n/2 − 1 rounds. This bound holds even for algorithms with pre-shared
entanglement. It improves the previously known lower bound from [25] by a factor 2, and it is tight
as there is a trivial deterministic algorithm for 2-coloring n-node cycles, n even, in n/2 − 1 rounds.
In other words, even pre-shared entangled quantum resources do not help saving even just a single
round compared to deterministic algorithms.
    Our lower bound is established in the more general non-signaling framework, but using a tech-
nique that differs from [25]. To see the differences, it is worth pointing out that the authors of [25]
also provide a non-signaling distribution matching their n/4 rounds lower bound. However, this
distribution is designed for cycles only, and thus it does not fully respect the principle of physical
causality, which should hold with no restriction on the input graph. Indeed, the output distribution
of a quantum algorithm (with or without pre-shared entanglement) is a non-signaling distribution.
However, even an algorithm A designed specifically for n-node cycles can be used other graphs,
e.g., an (n − 1)-node cycle plus an isolated node. The isolated node may err, but the other n − 1
nodes output. Since A is quantum, the output of the nodes in Cn−1 is non-signaling. It follows
   1
     In [30], the proof that no r-block factor q-coloring of the infinite line exists, for any r and q (Proposition 2),
actually follows the same lines as a simplified proof of Linial’s lower bound for 3-coloring [34].


                                                          4
that the non-signaling distribution matching the n/4 rounds lower bound is not a certificate that
n/4 is the right lower bound for quantum algorithms, as this distribution is defined over the n-node
cycles only. Instead, we consider non-signaling distributions over a slightly larger class of graphs,
composed of all n-node cycles Cn , plus the graphs composed of Cn−1 union one isolated node.

1.3   Related Works
Quantum Lower Bounds. Several quantum lower bounds have recently been established in the
LOCAL model, most of them proved in the stronger non-signaling setting. General LCL problems
have been considered in [1], which introduces the randomized online-LOCAL model, and proves it
to be stronger than the non-signaling model, and hence stronger than quantum-LOCAL. Building
on this, and using the results in [30], it is then shown that every LCL problem on bounded-degree
graphs solvable in O(log⋆ n) rounds in the LOCAL model admits a non-signaling, finitely-dependent
distribution with constant locality. This generalizes the result in [30], which holds for coloring
cycles, in two directions at once: from cycles to arbitrary bounded-degree graphs, and from a
coloring problem to all LCL problems of locality O(log⋆ n). To generalize the coloring to every
LCL problem, the authors of [1] use the reduction defined in [12]. We remark that their results
do not contradict ours because our lower bound relies on a class of trees of super-constant degree,
which falls outside the bounded-degree setting of LCL problems.
     A related line of work studies approximate graph coloring. In particular, the problem of c-
coloring a χ-colorable graph was considered in [14]. A quantum lower bound (which is shown in
general in the non-signaling model) of Ω(n⌊(c−1)/(χ−1)⌋ ) is established, which is tight for certain
classes of bipartite graphs, and an almost-matching classical upper bound of Õ(n⌊(c−1)/(χ−1)⌋ ) is
proved, showing the existence of a deterministic algorithm for the LOCAL model. These results rule
out any super-logarithmic quantum speed-up for the problem. Restricting to unrooted trees, the
authors of [14] further prove a quantum lower bound of Ω(logc n − logc log ε−1 ) for c-coloring with
success probability at least ε > e−n , matching the classical upper bound [7] and thereby ruling out
a quantum advantage in this setting as well. Also in this case, the lower bound is shown in general
for the non-signaling model.
     Beyond coloring, [6] shows that no distributed quantum advantage is possible for any linear
program, while [9] obtains the first super-constant lower bounds for skinless orientation, and for LLL
(i.e., the distributed computation of solutions agreeing with the Lovász Local Lemma). Notably, the
latter bounds are proved in the randomized online-LOCAL model using techniques quite different
from the indistinguishability arguments that underlie most non-signaling lower bounds.
     Closer to our setting, [17] give an extensive classification of LCL problems on trees, both rooted
and unrooted, comparing their complexity in the LOCAL model against the randomized online-
LOCAL model. For rooted trees, they show that any LCL problem solvable in o(log n) rounds in
randomized online-LOCAL can also be solved with locality O(log⋆ n) in the LOCAL model. Their
classification, however, is restricted to constant-degree graphs, and so leaves the case of general
rooted trees open.
     We refer the reader to the survey [16] for an overview of lower bounds results in this area.

Quantum Advantage. On the other hand, a complementary line of work focuses on establishing
that quantum advantage can indeed be obtained in the LOCAL model for certain problems. A com-
putational task requiring Ω(n) rounds in the classical setting but only a constant number of rounds
in the quantum setting was exhibited in [24]. However, the problem considered is rather artificial,
and has no local description. Subsequently, [4] gave the first problem with a local description ex-
hibiting distributed quantum advantage, called iterated GHZ, an iterated and distributed version of


                                                  5
the quantum GHZ game. The separation is Ω(∆) rounds for graphs of maximum degree ∆, which,
restricted to LCL problems (hence, on bounded-degree graphs), yields only a constant-round sepa-
ration. Building on this, [5] gave the first LCL problem with an ω(1) separation, achieving a ratio
of Ω(log0.99 log n) between the classical and quantum round complexities. Despite this progress, the
problems used to obtain these separations remain rather artificial, and no natural or fundamental
problems in distributed computing is yet known to admit a quantum advantage.

Quantum Results in the CONGEST model. The situation regarding the existence of natu-
ral or fundamental problems for which a quantum advantage can be observed is different in the
CONGEST model, which is LOCAL plus the additional constraint that messages are limited in
size (typically, O(log n) bits or qubits). In the CONGEST model, quantum advantages have been
established for many fundamental problems. This line of work was pioneered by [18, 23]. The
former established the impossibility of any quantum advantage in the CONGEST model for many
important graph-theoretical problems, whereas the latter provided the first quantum advantage in
CONGEST, for a basic and important task, namely for computing the diameter of a network. Since
then, other quantum speed-ups have been discovered, in particular regarding subgraph detection
(e.g., [11, 22, 31, 32, 44]). Note that these algorithms do not use any pre-shared quantum resources.

Distributed Graph Coloring. The search for efficient algorithms for distributed graph coloring
is a highly dynamic and fruitful area of research, and it would be impossible to list here all the
results obtained in this domain. We however refer to [19, 20, 26, 27, 28] for recent results, and
pointers to the literature.


2     Computational Models and Probabilistic Framework
In this section, we define our computational framework, that is, the LOCAL model and its quan-
tum counterpart, and we recall two notions at the core of our lower bound proof, namely finite-
dependence and non-signaling.

2.1   LOCAL and Quantum-LOCAL
This paper focuses on the standard LOCAL model of distributed computing (see [35]). In this
model, a set of n processing nodes are connected by a network modeled as an n-node undirected
simple graph G = (V, E). The nodes do not initially know the graph G they belong to. They
are however provided with a polynomial upper bound N = poly(n) on the number of nodes of
this graph. Each node is also provided with an identifier on O(log n) bits, which is unique in
the network. Computation proceeds as a sequence of synchronous rounds. At each round, every
node performs some (unbounded) local computation, then sends a message (of unbounded size) to
each of its neighbors, and receives the messages sent by its neighbors. After a certain number of
rounds, every node outputs a value, and terminates. The round-complexity of an algorithm is the
maximum, taken over all n-node graphs G, of the number of rounds required for all nodes executing
the algorithm in G to terminate.

Randomized-LOCAL. The design of randomized algorithms in the LOCAL model assumes that
every node is given a private source of random bits. For quantum algorithms it is also assumed
that every node can prepare quantum states locally, and that the nodes can exchange quantum bits
(qubits) along the edges of the network. In both cases, the output of a node v is a random value.


                                                 6
We denote by Xv the random variable corresponding to the outputs of node v, and we denote by
X = (Xv )v∈V the collection of all these random variables.
    Note that, in the randomized setting, whether it be when considering classical randomized or
quantum algorithms, the nodes can forge their identifiers by themselves, e.g., by picking values
uniformly at random in {0, . . . , N s+2 − 1} for some s ≥ 0, where N = poly(n) is the upper bound
on the actual number of nodes n provided to the nodes, which guarantees that every identifier
is unique in the network with probability at least 1 − 1/ns+1 . Since we are considering classical
randomized, or quantum algorithms succeeding with high probability, i.e., with probability at least
1 − O(1/n) in n-node networks, we can assume without loss of generality that the nodes are not
initially provided with distinct identifiers, but that these identifiers are picked independently at
random by the nodes at the first round.

Quantum-LOCAL. The design of quantum algorithms in the LOCAL model assumes that every
node v ∈ V of a graph G = (V, E) can prepare private quantum states locally, and that the nodes
can exchange quantum bits (qubits) along the edges of the graph. This is the equivalent of the
randomized LOCAL model with private randomness, but where nodes can prepare private quantum
states instead of using private random coins. The quantum equivalent of classical randomized
algorithms with shared randomness is quantum algorithms with shared pre-entangled states.
    The ability to create private quantum states (resp., to access shared pre-entangled quantum
states) results in global states whose distributions go beyond the ones resulting from using private
(resp., shared) randomness, which potentially extends the computing power of distributed quan-
tum algorithms compared to classical ones. The question addressed in this paper is whether this
extension really helps as far as distributed coloring is concerned.

2.2   Non-Signaling Processes
The non-signaling model [2] (also referred to as the φ-LOCAL model [25]) formalizes the principle of
physical causality in distributed computing, which is that, in any r-round algorithm, a node cannot
be influenced by information originating more than r hops away from it. Equivalently, the output
of a node v in a graph G can only depend on nodes within distance r from v in G. This principle
is not a restriction specific to a particular computational model, but rather a fundamental physical
constraint that any realizable model of computation must respect, including the LOCAL model,
and the quantum-LOCAL model. As a consequence, the non-signaling model is the most general
model of distributed computation consistent with causality, and lower bounds proved in this model
apply universally. We refer the reader to [1, 2, 25] for further discussion on the motivations for the
non-signaling model. We now introduce the key objects needed to formalize non-signaling.

Views. Given a graph G = (V, E), a node v ∈ V , and an integer r ≥ 0, let the distance-r local
view of v, denoted by viewr (G, v), be the information available to v after r communication rounds.
That is, viewr (G, v) contains all input of classical data of the nodes in the radius-r neighborhood
of v in G (including their degrees, their port numbers if any, and their identifiers), as well as the
structure of the connections between these nodes (i.e., the structure of the ball of radius r centered
at v in G, but the potential edges connecting two nodes at distance exactly r from v). Note that a
view does not include the starting state of those nodes, which could be eventually entangled. For
a set S ⊆ V , we extend the notion of individual view by setting
                                                    [
                                    viewr (G, S) :=     viewr (G, v).
                                                  v∈S



                                                  7
Stochastic Outputs. Let G be a graph family. For each G ∈ G, we consider a stochastic process
of the form X G = (XvG )v∈V (G) . We set X = {X G | G ∈ G}, and, for any G ∈ G and any S ⊆ V (G),
we denote by XSG = (XsG )s∈S the restriction of X G to S. The output of any r-round algorithm
in the non-signaling model must satisfy the following natural consistency condition: the marginal
distribution of the output on any set S ⊆ V depends only on the r-hop neighborhood of S in G.
This is captured by the following definition, which states that if two sets of nodes have the same
local view, then their marginal output distributions must coincide.

Definition 3 (r-non-signaling process). Let G be a family of graphs, and let r ≥ 0 be an integer.
The collection X = {X G | G ∈ G} of stochastic processes X G = (XvG )v∈V (G) is r-non-signaling
over G if, for every G, G′ ∈ G, every S ⊆ V (G) and S ′ ⊆ V (G′ ), it holds
                                                                           ′
                             viewr (G, S) = viewr (G′ , S ′ ) =⇒ XSG ∼ XSG′ ,

where ∼ denotes equality in distribution.

   Note that if X is r-non-signaling, then X is r′ -non-signaling for all r′ ≥ r.

2.3   Finitely-Dependent Processes
Finite dependence captures the idea that two stochastic processes as defined in the previous section
are independent whenever they are indexed by sets of nodes that are sufficiently far apart. Given
two random variables Y and Y ′ , we write Y ⊥⊥ Y ′ to denote that Y and Y ′ are independent. Let
distG (u, v) denote the distance from u to v in G (i.e., the length of a shortest path between u and v
in G), and, for two sets of nodes S and S ′ , we define distG (S, S ′ ) = min(u,v)∈S×S ′ distG (u, v). The
following definition of k-dependence is standard (see, e.g., [30]).

Definition 4 (k-dependent process). Let G = (V, E) be a graph, let X = (Xv )v∈V be a stochastic
process, and let k ≥ 0 be an integer. The process X is k-dependent if, for every two subsets
S, S ′ ⊆ V we have
                              distG (S, S ′ ) > k =⇒ XS ⊥⊥ XS ′ .

    Note that if X is k-dependent, then X is k ′ -dependent for all k ′ ≥ k. If X is 0-dependent, then,
for every two non-intersecting sets of nodes S and S ′ , we have that XS and XS ′ are independent.

2.4   NS-FD Distributions and their Relation to Quantum-LOCAL
The non-signaling finitely-dependent distributions were previously considered in [1]. Informally,
the non-signaling finitely-dependent distributions (also called here NS-FD) are arbitrary output
distributions, as long as they satisfy the non-signaling condition and induce independence between
sufficiently distant parts of the network. Such distributions can be generated, for example, by
algorithms in the classical LOCAL and quantum-LOCAL models.

Definition 5 (r-NS-FD distribution). Let G be a family of graphs, and let r ≥ 0 be an integer. A
collection X = {X G | G ∈ G} of stochastic processes X G = (XvG )v∈V (G) is r-non-signaling-finitely-
dependent (or r-NS-FD) over G if the following two conditions hold:

 (a) X is r-non-signaling over G;

 (b) For every G ∈ G, the distribution X G is 2r-dependent.



                                                    8
    The following proposition says that the output distribution of a r-round algorithm in the
quantum-LOCAL model are r-NS-FD distribution. Moreover, if we consider a r-round algorithm in
the quantum-LOCAL model with pre-share entanglement, the distribution of the output is r-non-
signaling.

Proposition 6 ([1, 25]). Let r ≥ 0 be an integer, let G be a family of n-node graphs, and let
X = {X G | G ∈ G} be the collection of output distributions of an r-round algorithm A in the
quantum-LOCAL model over a family of graphs G. Then,

       • If A does not use pre-shared entanglement, nodes are anonymous, and all nodes get the same
         (quantum) input state2 , then X is r-NS-FD over G;

       • If A uses pre-shared entanglement, which is assumed to be symmetric by permutation over
         the nodes, then X is r-non-signaling over G.

    The proposition above has been mentioned in [1, 25]. The first part is almost folklore and
in particular implicit in [1]. The second part is proven explicitly in [25, Theorem 5] (proven in
Appendix B of their full version), but for a restricted scenario where the graph structure is fixed,
for instance a cycle of given length. We provide a complete explicit proof of Proposition 6 in
Appendix A, which handles the general setting of any family of n-node graphs.
    Proposition 6 implies that if no family of r-NS-FD distributions over G is a correct solution
to a graph problem, with probability at least 1 − ε, then no r-round LOCAL algorithm, nor any
quantum-LOCAL algorithm, can produce an output that is a correct solution to this problem with
probability at least 1 − ε on every graph in G. We shall use this fact for our lower bound on
3-coloring rooted trees, by proving the non-existence of o(log⋆ n)-NS-FD distributions for 3-coloring
rooted trees.

Limitations of the NS-FD Approach for Cycles. On the other hand, Proposition 6 cannot be
used for producing non-trivial lower bounds on 3-coloring the n-node cycle Cn . Indeed, as observed
in [1], there exists a family of 1-dependent, stationary random proper 4-coloring distributions for
cycles (see [29, 30]). This implies the existence of a family of proper 4-colorings of cycles that is
1-NS-FD. Consequently, one cannot obtain an ω(1) lower bound for 3-coloring cycles using NS-FD
distributions3 .

Proposition 7 ([29, 30]). Let G = {Cn | n ≥ 3}. There exists a collection X = {X (n) | n ≥ 3},
where X (n) is a random process indexed by the vertices of Cn , such that, for every n ≥ 3, X (n) is
a proper 4-coloring of Cn , and X is 1-NS-FD over G.

    Since [29, 30] use different notations, and even different concepts (e.g., stationarity), Appendix B
provides more details on the constructions in [29, 30], and a rephrasing of the proof of Proposition 7
using the formalism of this paper. We remark that the result in Proposition 7 is very general, as the
family of distributions X is non-signaling on the all family of cycles G, and therefore, our technique
for proving a lower bound on 2-coloring even-size cycles, described in Section 1.2.2, cannot be
adapted to this setting to obtain an analogous lower bound for 3-coloring.
   2
    For instance, the nodes could share some global knowledge, such as an upper bound N on the number of nodes n.
   3
    Any lower bound for 4-coloring carries over to 3-coloring by adding two additional rounds: in the LOCAL model,
any proper 4-coloring of a rooted tree can be transformed into a proper 3-coloring in just two rounds.




                                                        9
3     Lower Bounds for Rooted Trees
The aim of this section is to establish a lower bound for proper 3-coloring in the finitely-dependent,
non-signaling model (cf. Definition 5) on rooted trees, which, thanks to Proposition 6 provides a
lower bounds for the quantum-LOCAL model.
Theorem 8. Any quantum-LOCAL algorithm for 3-coloring n-node rooted trees that succeeds with
probability at least 1 − O(1/ log n) requires at least Ω(log⋆ n) rounds.
    Our proof assumes that the nodes share a common upper bound N on n, rather than being
provided with distinct identifiers. This is without loss of generality: as discussed in Section 2.1,
knowing N is sufficient for nodes to independently sample identifiers that are globally distinct with
probability at least 1 − O(1/n2 ). Therefore, any algorithm that succeeds in the distinct-identifier
setting can be simulated in the anonymous setting with only a negligible loss in success probability.
Consequently, the Ω(log⋆ n) lower bound established in the anonymous setting carries over to the
distinct-identifier setting as well.

3.1   Notation and Fork Dependence
We first introduce some notation, and the concept of fork-dependence which will be used in stating
and proving our main theorem. For any graph G = (V, E) and any set S ⊆ V , we denote by G[S]
the subgraph of G induced by the nodes in S. For any q ∈ N, we denote [q] = {1, . . . , q}.
    Let ∆ ≥ 1 be an integer. We focus on ∆-ary rooted trees T = (V, E), i.e., rooted trees where
each internal node has exactly ∆ children. For every node v ∈ V , C(v) denotes the set of children of
v, and C k (v) denotes the set of descendants of v at exactly k levels below v. That is, C 1 (v) = C(v),
and C (v) = u∈C(v) C k−1 (u). For any set of nodes S, we define C k (S) = ∪v∈S C k (v). Finally, we
       k
               S
denote by depth(v) the distance from the root to node v.
Definition 9 (k-forked pairs). Let T = (V, E) be a rooted tree. For every two nodes u, v ∈ T , let

                      fork(u, v) = min{depth(u), depth(v)} − depth(LCA(u, v)),

where LCA(u, v) denotes the lowest common ancestor of nodes u and v in T . Let k ≥ 0 be an
integer. A pair of nodes (u, v) is k-forked if fork(u, v) ≥ k.
    Intuitively, (u, v) is k-forked means that reaching v from u (or vice versa) requires moving up
the tree for at least k level for reaching their lowest common ancestor, and then moving down at
least k levels. For two sets S, S ′ ⊆ V , we define

                                   fork(S, S ′ ) =     min fork(u, v),
                                                     u∈S,v∈S ′

and we say S and S ′ are k-forked if fork(S, S ′ ) ≥ k.
Definition 10 (k-fork-dependent process). Let k ≥ 0, and let T = (V, E) be a rooted tree. A
stochastic process X = (Xv )v∈V is k-fork-dependent if, for every two sets S, S ′ ⊆ V ,

                                   fork(S, S ′ ) > k =⇒ XS ⊥⊥ XS ′ .

    The concept of fork-dependence is strongly related to the output distributions of k-round al-
gorithms in the LOCAL, or quantum-LOCAL model. Specifically, every 2k-dependent process on a
tree is k-fork-dependent. This observation follows from the mere fact that, for every two nodes u
and v, fork(u, v) > k implies dist(u, v) > 2k.

                                                      10
3.2   Main Result
The main technical result of the section is the following. Recall that the iterated logarithms are
              (0)                                      (k+1)              (k)
defined by log2 x = x, and, for any integer k ≥ 0, log2      x = log2 (log2 x).

Theorem 11. Let k ≥ 1 be an integer, and let T = (V, E) be a ∆-ary tree with ∆ ≥ 300 and
height at least 2k + 1. If X = (Xv )v∈V is a k-fork-dependent, k-non-signaling, q-coloring of T that
                                                         (k+1)
is proper with probability at least 1 − 1/∆, then q ≥ log2     ∆.

   Before establishing Theorem 11, let us state important consequences. Recall that, for every
                                                                    (k)
x ≥ 0, log⋆ x is defined as the smallest integer k ≥ 0 such that log2 x ≤ 1.
                                                                                               ⋆
Corollary 12. Let T = (V, E) be a n-node ∆-ary tree where 300 ≤ ∆ ≤ n1/ log n . If X =
(Xv )v∈V is a k-fork-dependent, k-non-signaling, 3-coloring of T that is proper with probability at
least 1 − 1/∆, then k = Ω(log⋆ ∆).

Proof. Let h denote the height of T . We have that n = hi=0 ∆i ≤ ∆h+1 , which gives that
                                                        P

                                                        log n
                                  h + 1 ≥ log∆ n =            ≥ log⋆ n,                            (1)
                                                        log ∆
                                                        ⋆
where the last inequality follows since ∆ ≤ n1/ log n . Now, if k > (h − 1)/2 then Eq. (1) yields
k = Ω(log⋆ ∆). And if k ≤ (h − 1)/2, then T has height at least 2k + 1 and Theorem 11 applies,
                (k+1)
yielding 3 ≥ log2     (∆), which holds if and only if k = Ω(log⋆ ∆).

    In particular, since every 2k-dependent process on a tree is k-fork-dependent, we get Theorem 8
by merely setting ∆ = Θ(log n) in Corollary 12, and by using Proposition 6. The rest of the section
is dedicated to the proof of Theorem 11.

3.3   Iterated Power Sets
For any set S, we denote by P(S) the set of all its parts, i.e., the set of all the 2|S| subsets of S.
Let q ≥ 1 be an integer. For every k ≥ 0, we define the k-fold iterated power set P k ([q]) recursively
as follows:

                                 P 0 ([q]) = [q] = {1, . . . , q},
                                 P k ([q]) = P P k−1 ([q]) for k ≥ 1.
                                                              


In particular, P k ([q]) is the set of all subsets of P k−1 ([q]). For every q ≥ 1 and every k ≥ 0, we
denote by expk (q) the cardinality of the k-fold iterated power set, i.e.,

                                         expk (q) = |P k ([q])|.
                                                                                          2q
                                                                                   2···
The function expk thus represents the tower of k exponentials, i.e. expk (q) = |2 {z } .
                                                                                 k times


3.4   The Lifted Coloring
The following notion is a key tool for lifting a k-fork-dependent coloring into a 0-fork-dependent
coloring. Recall that C(v) denotes the set of children of v.


                                                   11
Definition 13 (Lifted coloring). Let T = (V, E) be a rooted tree, and let x = (xv )v∈V be a coloring
of the nodes of T with values in [q]. For every v ∈ V , and k ≥ 0 we define φk (v, x) recursively as
follows: φ0 (v, x) = xv , and, for every k ≥ 1,

                                 φk (v, x) = {φk−1 (w, x) | w ∈ C(v)}.

    Thus φ0 (v, x) ∈ [q], and φk (v, x) ∈ P k ([q]) is a nested multiset of depth k built from the colors
of the descendants of v. The following result states that given a proper coloring x = (xv )v∈V of a
tree T , then the lifted colorings φk (v, x) are distinct across neighboring nodes that are at distance
at least k from every leaf.

Lemma 14. Let k ≥ 1, let T = (V, E) be a rooted tree, let inner(T, k) be the set of nodes at
distance at least k from every leaf of T , and let x = (xv )v∈V be a proper q-coloring of T . Define
yv = φk (v, x) for every v ∈ V . Then y = (yv )v∈V is a proper expk (q)-coloring of T [inner(T, k)].

Proof. We first notice that, from definition Definition 13 and since xv ∈ [q] for every v ∈ V , then
φk (v, x) takes value in P k ([q]), that has expk (q) elements. Therefore, y has expk (q) possible colors.
We now show that y is proper, i.e., yu ̸= yv for every edge u, v ∈ T [inner(T, k)] with v ∈ C(u).
    Suppose for contradiction that there exist a, b ∈ inner(T, k) with b ∈ C(a) and ya = yb , i.e.,
φk (a, x) = φk (b, x). We derive a contradiction by showing that x = (xv )v∈V is not a proper coloring.
    We first show via decreasing induction on m ∈ {0, . . . , k}, that there exist u, v ∈ inner(T, m)
with v ∈ C(u) and φm (u, x) = φm (v, x). The base case m = k holds by assumption (take u = a
and v = b).
    For the inductive step, suppose the claim holds for some 1 ≤ m ≤ k: there exist u, v ∈
inner(T, m) with v ∈ C(u) and φm (u, x) = φm (v, x). Unfolding the definition of φm , we get that

                        {φm−1 (w, x) | w ∈ C(u)} = {φm−1 (w, x) | w ∈ C(v)}.

Since v ∈ C(u), the value φm−1 (v, x) appears on the left-hand side, and hence also on the right-
hand side. Thus, there exists v ′ ∈ C(v) such that φm−1 (v ′ , x) = φm−1 (v, x). Since v ∈ inner(T, m)
and v ′ ∈ C(v), both v and v ′ belong to inner(T, m − 1), completing the inductive step.
   At m = 0, we obtain u, v ∈ inner(T, 0) = V with v ∈ C(u) and φ0 (u, x) = φ0 (v, x), i.e., xu = xv .
This contradicts the properness of x, so y must be proper.

    The next lemma shows that, given a random k-fork-dependent q-coloring X = (Xv )v∈V of a
tree T which is proper with error at most ϵ, we can derive a lifted coloring (φk (v, X))v∈V which
0-fork dependent and is also proper with probability at most ϵ on the subtree induced by nodes at
distance at least k from every leaf.

Lemma 15. Let k ≥ 1, let T = (V, E) be a rooted tree with height at least 2k, and let X = (Xv )v∈V
be a k-fork-dependent, k-non-signaling q-coloring of T that is proper with probability at least 1 − ϵ.
Let Y = (Yv )v∈V be the random process where, for every v ∈ V , Yv = φk (v, X). Then, Y satisfies
the following two properties:

 (a) Y is a 0-fork-dependent expk (q)-coloring of T [inner(T, 2k)] that is proper with probability 1−ϵ,
     and

 (b) for every u, v ∈ inner(T, 2k), Yu ∼ Yv .

Proof. To show (a), let us first prove that the process Y is 0-fork-dependent. Let S, S ′ ⊆ inner(T, 2k)
be such that fork(S, S ′ ) > 0. Recall that C k (v) denotes the set of descendants of v at exactly k

                                                   12
levels below v. By definition of φk , for any set of nodes A ⊆ inner(T, 2k), the tuple YA is determined
by XC k (A) . Hence, to prove YS ⊥    ⊥ YS ′ , it suffices to show XC k (S) ⊥⊥ XC k (S ′ ) , since functions of
independent random variables are independent. Therefore, by the k-fork-dependence of X, it suf-
fices to prove that fork(C k (S), C k (S ′ )) > k. To prove this inequality, let u ∈ S, v ∈ S ′ , u′ ∈ C k (u),
and v ′ ∈ C k (v) be arbitrary nodes. Since u′ and v ′ lie exactly k levels below u and v, respectively,
we have that LCA(u′ , v ′ ) = LCA(u, v), depth(u′ ) = depth(u) + k, and depth(v ′ ) = depth(v) + k.
Therefore,

                     fork(u′ , v ′ ) = min{depth(u′ ), depth(v ′ )} − depth(LCA(u′ , v ′ ))
                                 = fork(u, v) + k
                                 ≥ fork(S, S ′ ) + k
                                 > k,

where the last inequality uses fork(S, S ′ ) > 0. Taking the minimum over all u′ ∈ C k (S) and
v ′ ∈ C k (S ′ ) yields fork(C k (S), C k (S ′ )) > k, as desired.
     To complete the proof of (a), it just remains to show that Y is a proper expk (q)-coloring of
inner(T, 2k) with error at most ϵ. Definition 13 implies that, for every v ∈ V , Yv is a random variable
with values in P k ([q]), which has expk (q) many elements. Moreover, Lemma 14 implies that, for
every possible realization of X, if X is a proper q-coloring of T , then also Y = (φk (v, X))v∈V is a
proper expk (q)-coloring of T [inner(T, k)]. Therefore, we have that
                                                          
       Pr Y is a proper coloring of T [inner(T, k)] ≥ Pr [X is a proper coloring of T ] ≥ 1 − ϵ,

which completes the proof of (a).
     We now prove (b). Fix u, v ∈ inner(T, 2k). Since Yu = φk (u, X) depends on X only through
XC k (u) , and similarly Yv depends on X only through XC k (v) , it suffices to show XC k (u) ∼ XC k (v) .
C k (u) and C k (v) are sets of nodes all at distance at least k from the root, and at least k from the
leaves. Therefore their local views at radius k are the same. By the k-non-signaling property of X,
this implies XC k (u) ∼ XC k (v) , and hence Yu ∼ Yv .

3.5    The Base Case
The following lemma forms the base case of our lower bound argument. We restrict to q ≥ 3, since
the case q = 2 (i.e., 2-coloring) is already handled by the known non-signaling lower bound on
cycles (which correspond to 1-ary trees).
Lemma 16 (Base case). Let k ≥ 1, let q ≥ 3, and let T = (V, E) be a ∆-ary rooted tree with
∆ ≥ 300, and height at least 2k + 1. Let X = (Xv )v∈V be a 0-fork-dependent q-coloring of T that
is proper with probability at least 1 − ϵ, where ε ≤ 1/∆. Moreover, let us assume that Xu ∼ Xv for
every pair of vertices u, v ∈ inner(T, 2k). Then, q ≥ log2 (∆).
Proof. Note that inner(T, 2k) is not empty since the height of the tree is at least 2k + 1. In
fact, it contains at least the root and its children. Let u ∈ inner(T, 2k), and, for every i ∈ [q], let
pi = Pr[Xu = i]. Since all nodes in inner(T, 2k) share the same marginal distribution, the definition
of (pi )i∈[q] does not depend on the choice of u ∈ inner(T, 2k). Without loss of generality, let us
assume that p1 ≥ · · · ≥ pq . In particular, this implies that p1 ≥ 1/q.
    Suppose for contradiction that q < log2 (∆). We prove that, for every i ∈ {1, . . . , q},
                                                                
                                               1             1
                                     pi ≥             1 − 1/10 .                                    (2)
                                           q−i+1           ∆

                                                       13
The proof by induction on i. It is based on the following key observation. For any node u ∈
inner(T, 2k) with children C(u) ⊆ inner(T, 2k), proper coloring requires that Xu ∈
                                                                                 / {Xw : w ∈ C(u)}.
In particular, if color i appears among the children of u, then Xu ̸= i. Applying union bound, and
using the fact that Pr[X is proper] ≥ 1 − ε ≥ 1 − 1/∆, we get that, for any set of colors A ⊆ [q],
                                                              1
                           Pr[Xu ∈
                                 / A] ≥ Pr A ⊆ {Xw : w ∈ C(u)} − .                                              (3)
                                                                ∆
This latter bound is the key argument in the inductive proof of Eq. (2).
   The base case, i.e., Eq. (2) for i = 1, directly follows from the assumption that p1 is the largest
probability, which implies                                    
                                            1    1         1
                                      p1 ≥ ≥         1 − 1/10 .
                                            q    q       ∆
For the inductive step, let us assume that Eq. (2) holds for all j ≤ i, and let us show that it then
holds for i + 1. Applying Eq. (3) with A = {1, . . . , i}, we obtain
                                                                                            1
          pi+1 + · · · + pq = Pr[Xu ̸∈ {1, . . . , i}] ≥ Pr {1, . . . , i} ⊆ {Xw : w ∈ C(u)} − .                (4)
                                                                                              ∆
We remark that, by the 0-fork-dependence of X, the children of u produce independent outputs,
each with the same marginal distribution as Xu , since C(u) ⊆ inner(T, 2k). Using the independence,
and the fact that node u has ∆ children, each independently taking color j with probability pj ≥ pi ,
we divide the set C(u) into ∆/i ≥ ∆/q clusters, and bound the probability that each of these clusters
contains color j ∈ {1, . . . , i}. This leads to
                                      i                   
                                    Y
                                          1 − (1 − pj )∆/q
  
Pr {1, . . . , i} ⊆ {Xw : w ∈ C(u)} ≥
                                         j=1
                                         i 
                                         Y                    
                                     ≥         1 − e−pj ∆/q           (since 1 − x ≤ e−x for each x ≥ 0)
                                         j=1
                                                   i
                                     ≥ 1 − e−pi ∆/q                   (since pj ≥ pi for each j ≤ i)
                                             q
                                     ≥1−i·                            (since (1 − x)r ≥ 1 − rx for x < 1, r > 0)
                                            ∆pi
                                                 q3
                                     ≥1−                              (since i ≤ q and pi ≥ 1q (1 − ∆−1/10 ))
                                          ∆(1 − ∆−1/10 )
                                            (log2 ∆)3
                                     ≥1−                              (since q < log2 (∆).
                                          ∆(1 − ∆−1/10 )

Combining the inequality above with Eq. (4), we get that, since ∆ ≥ 300,

                                                  (log2 ∆)3     1        1
                      pi+1 + · · · + pq ≥ 1 −                 −   ≥ 1 −       ,
                                                ∆(1 − ∆−1/10 ) ∆        ∆1/10

which yields                                                         
                                              1                   1
                                      pi+1 ≥          1−                  ,
                                             q−i              ∆1/10
establishing Eq. (2) for i + 1.


                                                     14
    We complete the proof of the lemma by applying Eq. (2) to i = q. This yields
                                                       1
                                           pq ≥ 1 −         .
                                                      ∆1/10
owever, pq is assumed to be the smallest probability, and thus pq ≤ 1/q. Since q ≥ 3 and ∆ ≥ 300,
this yields
                               1   1          1               1
                                 ≥ ≥ 1 − 1/10 ≥ 1 −                 ,
                               3   q        ∆             (300)1/10
a contradiction. Hence, q ≥ log2 ∆.

    Before completing the proof of Theorem 11, let us point out that, in the case of coloring with
zero-error, a stronger bound on the number on the number of colors can be obtained.

Lemma 17 (Zero-error base case). Let k ≥ 1, let q ≥ 3, let T = (V, E) be a ∆-ary rooted tree with
∆ ≥ 2 and height at least 2, and let X = (Xv )v∈V be a 0-fork-dependent proper q-coloring of T .
Then q ≥ ∆ + 1.

Proof. Suppose for contradiction that q ≤ ∆. Let r be the root of T . Let us pick q distinct children
w1 , . . . , wq ∈ C(r), which exist since |C(r)| = ∆ ≥ q, and since the tree has height at least 2. By
the 0-fork-dependence of the process X, the variables Xw1 , . . . , Xwq are mutually independent. In
particular, each color i ∈ [q] satisfies Pr[Xwi = i] > 0, and, thanks to the independence property,
                                                         q
                                                      Y
                         Pr {Xw1 , . . . , Xwq } = [q] ≥   Pr[Xwi = i] > 0.
                                                         i=1

In this event, all q colors appear among the children of u, leaving no valid color for Xu . This
contradicts the assumption that X is a proper coloring with probability 1, since
                                                                               
                  Pr [X is not a proper coloring] ≥ Pr {Xw1 , . . . , Xwq = [q]} > 0.

It follows that it must be the case that q ≥ ∆ + 1.

3.6   Proof of Theorem 11
We have all ingredients to prove the theorem. It suffices to apply Lemma 15 to X. This yields
a 0-fork-dependent expk (q)-coloring Y of T [inner(T, 2k)] that is proper with probability at least
1 − 1/∆, and such that Yu ∼ Yv for all u, v ∈ inner(T, 2k). Applying then Lemma 16 to Y , we get
that
                                       expk (q) ≥ log2 (∆).
This gives q ≥ log(k+1) (∆), as claimed.


4     Lower Bound for Even-Size Cycles
In this section, we push forward the lower bound proved in [25], showing that at least ⌊ n−2  4 ⌋
rounds are needed to 2-color an even-size n-node cycle by a quantum algorithm, even if nodes are
equipped with pre-shared entangled states. Our proof holds in the strongest possible model when
all nodes are assigned unique identifiers between 1 and n. Specifically, let us fix the vertex set
V = [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n}.


                                                 15
                                                                 i′

                                             distance t + 1

                                      n                               i

                                             distance t + 1




Figure 1: Construction in the proof of Theorem 19, for n = 10, and t = 3. The vertex n is inserted
at distance t + 1 from i using the two new red edges, after removing the black dashed edge.


    We assume that the identifier of node i is also i. Therefore, since those identifiers are provided
in our definition of views, the condition viewr (G, S) = viewr (G, S ′ ) implies that S = S ′ .
    Assume for now that n is even. Since we consider pre-shared entangled states, we will rely on
the second part of Proposition 6, that we will apply to two possible types of graphs with vertex
set V = [n]: either a Hamiltonian cycle (family Cn ), or an (n − 1)-cycle together with one extra
                        ′
isolated node (family Cn−1  ). Lemma 18 hereafter shows that any t-non-signaling distribution must
err for properly coloring n-cycles when t ≤ (n − 4)/2. Then the missing step leading to Theorem 19
consists in proving that any t-round quantum-LOCAL algorithm on Cn leads to a t-non-signaling
distribution on Fn = Cn ∪ Cn−1′  .

Lemma 18. Let t ≥ 1 and n = 2t + 4 be integers. Let Cn denote the set of all Hamiltonian cycles
                                ′
on V = [n]. Furthermore, let Cn−1   denote the set of all graphs on V = [n] composed of exactly one
(n − 1)-cycle and one isolated node. Let Fn = Cn ∪ Cn−1  ′   . Let X = {X G | G ∈ Fn } be a family
of (not necessarily proper) 2-coloring t-non-signaling distributions over Fn with unique identifiers.
There exists G ∈ Cn such that
                                                                           1
                          Pr X G is not a proper 2-coloring of G ≥
                                                               
                                                                              .
                                                                          n−1
Proof. The key idea is to start from the (n − 1)-cycle. Since n − 1 is odd, there must systematically
exist two adjacent nodes that are colored the same by the algorithm. Since there are n − 1 pairs of
                                                                                          1
adjacent nodes, there must be a pair for which this occurs with probability at least n−1     . Then, by
inserting a vertex at a position antipodal to this pair, one gets an n-cycle on which the distribution
errs on the same adjacent nodes and with the same probability.
                              ′
    More formally, let G ∈ Cn−1   be such that the isolated node in G is n, i.e. the cycle is on [n − 1].
Let us orient the (n − 1)-cycle in G arbitrarily in one direction, and, for every i ∈ [n − 1], let us
denote by i′ ∈ [n − 1] the successor node of i on the cycle, according to our orientation. Let X be
the marginal distribution of X G on the (n − 1)-cycle. Since n − 1 = 2t + 3 is odd, any set of values
produced by X is not a proper 2-coloring of the (n − 1)-cycle. Formally,

                  Pr ∃i ∈ [n − 1] such that i and i′ get the same color by X = 1.
                                                                               


                                                   16
For every node i ∈ [n − 1], let q(i) be the probability that        ′
                                                            Pi and i get the same color by X. By the
union bound, it follows from the previous equality that i q(i) ≥ 1. Therefore there exists a node
i ∈ [n − 1] such that q(i) ≥ 1/(n − 1).
    Let us fix such a node i, and let us extend the (n − 1)-node cycle into an n-node cycle by
inserting node n between a pair of consecutive nodes (see Figure 1). Specifically, we denote by
G′ ∈ Cn the graph resulting from inserting node n between the two node at distance t + 1 from
vertex i in G. Note that, in G′ , node n is at distance t + 2 from vertex i, and at distance t + 1 from
node i′ .
    Thanks to Definition 3 applied to G and G′ , and since X is t-non-signaling, we get that the
                                                          ′
joint distribution of (i, i′ ) is the same for X G and X G . Therefore, the probability that G′ is not
                               ′
properly 2-coloring by X G is at least q(i) ≥ 1/(n − 1).

   Then we are ready to state our main result for 2-colorying n-cycles, namely that (n − 2)/2
rounds are needed when the success probability is greater than 1 − 1/(n − 1).
Theorem 19. Let t ≥ 1 and n = 2t + 4 be integers. Any quantum-LOCAL algorithm for 2-coloring
n-cycles with success probability greater than 1 − 1/(n − 1) must use more than t rounds, even with
pre-shared entanglement and identifiers in {1, . . . , n}.
Proof. Let us consider any quantum-LOCAL algorithm A for 2-coloring n-node cycles, with colors
in {0, 1}. The proof consists of constructing a family of (not necessarily proper) 2-coloring t-non-
signaling distributions X over Fn = Cn ∪ Cn−1 that errs on Cn at most as A errs on Cn . Then,
Lemma 18 will conclude the proof.
    The basic but crucial observation is that the algorithm A can be executed on both graph families
          ′
Cn and Cn−1   . However, since any graph G ∈ Cn−1′   is a non valid instance for A, the behavior of A
is not specified. In particular, some node may output an error message, especially the isolated one.
Let us thus modify A such that each node outputs only 0 or 1, no matter what happens during
the execution. It suffices to replace any output of A different from color 1 by color 0. By doing
so the error probability of the modified algorithm A′ can only decrease on Cn , and A′ is still a
quantum-LOCAL algorithm with the same number of round.
    Then X G is defined as the output coloring of A′ on G, for each G ∈ Fn . By construction, when
G ∈ Cn , the distribution X G produces a proper coloring with a probability at least as large than
A. Then Proposition 6 tells us that the resulting distribution family X is t-non signaling.


5    Conclusion
In this paper, we provide the first fine-grained lower bounds for quantum-LOCAL. In particular, we
prove two results:
    • A lower bound of Ω(log⋆ n) rounds for 3-coloring rooted trees by a quantum algorithm with
      success probability at least 1 − O(1/ log n), by using a form of round-reduction applicable to
      non-signaling finitely-dependent distributions.

    • A lower bound of n/2 − 1 rounds for 2-coloring even-length cycles by a quantum algorithm
      with success probability at least 1 − O(1/n), by exploiting the fact that quantum algorithms
      generate output distributions that are non-signaling in all graphs. This bound holds even for
      algorithms using pre-shared entanglement.
Beyond its interest from a quantitative perspective, our Ω(log⋆ n) lower bound for 3-coloring n-
node rooted trees is also interesting conceptually. While our technique does not directly generalize

                                                  17
to cycles (due to the existence of non-signaling, finitely-dependent distributions on cycles noted
above [29, 30]) it suggests a new route toward proving quantum lower bounds for 3-coloring ori-
ented cycles. Indeed, let us consider oriented cycles, where only one-way communications are
allowed (say, clockwise). From the perspective of the nodes, in a sufficiently small number of
rounds, their local view is indistinguishable from the view they would have in a rooted tree with
one-way communication oriented towards the leaves. In the classical LOCAL model, this obser-
vation implies that any algorithm for 3-coloring oriented cycles can be simulated on rooted trees,
with nodes receiving information from their parent and broadcasting it to their children. This
reduction transfers lower bounds from trees to directed cycles in the classical LOCAL model. Un-
fortunately, this argument does not carry over to the quantum-LOCAL model, since duplicating
qubits to broadcast them would violate the no-cloning theorem. Nevertheless, a suitable notion
of branching, compatible with quantum communication, may still be formulated in the quantum
setting, replacing the broadcast step in the classical reduction. Our lower bound for trees in the
non-signaling, finitely-dependent setting suggests that such a tree-based approach could indeed be
viable for establishing a quantum-LOCAL lower bound on the round complexity of 3-coloring cycles.

Acknowledgments:         The second author is thankful to Adrian Kosowski for fruitful discussions
on the topic of the paper, especially regarding the lower bound for even-length cycle.


References
 [1] Amirreza Akbari, Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco d’Amore, François Le Gall, Henrik Lievo-
     nen, Darya Melnyk, Augusto Modanese, Shreyas Pai, Marc-Olivier Renou, Václav Rozhoň,
     and Jukka Suomela. Online locality meets distributed quantum computing. In 57th ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1295–1306, 2025.

 [2] Heger Arfaoui and Pierre Fraigniaud. What can be computed without communications?
     SIGACT News, 45(3):82–104, 2014.

 [3] Hagit Attiya and Jennifer L. Welch. Distributed computing - fundamentals, simulations, and
     advanced topics (2. ed.). Wiley series on parallel and distributed computing. Wiley, 2004.

 [4] Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo Equi,
     François Le Gall, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti, Marc-Olivier Renou,
     et al. Distributed quantum advantage for local problems. In 57th ACM Symposium on Theory
     of Computing (STOC), pages 451–462, 2025.

 [5] Alkida Balliu, Filippo Casagrande, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo Equi, Barbara Keller, Henrik
     Lievonen, Dennis Olivetti, Gustav Schmid, and Jukka Suomela. Distributed quantum advan-
     tage in locally checkable labeling problems. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
     (SODA), pages 1268–1308. SIAM, 2026.

 [6] Alkida Balliu, Corinna Coupette, Antonio Cruciani, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo Equi, Henrik
     Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. New Limits on Distributed
     Quantum Advantage: Dequantizing Linear Programs. In 39th International Symposium on
     Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 356 of LIPIcs, pages 11:1–11:22, Dagstuhl, Germany,
     2025. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.




                                               18
 [7] Leonid Barenboim and Michael Elkin. Distributed Graph Coloring: Fundamentals and Recent
     Developments. Synthesis Lectures on Distributed Computing Theory. Morgan & Claypool,
     2013.

 [8] Sebastian Brandt. An automatic speedup theorem for distributed problems. In 38th ACM
     Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 379–388, 2019.

 [9] Sebastian Brandt and Tim Göttlicher. A post-quantum lower bound for the distributed lovasz
     local lemma. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 3298–3312,
     2026.

[10] Jop Briët and Jeroen Zuiddam. Orthogonal rank and impossibility of quantum round elimi-
     nation. Quantum Inf. Comput., 17(1&2):106–116, 2017.

[11] Keren Censor-Hillel, Orr Fischer, François Le Gall, Dean Leitersdorf, and Rotem Oshman.
     Quantum distributed algorithms for detection of cliques. In 13th Innovations in Theoreti-
     cal Computer Science Conference (ITCS), volume 215 of LIPIcs, pages 35:1–35:25. Schloss
     Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022.

[12] Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. An exponential separation between random-
     ized and deterministic complexity in the LOCAL model. SIAM J. Comput., 48(1):122–143,
     2019.

[13] J. F. Clauser, M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R. A. Holt. Proposed experiment to test local
     hidden-variable theories. Physical Review Letters, 23(15):880–884, 1969.

[14] Xavier Coiteux-Roy, Francesco d’Amore, Rishikesh Gajjala, Fabian Kuhn, François Le Gall,
     Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Marc-Olivier Renou, Gustav Schmid, and Jukka
     Suomela. No distributed quantum advantage for approximate graph coloring. In 56th An-
     nual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 1901–1910, 2024.

[15] Richard Cole and Uzi Vishkin. Deterministic coin tossing with applications to optimal parallel
     list ranking. Inf. Control., 70(1):32–53, 1986.

[16] Francesco d’Amore. On the limits of distributed quantum computing. Bull. EATCS, 145,
     2025.

[17] Anubhav Dhar, Eli Kujawa, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Mikail Muftuoglu, Jan
     Studený, and Jukka Suomela. Local problems in trees across a wide range of distributed
     models. In 28th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS),
     volume 324 of LIPIcs, pages 27:1–27:17. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
     2024.

[18] Michael Elkin, Hartmut Klauck, Danupon Nanongkai, and Gopal Pandurangan. Can quantum
     communication speed up distributed computation? In ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 166–175, 2014.

[19] Manuela Fischer, Magnús M. Halldórsson, and Yannic Maus. Fast distributed Brooks’ theorem.
     In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2567–2588, 2023.

[20] Maxime Flin, Mohsen Ghaffari, Magnús M. Halldórsson, Fabian Kuhn, and Alexandre Nolin. A
     distributed palette sparsification theorem. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
     (SODA), pages 4083–4123, 2024.

                                                19
[21] Maxime Flin, Alesya Raevskaya, Ronja Stimpert, Jukka Suomela, and Qingxin Yang. 2-
     coloring cycles in one round. CoRR, abs/2603.04235, 2026.

[22] Pierre Fraigniaud, Maël Luce, Frédéric Magniez, and Ioan Todinca. Even-cycle detection in
     the randomized and quantum CONGEST model. In 43rd ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 209–219, 2024.

[23] François Le Gall and Frédéric Magniez. Sublinear-time quantum computation of the diameter
     in CONGEST networks. In 39th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
     (PODC), pages 337–346, 2018.

[24] François Le Gall, Harumichi Nishimura, and Ansis Rosmanis. Quantum advantage for the LO-
     CAL model in distributed computing. In 36th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
     of Computer Science (STACS), volume 126 of LIPIcs, pages 49:1–49:14. Schloss Dagstuhl -
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.

[25] Cyril Gavoille, Adrian Kosowski, and Marcin Markiewicz. What can be observed locally?
     In 23rd International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), LNCS, pages 243–257.
     Springer, 2009.

[26] Mohsen Ghaffari and Christoph Grunau. Dynamic o(arboricity) coloring in polylogarithmic
     worst-case time. In 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
     1184–1191, 2024.

[27] Mohsen Ghaffari and Fabian Kuhn. Deterministic distributed vertex coloring: Simpler, faster,
     and without network decomposition. In 62nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science (FOCS), pages 1009–1020, 2021.

[28] Magnús M. Halldórsson, Fabian Kuhn, Alexandre Nolin, and Tigran Tonoyan. Near-optimal
     distributed degree+1 coloring. In 54th ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
     pages 450–463, 2022.

[29] Alexander E. Holroyd, Tom Hutchcroft, and Avi Levy. Finitely dependent cycle coloring.
     Electronic Communications in Probability, 23:1–12, 2018.

[30] Alexander E Holroyd and Thomas M Liggett. Finitely dependent coloring. In Forum of
     Mathematics, Pi, volume 4, page e9. Cambridge University Press, 2016.

[31] Taisuke Izumi and François Le Gall. Quantum distributed algorithm for the all-pairs short-
     est path problem in the CONGEST-CLIQUE model. In ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 84–93, 2019.

[32] Taisuke Izumi, François Le Gall, and Frédéric Magniez. Quantum distributed algorithm for
     triangle finding in the CONGEST model. In 37th International Symposium on Theoretical As-
     pects of Computer Science (STACS), volume 154 of LIPIcs, pages 23:1–23:13. Schloss Dagstuhl
     - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

[33] Rahul Jain, Jaikumar Radhakrishnan, and Pranab Sen. A lower bound for the bounded round
     quantum communication complexity of set disjointness. In 44th Symposium on Foundations
     of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 220–229, 2003.

[34] Juhana Laurinharju and Jukka Suomela. Brief announcement: Linial’s lower bound made easy.
     In ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 377–378, 2014.

                                               20
[35] Nathan Linial. Distributive graph algorithms-global solutions from local data. In 28th IEEE
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 331–335, 1987.

[36] Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM J. Comput., 21(1):193–201,
     1992.

[37] Nancy A. Lynch. Distributed Algorithms. Morgan Kaufmann, 1996.

[38] Moni Naor. A lower bound on probabilistic algorithms for distributive ring coloring. SIAM J.
     Discret. Math., 4(3):409–412, 1991.

[39] Moni Naor. A lower bound on probabilistic algorithms for distributive ring coloring. SIAM
     Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 4(3):409–412, 1991.

[40] Moni Naor and Larry J. Stockmeyer. What can be computed locally? SIAM J. Comput.,
     24(6):1259–1277, 1995.

[41] Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information:
     10th Anniversary Edition. Cambridge University Press, 2010.

[42] David Peleg. Distributed computing: a locality-sensitive approach. SIAM, 2000.

[43] Pranab Sen and Srinivasan Venkatesh. Lower bounds in the quantum cell probe model. In
     28th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP), volume
     2076 of LNCS, pages 358–369. Springer, 2001.

[44] Joran van Apeldoorn and Tijn de Vos. A framework for distributed quantum queries in the
     CONGEST model. In 41st ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
     pages 109–119, 2022.


A     From Distributed Quantum Algorithms to Non-Signaling Dis-
      tributions
This part is devoted to the proof of Proposition 6. First we provide some technical background on
density matrices and their partial traces, and then a formal description of a quantum distributed
algorithms. This is probably enough to understand the flow of the proof of Proposition 6. Nonethe-
less, for a more complete introduction to quantum computing we refer the interested reader to the
excellent book of [41].

A.1     Quantum Information Background
A.1.1    Density Matrix
The state of a quantum system can always be described by a unit-norm vector |ψ⟩ in some given
Hilbert space H, that we usually call a pure state. When H = CS , for some finite set S, the coor-
dinates (amplitudes) of |ψ⟩ are the quantum analogue of probabilities for probability distribution
over S. We say that |ψ⟩ is a (pure) quantum state over H (or over S when there is no ambiguity).
    Nonetheless, this formalism has limitation when considering the state of a subsystem, such as
the register of a program, or the node in a network. Then the notion of density matrix is much more
suitable. In particular, the density matrix corresponding to a pure state |ψ⟩ is simply ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|.



                                                21
More generally, any probability distribution of quantum states (|ψi ⟩ , pi )i∈I ), that we usually call a
mixed state, can be represented by a density matrix ρ, an operator of H as
                                             X
                                        ρ=       pi |ψi ⟩⟨ψi | .
                                               i∈I

This formalism unifies both quantum states and probability distribution of quantum states. We
also say that ρ is a mixed state, or a density matrix, over H.
    Then quantum operation and measurements can be defined similarly than for pure states. For
instance, the application of a unitary map U transforms a density matrix as follows

                                              ρ 7→ U ρU † .

Also, the measurement of ρ in an orthonormal basis (|x⟩)x∈X produces |x⟩ with probability ⟨x| ρ |x⟩,
in other words it realizes the map
                                          X
                                     ρ 7→    ⟨x| ρ |x⟩ |x⟩⟨x| .
                                             x∈X


A.1.2    Partial Trace
The notion of a local state can be defined through the partial trace operator. Given the global
state of a system, it provides a mathematical description of the corresponding local state and,
consequently, characterizes the possible outcomes accessible from that local state without any
additional communication with the rest of the environment.
    Let us consider a bipartite system made of two components, say A and B, such as two registers,
the corresponding Hilbert space can be tensor decomposed as H = HA ⊗ HB , where HA denotes
the space of quantum states of component A, and similarly HB for B. Note that the joint state
can be entangled, as joint probabilities can be dependent in the classical setting.
    Then, given a density matrix ρ over H = HA ⊗ HB , we can describe a notion of density
matrix over HA (or HB ) describing what locally the state is in HA , as marginals do for probability
distributions. We denote by trHB , or simply trB , the partial trace operator mapping matrices on
HA ⊗ HB to matrices on HA . Formally,
                                                     (
                                                      ρA if x = y,
                                 trB (ρA ⊗ |x⟩⟨y|) =
                                                      0  otherwise.

    When ρ represents a pure state |ψ⟩ over = HA ⊗ HB , we simply write trB (|ψ⟩) instead of
trB (|ψ⟩⟨ψ|). The following facts state two useful and well known properties of partial trace.
Fact 20. Let ρ be a density matrix on a bipartite system HA ⊗ HB . Then for all unitary matrices
U, V acting respectivly on HA and HB we have

                              trB ((U ⊗ V )ρ(U ⊗ V )† ) = U (trB (ρ)) U † .

    When the systeme is now multi-partite, for instance H = HI ⊗ HJ ⊗ HK , then the notation
trJ,K (ρ) refers to trHJ ⊗HK (ρ). With our notations, observe that trJ,K (ρ) matches trJ (trK (ρ)) and
also trK (trJ (ρ)).
Fact 21. Let H = HX ⊗ HY ⊗ HZ , HX = HA ⊗ HA′ and HY = HB ⊗ HB ′ . Let ρX , ρY , ρZ be
density matrices respectively on HX , HY , HZ . Then

                            trA,B,C (ρX ⊗ ρY ⊗ ρZ ) = trA (ρX ) ⊗ trB (ρY ).

                                                     22
A.2    Framework for Quantum Distributed Computing
Formally, in a nutshell, the r-th round of computation of a quantum-LOCAL distributed algorithm
is formalized as follows in two steps:

  1. Each node v applies a unitary map Uvr (we can always disregard intermediate measurements)
     on its own quantum memory, including some registers dedicated to communication, one for
     each edge;

  2. For each edge, each node v exchanges the memory content of the corresponding communi-
     cation register with the one of the corresponding neighbor node (this is a unitary SWAP
     operation).

Note that initially the system is in a starting state Ψ0 which is either a tensor product (no
pre-shared entanglement), or not (with pre-shared entanglement). Moreover, after the final round,
there is formally an extra step, where nodes measure and output one of their memory register.
    Observe that the local unitary map Uvr depends on v (and r). This dependency can model
identifiers, inputs, ect. When there is no such dependency than Uvr = Uur for all vertices u, v.
    If |Ψ⟩ is the state of the whole network whose nodes are in V , and S ⊆ V is a subset of nodes,
we simply denote by trS (|Ψ⟩) the partial trace over the registers of nodes in S. In particular, the
corresponding (local) state ρS over the registers in S ⊆ V can be written as

                                           ρS = trV \S (|Ψ⟩).

    Last, for any subset S ⊆ V and for any integer r, let S r be the union of all radius-t neighborhood
of v ∈ S. Denote by CS the unitary map corresponding to all communication operations performed
by the nodes in S during one round, according to the underlying communication graph G. Observe
that these operations include communication both within S and between S and S 1 \ S. Then the
cone of propagation of information is formalized by the following result.

Proposition 22. Let A be an r-round quantum distributed algorithm on a graph G over V starting
with initial state Ψ0 (entangled or not). Then the final state ρS of registers in S ⊆ V satisfies
                                     !                                  !      
                              O              O                      O
                ρS = trV \S     Uvr+1 CS       Uvr  . . . CS r−1    Uv1 Ψ0  ,
                               v∈S               v∈S 1                 v∈S r

where by convention tensors with identity maps have been ommitted.

Proof. The proof is quite direct by inspection of a quantum distributed algorithm, round by round.
We will use Fact 20 recursively starting from

                                        ρS = trV \S Ψr+1 .
                                                          


    Observe that all operations but the communication operations are local to each node. Moreover,
the operator CS acts only on the registers of S together with its neighborhood in the communication
graph G, that is only on the registers in S 1 . Thus after one round, the effects of all local operations




                                                   23
on nodes of S propagates to S 1 , and so on for further rounds. Let us now formalize this below:
                                        !      !
                             O
   trV \S Ψr+1 = trV \S            Uvr+1 |Ψr ⟩
                
                                                                          (Final local operations)
                                 v∈V
                                                !         !
                                 O
                    = trV \S           Uvr+1        |Ψr ⟩                                      (Communication and Fact 20)
                                 v∈S
                                                !                        !             !
                                 O                           O
                    = trV \S           Uvr+1        CV             Uvr       Ψ   r−1
                                                                                                                 (Local operations)
                                 v∈S                         v∈V



    In order to apply Fact 20 to the last expression, we observe CV = CS ⊗ CV \S 1 , where CV \S 1
                                                                          r+1 . Similarly,        r =
                                                                  N                        N       
does not act on S and therefore     commutes
                                        N        with  the term   v∈S Uv                  v∈V Uv
            r ⊗               r , where             r does not act on S and therefore commutes with
 N                N
    v∈S 1 U v        v̸∈S 1 U v            v̸∈S 1 U v
                     r+1 and C . Therefore we get in two steps
             N           
the term           U
                v∈S v             S
                                                          !                     
                                       O           O                O
trV \S Ψr+1 = trV \S CV \S 1            Uvr          Uvr+1 CS       Uvr  Ψr−1  (Commutativity)
                 

                                       v̸∈S 1               v∈S                        v∈S 1
                                             !                                      
                                O                           O
                 = trV \S,E          Uvr+1       CS              Uvr  Ψr−1                                                   (Fact 20).
                                v∈S                      v∈S 1



   If we continue for one more round, we get
                                          !                                                               !             
                                  O              O                                             O
        trV \S Ψr+1 = trV \S         Uvr+1 CS    Uvr  CV                                          Uvr−1       Ψr−2 
                      

                                         v∈S                        v∈S 1                      v∈V
                                                        !                                                               
                                         O                             O                        O
                          = trV \S             Uvr+1        CS             Uvr  CS 1               Uvr−1  Ψr−2  .
                                         v∈S                        v∈S 1                      v∈S 2



   Therefore by induction we ends with
                                           !                                                                        !       
                                     O            O                                                     O
     trV \S,E (|Ψt+1 ⟩) = trV \S,E    Uvr+1 CS    Uvr  . . . CS r−1                                           Uv1       Ψ0  .
                                           v∈S                           v∈S 1                          v∈S r




A.3    Proof of Proposition 6
Before proving the proposition, we start with two preliminary results based on Proposition 22.
Proposition 23. Let A be an r-round quantum distributed algorithm that we run on two graphs
G, G′ with same vertex set V and the same initial state Ψ0 (entangled or not). Let S, S ′ ⊆ V
be such that viewr (G, S) = viewr (G′ , S ′ ) and trV \S r (Ψ0 ) = trV \S ′r (Ψ0 ). Then the respective final
states ρG       G′         G     G′
        S and ρS satisfy ρS = ρS .


                                                              24
Proof. From Proposition 22 we get that ρS = trV \S WS Ψ0 , where
                                                         

                                              !                                                 !
                                O                        O                          O
                      WS =            Uvr+1       CS          Uvr  . . . CS r−1           Uv1       .
                                v∈S                  v∈S 1                          v∈S r

We have a similar expression for ρS ′ .
  However, writing trV \S as trS r \S ◦ trV \S r and then using Fact 20 lead us to:
                                                                                                        
                 ρS = trS r \S trV \S r WS Ψ0                                           Ψ0            WS† .
                                                                                                
                                                          = trS r \S WS trV \S r

   We then conclude that ρS ′ satisfies the same expression since:

   • WS and WS ′ acts similarly in their respective space because viewr (G, S) = viewr (G′ , S ′ );

   • and trV \S r (Ψ0 ) = trV \S ′r (Ψ0 ) by assumption.



Proposition 24. Let A be an r-round    N quantum     distributed algorithm on a graph G over V starting
with initial product state Ψ0 =                ψ 0 . Let S, S ′ ⊆ V be two disjoint subsets such that
                                          v∈V   v
distG (S, S ′ ) > 2r. Then the final state ρ satisfies ρS∪S ′ = ρS ⊗ ρS ′ .

Proof. Set Z = S ∪ S ′ . From Proposition 22,
                                     !                                                         !          
                             O                O                                     O
             ρZ = trV \Z        Uvr+1 CZ      Uvr  . . . CZ r−1                          Uv1           Ψ0  .
                               v∈Z                   v∈Z 1                          v∈Z r


Since S, S ′ are at distance greater than 2r, we have Z j = S j ∪ S ′j , for 0 ≤ j ≤ r, and therefore

                                    ρZ = trV \Z A ⊗ B ⊗ C Ψ0 ,
                                                                 


where ANacts on S r , B on S ′r , C on V \ Z r . Using now that Ψ0 =                    0
                                                                               N
                                                                                  v∈V ψv , and defining
  0               0
 ΨI = v∈I ψv , for any subset I ⊆ V , we get
                                                                          E
                        ρZ = trV \Z A ψS0 r ⊗ B ψS0 ′r ⊗ C ψV0 \Z r
                                              
                                                                                  .

   Using Fact 21, we can now conclude that ρZ = ρX ⊗ ρY .


   We can now conclude the proof of Proposition 6.

Proof of Proposition 6. Let A be an r-round quantum distributed algorithm for n-vertex graphs
with some initial quantum state Ψ0 (entangled or not) being symmetric over permutation of
nodes (which is the case for both scenarios). Let X = {X G | G ∈ G} be the collection of its output
distributions.
    Then Proposition 23 leads directly to the r-non-signaling property over G, for both scenarios.
Moreover, in the first scenario, |Ψ0 ⟩ is in fact a product state, and therefore Proposition 24 ensures
the additional (2r)-dependent property.



                                                          25
B     Holroyd and Liggett’s Result
The following theorem, proved in [30] and subsequently generalized to cycles in [29], establishes the
existence of finitely-dependent, stationary proper colorings of the integer line Z and of finite cycles.
Theorem 25 ([30, 29]). For every (k, q) ∈ {(1, 4), (2, 3)}, there exists a stationary, k-dependent
proper q-coloring X = (Xi )i∈Z of Z. Here, stationarity means that (Xi )i∈Z and (Xi+1 )i∈Z are
equal in law. Moreover, the distribution of X is invariant under permutations of colors and under
reflections.
                                                                                               (n)
    Furthermore, for every n ≥ 3, there exists a k-dependent proper q-coloring X (n) = (Xi )i∈[n]
of the cycle Cn , whose law is invariant under permutations of colors, rotations, and reflections, and
such that
                                    (n)         (n) 
                                  X1 , . . . , Xn−k ∼ (X1 , . . . , Xn−k ).                         (5)

    We note that (5), together with stationarity of X, implies that any consecutive block of X (n)
of length at most n − k has the same distribution as a block of X of the same length.
    The case (k, q) = (1, 4) of Theorem 25 is of particular interest for us. In this regime, the
stationarity property (5) can be used to show that the induced family of 4-coloring is 1-non-
signaling over the family {Cn , n ≥ 3} of cycle graphs, as stated in Proposition 7. We provide a
proof of the lemma below.

Proof of Proposition 7. For each n ≥ 3, let X (n) be the distribution given by Theorem 25 for
(k, q) = (1, 4). By construction, X (n) is a 1-dependent proper 4-coloring of Cn , establishing part (a).
It therefore remains to verify the 1-non-signaling property.
    Let n, n′ ≥ 3, and let S ⊆ V (Cn ) and S ′ ⊆ V (Cn′ ) satisfy

                                          view1 (Cn , S) = view1 (Cn′ , S ′ ).

Since the distance-1 views of the two sets coincide, the induced subgraphs on S and S ′ have the
same collection of connected components. Thus, we may write

                                  S = S1 ∪ · · · ∪ Sℓ ,          S ′ = S1′ ∪ · · · ∪ Sℓ′ ,

where:
  (i) |Si | = |Si′ | for every i ∈ [ℓ];

 (ii) distCn (Si , Sj ) > 1 and distCn′ (Si′ , Sj′ ) > 1 whenever i ̸= j.
By 1-dependence, the random colorings on distinct components are independent. Hence, for every
assignment σ = (σ1 , . . . , σℓ ) ∈ [4]|S| ,
                                                 ℓ
                                        (n)   Y       (n)    
                                   PrCn XS = σ =   PrCn XSi = σi ,
                                                           i=1
                           (n′ )                  (n′ )
and analogously, PrCn′ XS ′ = σ = ℓi=1 PrCn′ XS ′ = σi .
                                        Q                    
                                                      i
    Each set Si (respectively Si′ ) is a path segment of length |Si |. By (5) and the stationarity of
the process on Z, the distribution of the coloring restricted to such a segment depends only on its
length. Since |Si | = |Si′ |, it follows that
                                         (n)            (n′ )    
                                    PrCn XSi = σi = PrCn′ XS ′ = σi
                                                                            i



                                                          26
for every i ∈ [ℓ]. Combining the above equalities yields
                                      (n)          (n′ )   
                                 PrCn XS = σ = PrCn′ XS ′ = σ

for every σ ∈ [4]|S| , which is precisely the 1-non-signaling condition.




                                                  27
