                                                        Distributed Santa Claus via Global Rounding∗
                                                            Tijn de Vos †○
                                                                         r ‡ Leo Wennmann §○
                                                                                           r Malte Baumecker †

                                                                       r Yannic Maus †○
                                                                       ○              r Florian Schager †


                                                                                         May 1, 2026
arXiv:2604.27983v1 [cs.DS] 30 Apr 2026




                                                                                            Abstract
                                                    In this paper, we consider the Santa Claus problem in the CONGEST model. This NP-
                                                hard problem can be modeled as a bipartite graph of children and gifts where an edge
                                                indicates that a child desires a gift. Notably, each gift can have a different value. The goal
                                                is to assign the gifts to the children such that the least happy child is as happy as possible.
                                                Even though this is a well-studied problem in the sequential setting, we obtain the first
                                                results the distributed setting. In particular,
                                                                                          √     we show that the complexity    of computing an
                                                O(log n/ log log n)-approximation is Θ̂( n + D) rounds, where our Ω(   e √n + D)-round lower
                                                bound is even stronger and holds for any approximation.
                                                    This lower bound is in stark contrast to related allocation tasks like maximum matching
                                                and load balancing, where there exist poly log n-round approximation algorithms. Since
                                                Santa Claus is a max-min allocation problem, there are many more global dependencies.
                                                Our lower bound construction shows that the non-existence of short augmenting paths does
                                                not guarantee a good approximation, thereby ruling out many techniques used for matching
                                                and related problems.
                                                    Instead, our algorithm exploits that Santa Claus, despite its non-linear objective function,
                                                can be modeled as a linear program (LP). In contrast to maximum matching, it is not
                                                a packing (or covering) LP, because it has both packing and covering constraints. We
                                                provide the first CONGEST solver that solves mixed packing and covering LPs in O(D ·
                                                poly(log n, ε−1 )) rounds. Based on a fractional solution obtained by the solver, we obtain
                                                an integral solution via an involved global rounding approach. The LP solver, as well as
                                                the rounding technique we present, may both be of independent interest for the distributed
                                                community and further our knowledge on the complexity of approximation in distributed
                                                optimization.




                                            ∗
                                              This research was funded in whole or in part by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) https://doi.org/10.
                                         55776/P36280 and https://doi.org/10.55776/I6915. For open access purposes, the author has applied a CC
                                         BY public copyright license to any author-accepted manuscript version arising from this submission. This research
                                         was also supported by Dutch Research Council (NWO) project "The Twilight Zone of Efficiency: Optimality of
                                         Quasi-Polynomial Time Algorithms" [grant number OCEN.W.21.268].
                                            †
                                              TU Graz
                                            ‡
                                              The    author    ordering    was    randomized   using     https://www.aeaweb.org/journals/policies/
                                         random-author-order/ generator. It is requested that citations of this work list the authors separated
                                         by \textcircled{r} instead of commas.
                                            §
                                              University of Southern Denmark


                                                                                                1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                     3
  1.1 Our Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
  1.2 Technique in a Nutshell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5
       1.2.1 Computing an Approximate LP Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            5
       1.2.2 Efficiently Eliminating Cycles in Gift Graph via Global Rounding . . . . .            6
       1.2.3 Computing an Integral Gift Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           7
       1.2.4 Lower Bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
  1.3 Related Work and Other Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
       1.3.1 Sequential Santa Claus Approximations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8
       1.3.2 Distributed Rounding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9
  1.4 Future Directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9

2 Distributed Santa Claus                                                                     11
  2.1 Efficiently Eliminating Cycles in Gift Graphs via Global Rounding . . . . . . . . 11
      2.1.1 Cycle Rounding Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
      2.1.2 Proof of the Cycle Rounding Lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
  2.2 Linear Programming Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  2.3 Computing an Integral Gift Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
      2.3.1 Big Gift Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
      2.3.2 Small Gift Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
  2.4 Proof of the Approximation Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

3 Lower Bounds                                                                                    24

4 Solver for Mixed Packing-Covering LPs                                                       29
  4.1 Solving the Feasibility Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
      4.1.1 The Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
      4.1.2 Proof of Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  4.2 Reducing Optimization to Feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
  4.3 Implementation in CONGEST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

References                                                                                        38

A A Counterexample for Naive Sparsification                                                       46

B CONGEST Primitives                                                                              47




                                                 2
1        Introduction
A wide variety of optimization problems have attracted considerable attention in the distributed
setting [KMW06; SHKK+12; HSS16; KMW16; AKO18; BCDE+19; BBHO+19; Gha19; ABL20;
BO20; EGK20; BFKL21; RGHZ+22; ZGYH+22; CL21; CL23a; FGGK+23; HS23; IKY24;
MS25; CS26]. Perhaps surprisingly, it still remains an interesting open question which dis-
tributed optimization problems are hard to solve. Sometimes, the answer seems straight-forward:
there are optimization problems like shortest path, min cut, and max flow that clearly have
global dependencies and require Ω(D) rounds, even for approximations [SHKK+12]. On the
other hand, there are problems with only local constraints like maximal independent set and
coloring that allow for polylogarithmic-round algorithms [Gha19; HSS16]. For other problems,
the complexity is less apparent. For example, approximating maximum independent set and
minimum 2-dominating set require global knowledge [BCDE+19; EGK20], while approximating
vertex cover, minimum dominating set, load balancing, and maximum matching do not [KMW16;
ABL20; HS23]. The complete landscape of which problems are hard to approximate is still un-
clear. In this paper, we aim to take a meaningful step towards filling the gaps by studying an
allocation problem called the Santa Claus problem—as it was first coined in the seminal paper of
Bansal and Sviridenko [BS06]. Informally, we help Santa Claus in his annual quest of trying to
fulfill the children’s gift wishlists by distributing gifts to the children such that the least happy
child is as happy as possible.
     More formally, we are given a set of gifts G and a set of children C where each gift g ∈ G
has a fixed value vg ≥ 0. Encoding the children’s wishlists as a bipartite graph G = (C ∪ G, E),
our goal is to find disjoint sets of gifts Gc ⊆ N (c) ⊆ G for all children c ∈ C according to the
objective function                                    X
                                            max min       vg .
                                                       c∈C
                                                              g∈Gc
Santa Claus, also referred to as the restricted assignment case or max-min fair allocation, has
been extensively studied in the sequential setting [BD05; BS06; Fei08; AFS12; AKS15; PS16;
CM18; JR20; DRZ20; CM22; HS25]. Note that some papers consider the scheduling formulation
of Santa Claus, where the goal is to find an assignment of jobs (gifts) to machines (children)
that maximizes the minimal machine load. Other variants of Santa Claus like the matroid,
submodular, budgeted, unrestricted, and online versions have also been studied [CCK09; DRZ20;
BGR21; SHPK22; BLMR+24; BMR25; RRW25].

1.1        Our Contribution
Notably, Santa Claus has not yet been studied in a distributed setting. In this paper, we consider
the CONGEST model [Pel00], where a communication network is abstracted as an n-node graph,
and the vertices communicate with each other through the edges of the graph in synchronous
rounds by sending a message of O(log n) bits to each neighbor. The complexity measure is
the number of communication rounds until every node has produced its output, e.g., each child
knows which gift it receives and each gift knows to which child it is assigned.

Distributed Hardness. Santa Claus is a max-min fair allocation problem where the max-min
property creates global dependencies that require considerable amount of communication. This
is reflected by the fact that computing a multiplicative approximation, i. e. an integral solution
that is only a multiplicative factor worse than the optimum, is already hard. More formally, we
show the following lower bound.1
Theorem 1. Any CONGEST algorithm that computes any multiplicative approximation of the
                                      e √n + D) rounds in the worst case.
integral Santa Claus problem requires Ω(
    1                                                    b ) := O(f 1+o(1) ) for any function f .
        Throughout, we write O(f
                             e ) := O(f poly log f ) and O(f


                                                          3
    In particular, this means that even computing a polynomial approximation is hard. This
lower bound is a juxtaposition to other allocations problems like matching and load balancing.
In particular, bipartite perfect matching is a special case of Santa Claus: Consider the case
where the number of children is equal to the number of gifts, then each child must receive
exactly one gift to maximize the minimum happiness. Consequently, such an assignment only
exists if and only if there is a perfect matching. For maximum matching, there is a structural
theorem by [HK73] with the following property: If there are no short augmenting paths in a given
feasible matching, then it is a good approximation of the optimum. The proof of Theorem 1
shows there is no such property for Santa Claus: even if a approximation is bad, there can be
no short augmenting paths (see Remark 25). Therefore, many of the approaches and techniques
used to solve matching simply do not transfer. The same argument also juxtaposes Santa Claus
and its dual—the min-max allocation problem called load balancing. As for matching, there
are (polylogarithmic) algorithms for load balancing in both LOCAL and CONGEST [FHS15;
HKPR18; OBL18; BO20; ABL20], which often rely on augmenting paths. Hence, the techniques
used in solving the load balancing problem do not transfer to Santa Claus either.

CONGEST Algorithm for Santa Claus. In this paper, we present the first multiplicative
approximation for Santa Claus that can be computed in an almost-optimal number of CONGEST
rounds. We consider this our main contribution.

Theorem 2. There exists a randomized CONGEST algorithm that, given a weighted bipartite
graph G = (C ∪ G, E) on n vertices and vertex values vg ∈ R≥0 for all g ∈ G, computes w. h. p.
                                                                    b √n + D) rounds.
an O(log n/ log log n)-approximation for the Santa Claus problem in O(

    In a nutshell, we start by computing a fractional solution to a suitable linear program (LP)
relaxation of the problem, and then employ a combination of global and local rounding steps to
compute an integral solution where each child is assigned a subset of gifts such that the total
value is not much worse than the optimum. Note that in the integral solution, each gift is either
assigned to one child or not at all.

Linear Programming. As the max-min objective is technically non-linear, we start by ex-
plaining why the Santa Claus problem can be modeled as an LP. By a standard binary search
framework, the following decision variant of Santa Claus is equivalent to an α-approximation for
the Santa Claus problem for some α > 1: Given a threshold T ≥ 0, either compute a solution
of value T /α or determine that the optimal value of the Santa Claus Problem is less than T .2
Intuitively, the threshold T can be thought of as the optimal fractional value found by binary
search. Throughout, we assume that T is known. The big advantage of the decision variant is
that it can be formulated as an LP as we explain in more detail in Section 1.2.1.
    However, formulating Santa Claus as an LP can only be advantageous if we can actually
solve the respective LP (formulation) efficiently in the distributed setting. This is not the
case for all classes of LPs, as the fastest general distributed LP solver takes n1.5+o(1) rounds
[Vos23]. While there are exponentially faster distributed solvers for either packing or covering
LPs [KMW06; GKM17; CL23b], and specific packing and covering problems [JRS02; KMW16;
BEG18; BHR18], there are no solvers for mixed packing and covering LPs like Santa Claus. It
is easy to see that Santa Claus is in fact a mixed packing and covering LP: we want to ensure
that all children get a value of at least T (covering constraints) while each gift can be assigned
at most once (packing constraints). Building on prior sequential and parallel work [MRWZ16],
we complement the world of existing distributed LP solvers by providing the first LP solver for
mixed packing and covering LPs (also known as positive LPs) in the CONGEST model.
   2
    In particular, for some T larger than the optimal value the LP is not no longer feasible, i. e. there does not
exist a solution that satisfies all constraints.



                                                        4
Theorem 3 (Simplified version of Theorem 29). There is a deterministic CONGEST      algorithm  
                                                                                   e D log3 3 n
that provides a (1 + ε)-approximate solution for mixed packing and covering LPs in O     ε
rounds.

    In particular, Theorem 3 is a distributed implementation of the PRAM algorithm by Ma-
honey, Rao, Wang, and Zhang [MRWZ16]. The Ω(    e √n+D) lower bound of Theorem 1 shows that
solving Santa Claus is harder than solving packing or covering LPs. This is supported by the fact
that one can approximate several packing or covering problems, like maximum matching and
maximum independent set, in poly log n-rounds when restricting to sparse graph classes [CS26],
where we show that Santa Claus still requires Ω(D) rounds.

1.2     Technique in a Nutshell
In this section, we explain how to obtain an O(log n/ log log n)-approximation for distributed
Santa Claus in the CONGEST model. On a high level, we follow the sequential approach of
Bansal and Sviridenko [BS06] that consists of computing a fractional solution using an LP and
then diligently rounding it to an integral solution. However, significant changes are necessary to
make the sequential algorithm suitable for the distributed setting which we point out throughout
the following explanation.
    Throughout, we consider the Santa Claus problem in form of the bipartite graph G =
(C ∪ G, E) where an edge {c, g} ∈ E is present if a child c ∈ C desires the gift g ∈ G. Further, let
n = |C ∪ G|, m = |E| and α = O(log n/ log log n). For the rest of this exposition, consider the
parameter T as the globally known optimal (integral) value of the Santa Claus problem. In the
actual algorithm, we determine T via a global binary search without affecting the total runtime.

1.2.1    Computing an Approximate LP Solution
The first important step is to choose the right LP formulation of the Santa Claus problem. The
challenge is that sequential LPs do not correspond to communication graphs, and can often be
solved exactly in polynomial time3 using a standard LP solver. When using distributed LP tech-
niques, we are restricted to LP formulations that correspond to the communication graph and we
can only compute approximate fractional solutions. Here, we are heavily deviating from [BS06],
because they use the configuration LP 4 that does not correspond to the communication graph
and has exponentially many variables.
    Therefore, we use the highly non-trivial, polynomial-size LP formulation due to Davies,
Rothvoss and Zhang [DRZ20] that has a constant integrality gap, i. e. any optimal integer
solution is a constant factor away from an optimal fractional solution. In Section 1.3.1, we
explain why this does not directly lead to a constant factor approximation. For this formu-
lation, we partition the set of gifts G into big gifts B := {g ∈ G : vg ≥ T /α} and small
gifts S := {g ∈ G : vg < T /α}. Importantly, as we are showing an α-approximation, any child
that receives one big gift is satisfied and does not require any more gifts. Let Cg ⊆ C denote
the subset of children that are interested in the gift g ∈ G, then we refer to the following LP as
   3
    In (sequential) approximation algorithms, the polynomial running time is often not even explicitly stated.
   4
    In the configuration LP, there exist exponentially many variables for all possible subsets of gifts that have a
total value of at least T . In the sequential setting, this can be solved in polynomial time by finding a solution to
the dual LP via a polynomial-time separation oracle and the Ellipsoid method.




                                                         5
SantaLP(T ) throughout.
                   X                                X           
                           vs ucs ≥ T · 1 −                ucb              ∀c ∈ C
                s∈S:c∈Cs                       b∈B:c∈Cb
                                            X
                              ucs ≤ 1 −              ucb                    ∀s ∈ S, ∀c ∈ Cs
                                          b∈B:c∈Cb
                       X
                              ucg ≤ 1                                       ∀g ∈ G
                       c∈Cg

                              ucg ≥ 0                                       ∀c ∈ C, ∀g ∈ G

Since this LP can be somewhat tricky to understand, it can be beneficial to ignore the gray
parts and get some intuition for a simpler formulation5 without the distinction between gift
sizes. Both formulations ensure that each child receives at least a total value of T and that all
gifts are (fractionally) assigned at most once. Additionally, the non-trivial formulation ensures
that each child who is not satisfied with big gifts alone receives the rest of the value from more
than α small gifts—thereby ensuring that an optimal integral solution is only a constant factor
away. For an in-depth explanation of the constraints, see Section 2.2.
    Using Theorem 3, we can compute an approximate fractional solution to SantaLP(T ) in
O(D·poly
 e          log n) rounds of CONGEST. More precisely, we compute a feasible fractional solution u
to SantaLP(T /2). Based on the size distinction between gifts, let u = (x, y) where x and y denote
the assignments for the big and small gifts, respectively. From here on out, let G denote the
bipartite gift graph based on the fractional solution u where an edge {c, g} of weight ucg ∈ [0, 1]
is present if ucg > 0. Similarly, let Gx = (C ∪ B, E) denote the big gift graph between children
and big gifts where an edge {c, b} ∈ E of weight xcb is present if xcb > 0.

1.2.2    Efficiently Eliminating Cycles in Gift Graph via Global Rounding
A crucial, reoccurring subroutine in the computation of our integral gift assignment in Sec-
tion 1.2.3, i. e. our α-approximation, is the efficient elimination of cycles in subgraphs of G via
global rounding. For the sake of simplicity, we explain our algorithm only for the general gift
graph G that is restricted to its fractional edges. Our goal is to reduce G to a forest. In the
sequential setting, the algorithm is simple: For all even cycles C in the bipartite graph G, par-
tition C into two disjoint matchings C1 and C2 and decrease the edge weight in C1 at the same
rate as the edge weights in C2 increase. Eventually, at least one edge weight becomes integral
and is removed. We repeat this process until there are no more cycles left in G.
    However, a naive implementation of this sequential procedure is prohibitively expensive.
Since each cycle might be of length O(n) and we are only guaranteed to remove one edge in each
iteration, this leads to a total runtime of O(nm) rounds—a time in which one can trivially solve
any problem in CONGEST by gathering the whole instance in a node. Therefore, our CONGEST
algorithm is substantially more involved. Based on a cycle cover algorithm [PY19; RGHZ+22],
we design a cycle rounding algorithm that finds and eliminates many disjoint short cycles in
                        √
parallel and takes Ô( n + D) rounds. The high-level idea of our approach to eliminating cycles
is to repeat the following steps restricted to the graph with only fractional edges:

 (1) Compute a low diameter decomposition, obtaining clusters with small diameter and m/10
     inter-cluster edges.

 (2) Within each cluster, carefully extract a Eulerian subgraphs using T -joins.

 (3) Compute short cycle covers: every edge appears in at least one cycle of length no(1) .
   5
    To be precise, there are two polynomial-size LP formulations without the gift size distinction (besides the
configuration LP) whose integrality gaps can be unbounded or as large as Ω(m), see [BS06] for more details.


                                                           6
 (4) Select a maximal set of disjoint cycles using an MIS algorithm on a virtual graph.

 (5) Round all cycles in parallel such that at least one edge in each cycle becomes integral.

We show that each iteration makes a 1/no(1) fraction of the remaining edges integral. Then
we repeat all steps on all remaining fractional edges. After log n · no(1) iterations, the graph G
becomes a tree.
     A priori, we cannot guarantee any progress once the graph becomes very sparse, that is,
when there are n − 1 + n/10 edges left. In this case, the number of inter-cluster edges can be
as large as n/10 such that the remainder is already a tree and no further edges are rounded. In
order to avoid this and make our algorithm efficient, we apply the two following tricks: First, we
simplify our graph to G′ by repeatedly removing all vertices of degree one. Second, we contract
all long paths. Together, this results in a graph G′′ where the average degree is > 2. This means
that (1 − ε)|E(G′′ )| ≥ |V (G′′ )| − 1, and we can still make progress. Since G′′ is not a subgraph pf
the communication graph G (but also contains contractions), each ‘round’ on G′′ takes several
rounds on G. We show that we can simulate each round on G′′ with O(         e √n + D) rounds on G.
Multiplying this overhead with the number of rounds per iteration and the number of iterations
       b √n + D).
gives O(

1.2.3     Computing an Integral Gift Assignment
Based on the feasible fractional solution (x, y) to SantaLP(T /2), we explain how to compute
an integral gift assignment (X, Z) such that each child receives a value of T /α. Our algorithm
can be characterized by the following three steps where each step takes O(e √n + D) rounds in
CONGEST.

   1. Clustering of Big Gifts. With the goal to compute multiple clusters of big gifts, we
      use our cycle rounding algorithm to compute a fractional solution (x′ , y) that corresponds
      to an acyclic subgraph Gx′ ⊆ Gx . However, the resulting forest T ′ does not yet have
      all properties we require to compute an integral assignment for all gifts. Thus, as a next
      step, we compute a fractional solution (x∗ , y) where Gx∗ ⊆ Gx′ is a sub-forest T ∗ ⊆ T ′ of
      children and big gifts with the crucial property that for each tree T ∈ T ∗ we can always
      find one child in T to be satisfied in small gifts while all remaining children receive one
      big gift. Recall that any child is satisfied by one big gift.

   2. Randomized Selection of Small Gifts. For each tree T ∗ , we randomly select exactly
      one child to receive only small gifts and propagate the choice to all other nodes in T ∗ .
      Importantly, the random selection happens independently and in parallel for all T ∗ such
      that all respective decisions whether a small gift is assigned to a tree are in fact independent.
      Using a concentration and union bound, each small gift is w. h. p. (fractionally) assigned
      to at most β = O(log n/ log log n) trees and exactly one child within each tree. After
      downscaling the solution by β, each gift is fractionally assigned to at most one child and
      each selected child receives a value of T /β. Notably, the random selection directly implies
      the integral big gift assignment X, i. e. we simply root all T ∗ in their respectively chosen
      children and assign the big gifts to their respective child node using the crucial property.
        Naively, rooting a tree takes diameter rounds. Since we consider the big gift forest Gx∗ ,
        each T ∗ can have diameter n. By using broadcast primitives on a compressed virtual
                                                                 e √n + D) rounds.
        graph, we show how to root all T ∗ in Gx∗ in parallel in O(

   3. Integral Assignment of Gifts. Lastly, we consider the subgraph of small gifts and
      randomly selected children with the goal to compute an integral assignment of small gifts.
      Using our cycle rounding algorithm as a subroutine again, we first eliminate all cycles in
      our small gift graph—this requires a careful adaption of the edge weights such that the


                                                  7
        rounding takes both the fractional solution and the values of the small gifts into account.
        In a second step, we round our fractional small gift assignment to an integral assignment Z
        such that each gift is assigned to at most one child and each child receives a value of T /α
        where α = 2β. The high-level idea of the rounding is as follows: For a fixed child c ∈ C
        that receives small gifts, let kc denote the (fractional) number of small gifts it receives in
        the fractional solution. Then we round it such that each child receives ⌊kc ⌋ small gifts and
        thus loses at most one small gift. In the worst case, this is the most valuable gift of value
        at most T /α and each child receives a value of at least T /β − maxs∈S vs = T /α.

1.2.4     Lower Bound
We prove Theorem 1 via a reduction from set-disjointness in the two-party model to the Santa
Claus problem in CONGEST. In particular, we construct a family of lower bound graphs where
deciding whether Santa Claus admits a solution of size 1 or 0 corresponds to the decision whether
a certain set-disjointness instance is a “yes”- or a “no”-instance. Observe that any multiplicative
approximation is also able to distinguish between a 1- and a 0-instance. Combining our reduction
with the restricted bandwidth of our lower bound graphs and the long-standing lower bound
of Ω(n) for set-disjointness in the two-party communication model [Raz92], we obtain the claimed
lower bound.

1.3     Related Work and Other Approaches
1.3.1      Sequential Santa Claus Approximations
As a result of several papers [BS06; Fei08; AKS15; CM18; DRZ20], the current state-of-the-art
for sequential Santa Claus is a (4 + ε)-approximation by Cheng and Mao [CM22]. It remains
an interesting open question whether the approximation factor can be improved to match the
hardness result by [LST90; BD05] who showed that unless P = N P there cannot exist a poly-
nomial time (2 − ε)-approximation for Santa Claus. This raises the important question why we
follow the first approach of [BS06] in our CONGEST algorithm and did not obtain a constant
approximation based on the works of [Fei08; AKS15; CM18; DRZ20; CM22]. The answer is
two-fold.
    Bansal and Sviridenko [BS06] also show how to extend the approach followed in this paper to
obtain a O(log log n/ log log log n) approximation via the sequential Lovász Local Lemma (LLL).
Improving upon these ideas with iterative applications of LLL, Feige [Fei08] showed the first
constant factor approximation.6 As the applications of distributed LLL either requires bounds
on the number of small gifts that are adjacent to a big gift cluster (and vice versa) or subsampling
of configurations of the configuration LP, it is highly unclear if this approach can be successfully
transferred to the distributed setting.
    Any sequential algorithm of [AKS15; CM18; DRZ20; CM22] is inherently global and combi-
natorial, i. e. they do not require to solve an LP for an initial fractional solution. On a high level,
they rely on polynomially many iterations of finding augmenting paths in the gift graph that
improve upon the current gift assignment. Intuitively, one can hope that that all augmenting
paths are short as long as we are far away from an optimal solution, because this would allow us
to augment many paths in parallel. However, the proof of our Ω(       e √n + D)-round lower bound
(see Remark 25) shows that such an approach must fail: Even if we are far away from an optimal
solution, the augmenting paths can still be of length D. This is also the reason why the constant
integrality gap of SantaLP(T ) does not automatically imply a constant approximation, as our
approximation factor can only be as good as the guarantee that we maintain during our rounding
   6
    At the time, it was a non-constructive result that was later shown to be constructive by a result of [HSS11]
that made LLL constructive for the several applications in Feige’s result.




                                                       8
procedure. It remains an open question whether a different approach that does not rely on the
augmenting paths leads to a better approximation factor for our CONGEST algorithm.
    A more general version of Santa Claus, also called unrestricted Santa Claus, considers the
case where each child c ∈ C desires a gift g ∈ G with a different value vcg ≥ 0. Known as a notori-
ously difficult open problem, the state-of-the-art is a max{poly(log |G|), |G|ε }-approximation by
Chakrabarty, Chuzhoy, and Khanna [CCK09]. In recent years, Bamas and Rohwedder [BR23]
showed a poly(log log |G|)-approximation for what Bateni, Charikar, and Guruswami [BCG09]
identified as another central special case of Santa Claus—the problem of max-min degree ar-
borescence as it captures much of its difficulty. However, this still leaves a significant gap to the
known hardness by [LST90; BD05] that also holds for the unrestricted case.

1.3.2    Distributed Rounding
On a high-level, our algorithm computes a fractional solution to Santa Claus and then rounds
it to an integral solution. Although distributed rounding is well-studied, the challenge we face
are distinct from existing work. Mainly following one recipe, previous work on local rounding in
distributed algorithms can be described as follows: Start with a suitable fractional solution—
usually an uniform distributionPover all possible output labels—of the problem. Next, define a
linear objective function Φ = v∈V Φv . Then pick a set S of vertices such that changing the
fractional labels of any vertex v ∈ S does not affect Φw for any w ∈ S \{v}. Round the fractional
labels in S to integral labels and remove S from the graph. Repeat this procedure until the
graph is empty. This produces a partial solution for a constant fraction of vertices in the graph.
Hence, recursing on the remaining subgraph for O(log n) iterations solves the problem on the
entire graph. This general method is responsible for many recent breakthroughs in the LOCAL
model; see [Fis20; GK21; GGR21; FGGK+23; GG23; GG24]. This approach relies on a few key
assumptions that are violated for Santa Claus: First of all, it assumes that any valid partial
solution can always be extended to a proper solution of the same objective value. Secondly, it
assumes that it is always possible to round a fractional solution without loss in objective value.
This is clearly impossible for Santa Claus, as illustrated by the following simple instance: There
are two children and one gift of value 1 desired by both children. The optimal fractional solution
has value 1/2 but any integral assignment has value 0.
     For global problems, rounding is less common. The only rounding algorithm in CONGEST
                                       e √m + D) rounds [FGLP+21]. The important subroutine
we are aware of is for flow and takes O(
of finding a Eulerian tour has since been improved to O( e √n + D) rounds [RGHZ+22] which can
be seen as the starting point of the cycle rounding detailed in Section 2.1.1. However, we cannot
use their algorithm, as our input graph does not have the structure required by [FGLP+21;
RGHZ+22].

1.4     Future Directions
In some sense, the cycle rounding subroutine of Section 2.1.1 can be seen as a sparsification
procedure: it significantly reduces the number of fractional edges while maintaining the fact that
it is a feasible fractional solution. To some extend, this rounding technique is content-oblivious:
it is rounding the values of a fractional solution of a linear program. Further research is required
to find out under which circumstances such a sparsification can be used in other optimization
problems. For Santa Claus, it already raises the question whether this sparsification can be
run directly on the entire fractional solution—thereby considerably simplifying our algorithm.
It turns out that this is not possible, which requires some care to see. Such a sparsification
step essentially removes any edges that attain weight 0 through rounding. However, an optimal
integral solution does not need to be a subset of the non-zero fractional edges (see Example 43 in
Section A). Importantly, when we apply this sparsification step as a subroutine in our algorithm,
we diligently guarantee that there exists a good integral solution that is a subset of the fractional


                                                 9
edges. We leave as an open question which other optimization problems can be approached in
a similar manner.




                                           10
2     Distributed Santa Claus
Throughout this section, we show the following approximation for the Santa Claus problem.

Theorem 2. There exists a randomized CONGEST algorithm that, given a weighted bipartite
graph G = (C ∪ G, E) on n vertices and vertex values vg ∈ R≥0 for all g ∈ G, computes w. h. p.
                                                                    b √n + D) rounds.
an O(log n/ log log n)-approximation for the Santa Claus problem in O(

    Crucially, our approximation requires multiple times that we can efficiently eliminate cycles
from a (sub-)graph as shown in Section 2.1. After applying our mixed packing and covering LP
solver (see Theorem 29) to compute an initial fractional assignment of gifts to children using
the LP formulation in Section 2.2, we show how the pivotal cycle-elimination subroutine is used
to compute an integral gift assignment in Section 2.3. Finally, we put all the pieces together
in Section 2.4 and show that the CONGEST algorithm described throughout this section has
w. h. p. an approximation factor of α = O(log n/ log log n).

2.1     Efficiently Eliminating Cycles in Gift Graphs via Global Rounding
In this section, we provide a CONGEST algorithm that efficiently eliminates cycles in a (sub-)
graph. More formally, we show the following lemma.

Lemma 4 (Cycle Rounding). Let G = (V, E) be a CONGEST communication network and G′ =
                                                                                         b √n + D)-
(V, E ′ ) be a subgraph with edge weights w : E ′ → [0, 1]. There exists a deterministic O(
round algorithm that computes edge weights w′ : E ′ → [0, 1] such that
                    ′
       P                    P
   1.      v∈N (u) w (uv) =   v∈N (u) w(uv) for every u ∈ V ; and

    2. There exists some forest F ⊆ E ′ such that all edges e ∈ E ′ \ F have integral value w′ (e).

    The idea of the rounding procedure is simple: for any cycle in G′ , we find the edge of
minimum or maximum weight w (depending on which is closer to 0 or 1) and alternatingly
increase or decrease all weights around the cycle by w. Although correctness of such an algorithm
is straightforward, it is tricky to efficiently implement it in the distributed setting. There exist
CONGEST implementations of this procedure for rounding flow [FGLP+21; RGHZ+22; FV23],
cumulating in a O(e √n + D)-round algorithm. However, these algorithm are tailored to graphs
with specific properties. In particular, (1) the sum of all edge weights for any vertex needs to be 1
and (2) the graph should be Eulerian, i.e., each node has even degree. The latter property implies
that it can be decomposed into a union of cycles. Overcoming the challenges of dropping these
assumptions requires several new ideas. In our approach, we bypass (1) completely. Moreover,
we introduce a preprocessing step so that allows use to reduce to the case where the graph is
Eulerian.

2.1.1    Cycle Rounding Algorithm
Let G′ denote the graph induced by all edges with non-integral weights. The high-level idea of
the cycle rounding algorithm of Lemma 4 is to repeat the following two steps in each iteration:
(1) We prune G′ by removing all edges which cannot be covered by a cycle. (2) For each Eulerian
graphs that we extract from the remaining graph, we compute a short cycle cover and round
all cycles in parallel. This guarantees that at least one edge in each cycle becomes integral. We
show that each iteration makes a 1/no(1) fraction of the remaining edges integral. Throughout
the rest of this section, we explain both of these steps in more detail, for an overview refer to
Algorithm 1.




                                                 11
 Algorithm 1: Cycle Rounding
   Input : A subgraph G′ = (V, E ′ , w) of the CONGEST network G = (V, E).
   Output: G = (V, E ′ , w′ ) such that w′ satisfies Lemma 4.
 1 for no(1) iterations do
                       ▷ Each iteration makes a 1/no(1) fraction of remaining edges integral
 2    V ← V , E ← {e ∈ E : w(e) ∈
        ′         ′                    / Z}, G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ).
 3    repeat
 4        Remove all nodes of degree 1 from G′ .                                   ▷ Lemma 5
 5        Contract all odd paths of degree 2 nodes in G′ .                        ▷ Lemma 45
 6    until there are no nodes of degree 1 in G′ .
 7    Compute a (1/10, no(1) )-low diameter decomposition S1 , . . . , Sk on G′ . ▷ Lemma 7
 8    for i ∈ [k] in parallel do
 9        T ← {v ∈ Si : degG′ [Si ] (v) is odd}.
10        Compute a T -join Fi on G′ [Si ].                                        ▷ Lemma 9
11        Compute a (n , n )-cycle cover Ui on G [Si ] \ Fi .
                         o(1)  o(1)                         ′                     ▷ Lemma 11
12        for C ∈ Ui in parallel do
13           Round C.                               ▷ At least one edge on C becomes integral



    Step 1: Simplify the Graph. Let G′ = (V, E ′ ) denote our graph restricted to only
fractional edges E ′ = {e ∈ E : w(e) ∈   / Z}. Using the following lemma, we compress our
graph G by removing parts of it that cannot be covered by cycle. To be precise, we simulate
         ′

the procedure that iteratively removes all nodes of degree 1.
Lemma 5. Let G = (V, E) denote a CONGEST communication network and let F ⊆ G be a
                                 e √n + D)-round CONGEST algorithm that roots every tree
forest. There is a deterministic O(
T ∈ F at an arbitrary vertex r ∈ T and informs everyone of their parent in the tree.
    For the proof, refer to Appendix B. Tailored to our algorithm, we use the above lemma with
the following operations inspired by Miller and Reif [MR89].
   • Rake: All edges incident to a vertex of degree one are removed.

   • Compress: All paths of degree two vertices that have at least a length of two are contracted
     into a single edge.
Repeatedly using the above operations results in a significantly compressed graph G′′ .

    Step 2: Orienting Cycles in Simplified Graph. The goal of our next step is to orient
cycles in G′′ . Since our subroutines for making the graph Eulerian (see Lemma 9) and for finding
a cycle cover in a Eulerian graph (see Lemma 11) take time proportional to the diameter, we
start by computing a low diameter decomposition of G′′ .
Definition 6. Given an undirected, unweighted graph G = (V, E), a (β, d)-low diameter decom-
position is a partition of V into subsets S1 , . . . , Sk such that
   • The diameter of G[Si ] is at most d for each i ∈ [k];

   • The number of edges with endpoints belonging to different pieces is at most βm.
    Low diameter decompositions are well studied in the CONGEST model [MPX13; RG20;
CG21; FGV21; GGR21; REGH22; GGHI+23; RHG23]. We use a deterministic version stated
in Lemma 7 which has slightly worse bounds than its randomized counterparts, but simplifies
our analysis and does not incur a higher asymptotic runtime.

                                               12
Lemma 7 ([CS20]). There exists a deterministic algorithm that computes a (1/10, no(1) )-low
diameter decomposition in no(1) rounds of CONGEST.

    With Lemma 7, we decompose G′′ into clusters S1 , . . . , Sk of small diameter and with few
additional edges. For each cluster Si , we carve out a sparse graph Fi such that the remain-
der G′′ [Si ] \ Fi is Eulerian. The technical term for such a graph Fi is a T -join.

Definition 8. Let G = (V, E) be an unweighted, undirected graph. For an even set of vertices
T ⊆ V , we call a subset H ⊆ E a T -join if degH (v) is odd for v ∈ T and even for v ∈ V \ T .

   We can efficiently compute a T -join using the following algorithm.

 Algorithm 2: Computing a T -join
   Input : Communication network G = (V, E), an even set of vertices T ⊆ V .
   Output: An acyclic T -join H ⊆ E.
 1 Compute a BFS-tree S ⊆ G rooted at an arbitrary node r ∈ T .
 2 H ←∅
 3 for i = D, . . . , 1 do
 4    for each u ∈ S : dist(u, r) = i in parallel do
                                                   ▷ Su denotes the subtree of S rooted at u.
 5        if |T ∩ Su | is odd then
 6            H ← H ∪ {{u, p(u)}}                        ▷ p(u) denotes the parent of u in S

 7 return H




Lemma 9. Algorithm 2 computes an acyclic T -join in O(D) rounds in the CONGEST model.

Proof. First, we argue the correctness of Algorithm 2. Note that for every node u ∈ T , the
degree degH (u) cannot change after checking the parity of |T ∩ Su |. Thus, it is sufficient to show
that after processing {u, p(u)}, each vertex v ∈ T ∩ Su has odd degree degH (v) in H and every
vertex in Su \ T has even degree. We prove the claim via induction on the height hu of Su .
    Base case (hu = 0). In this case, the tree Su contains only u. If u ∈ T , we keep {u, p(u)}, so
degH (u) = 1. If u ∈/ T , we do not keep {u, p(u)}, so degH (u) = 0. In both cases, the induction
hypothesis is satisfied.
    Induction step (hu > 0). By induction hypothesis, it holds for all v ∈ T ∩ Su \ {u}. Hence,
we only need to show it for u. Note that any child of u in Su ∩ H has an odd number of nodes
from T in its subtree. Let Cu (H) denote the number of children in Su ∩ H, then we distinguish
four exhaustive cases.

  1. Case: u ∈ T

        • If Cu (H) is odd, then the number of nodes from T including u is even, and {u, p(u)}
          is not included. Thus, degH (u) = Cu (H) is odd.
        • If Cu (H) is even, then the number of nodes from T including u is odd, and {u, p(u)}
          is included. Hence, degH (u) = Cu (H) + 1 is odd.

  2. Case: u ∈
             /T

        • If Cu (H) is odd, then the number of nodes from T is odd, and {u, p(u)} is included.
          Thus, degH (u) = Cu (H) + 1 is even.
        • If Cu (H) is even, then the number of nodes from T is even, and {u, p(u)} is not
          included. Hence, degH (u) = Cu (H) is even.


                                                13
In all cases, the induction hypothesis is satisfied. Since later steps do not influence the de-
gree degH (v) for v ∈ Su , it holds that H is a T -join. Computing the BFS-tree S takes O(D)
rounds in CONGEST. Further, since all vertices on the same level in S can be processed inde-
pendently in parallel, it also takes O(D) rounds to grow H into a T -join. Finally as a subgraph
of a spanning tree, H has to be acyclic.

    Using Lemma 9 with T = {v ∈ Si : degG′′ [Si ] (v) is odd}, the remainder G′′ [Si ]\Fi is Eulerian
and we can decompose it into disjoint cycles. However, these cycles can be of large diameter,
which makes it expensive to round them. In the worst case, only one edge disappears in each
iteration. Parter and Yogev [PY19] showed that any graph can be decomposed into short cycles
and additional O(n log n) edges. As it is not straightforward what to do with the last O(n log n)
edges, we take a more nuanced approach using cycle covers.

Definition 10. A (d, c)-cycle cover is a collection of cycles U in a graph G such that

  1. Each edge is contained in at least one cycle;

  2. Each edge is contained in at most c cycles; and

  3. Each cycle is of length at most d.

   Within their proof for short cycle decomposition, Parter and Yogev [PY19] use a lemma
that computes (d, c)-cycle covers in a bridgeless graph. A bridge is an edge whose removal
makes the graph disconnected and thus cannot be covered by a cycle. The following lemma is a
derandomization of their result by Rozhoň, Grunau, Haeupler, Zuzic, and Li [RGHZ+22].

Lemma 11 ([RGHZ+22]). Given ε ∈ (0, 1] and a bridgeless n-vertex graph G = (V, E) with
diameter D, there exists a deterministic CONGEST algorithm that computes a (d, c)-cycle cover
U with d = no(1) · D and c = no(1) in no(1) · D rounds.

    As G′′ [Si ] \ Fi is Eulerian, it is also bridgeless and we can compute a cycle cover Ui with
Lemma 11. As a last step, we simply round all cycles C ∈ Ui such that at least one edge in each
cycle becomes integral.

2.1.2   Proof of the Cycle Rounding Lemma
Putting all the pieces together, we finally prove our cycle rounding algorithm of Lemma 4.

Proof of Lemma 4. We describe an iterative process, such that in each iteration, a 1/no(1) -
fraction of the remaining edges (minus some forest) becomes integral. After log n·no(1) iterations,
all edges apart from some remaining forest become integral. See Algorithm 1 for an overview of
the algorithm.
    Each iteration consists of two steps, which we detail below. We make our progress in the
second step, where we need to compute a T -join (Lemma 9) and a cycle cover (Lemma 11).
Both procedures have a round complexity that depends on the diameter of G. So we have a first
step that removes tree-like parts of the graph and computes a low diameter decomposition on
the remainder, giving the graph on which we make progress low diameter.
    1. Simplifying the graph. Our goal is to remove any part of the remaining graph that
cannot be covered by a cycle. In other words, we remove the tree-like part of the graph. More
precisely, we give an efficient implementation of the algorithm that iteratively removes all edges
that connect to a vertex of degree 1. Let F denote these edges. We find this set F by the Rake
& Compress procedure of Lemma 5, tailored to this application. We run O(log n) iterations of
the following algorithm.

   • Rake: Remove all edges incident to a vertex of degree one.


                                                 14
   • Compress: Contract all paths of degree two vertices of length at least two into a single
     edge.
    Formally, we apply the Rake & Compress procedure in Lemma 5 with the forest F as defined
above. This seems contradictory: we apply Lemma 5 with F as input to find F . However, it
is crucial here that Lemma 5 does not require that all the edges in F know that they are in F :
only the leaves need to be aware of this at any moment in time. Hence, we can perform each
Rake operation in 1 round. As detailed in Lemma 5, we can perform each Compress operation
    e √n + D) rounds. Note that for this step, we compress all paths of degree two vertices, not
in O(
only the paths within the tree. This is necessary, since a priori it is not possible to know which
paths are part of the tree. However, this does not incur more rounds: Lemma 45 shows that we
can contract such paths with at most O(  e √n + D) overhead.
    At the end of this process, we consider the original (uncompressed) graph without all removed
edges. This is a graph without degree 1 vertices. However, we can still have many degree 2
vertices. We now run one iteration of Compress, but contract slightly less aggressively:
   • Compress’: Contract all paths of degree two vertices of an odd number of edges into a
     single edge. Replace the weight of this edge by the minimum weight on the path.
      The reason to only contract odd number of edges, is that the graph now remains bipartite.
We perform Compress’ in O(      e √n + D) rounds, again using Lemma 45, which also ensures that,
when round a contracted edge, we can forward the weight change to all edges on the path in
 e √n + D) rounds.
O(
      Number of edges left. After O(log n) iterations of (i) and (ii), we have reduced to a graph
with fewer nodes and edges. We denote this graph by G′ with n′ nodes and m′ edges. We claim
                ′
that m′ ≥ 6n   5 . This can be seen as follows. Note that after a Compress operation, no two degree
                                                       ′
2 nodes can be adjacent. If there are at least 3n    5 nodes with degree 2, all non-adjacent, then we
                    ′    6n′                       3n′                                             2n′
have m′ ≥ 2 · 3n   5 = 5 . If we have at most 5 nodes with degree 2, then we have at least 5
                                                                     ′       3n′      6n′
nodes with degree at least three, so in total at least m′ ≥ (3 · 2n 5 + 2 · 5 )/2 = 5 .
      Reducing the diameter. Next, we compute a low diameter decomposition with Lemma 7,
                                                                         ′
that decomposes into parts S1 , . . . , Sk with no(1) diameter and m   10 additional edges. Algorith-
mically, we continue to work on each of the clusters Si in parallel – in the analysis, we consider
all clusters simultaneously.
      2. Orienting cycles in each cluster. Let T = TiSdenote all odd degree nodes, with
                                                             S
Ti the odd degree nodes in Si . We compute a T -join F = Fi that is a forest by computing
a Ti -join Fi using Lemma 9 in no(1) -rounds on the virtual graph. By Lemma 45 this takes
O(no(1) · O( e √n + D)) rounds on the communication network G. Now Si \ Fi is Eulerian, hence
bridgeless. We compute a (d, c)-cycle cover U for c = d = no(1) on this graph in no(1) rounds
using Lemma 11. Again by Lemma 45 this takes O(no(1) · O(       e √n + D)) = O(  b √n + D) rounds on
the communication network G. To obtain a good set of disjoint cycles, we compute a maximal
independent set on these cycles. Hereto, we construct a virtual graph Ĝ of the cycles in U, where
to cycles are connected if they share an edge. Now we run a deterministic O(poly log n)-round
CONGEST algorithm for MIS on Ĝ [CPS20; GGR21]. Note that sending messages along the
cycles incurs an additional multiplicative simulation overhead of c · d = no(1) .
      Parter and Yogev [PY19] show that a maximal set of cycles covers an Ω(1/(cd))-fraction of
the edges. We repeat the argument here for completeness: each cycle C ∈ U intersects with at
most |C| · c many cycles in U. Thus, when we add the cycle C into the collection D we cover
|C| many edges. When we remove the |C| · c cycles that intersect with C, we remove the cover
of at most |C| · c · d many edges in G′ that appear on these cycles. That is, at each iteration,
the ratio between the number of edges we cover and the number of edges that the covering cycle
removed is at least 1/dc.
      This means that we have a set of disjoint cycles of length no(1) each, covering at least
           ′
    ′
(m − m                o(1) edges in total, where the −m′ /10 term comes from the inter-cluster edges
         10 − |F |)/n


                                                 15
of the low diameter decomposition and the −|F | from the T -join. We can round a cycle by
traversing it on the virtual graph in no(1) rounds. Since the cycles are edge-disjoint, we can
round all cycles in parallel. Again by by Lemma 45, this takes no(1) · O(     b √n + D) rounds on the
communication network. Since each cycle makes at least one edge integral and each cycles has
length no(1) , this makes at least ( 10
                                     9
                                        m′ − |F |)/no(1) · no(1)
                                                             1       9
                                                                 = ( 10 m′ − |F |)/no(1) edges integral.
    Iterative improvement. We now repeat Steps 1 and 2, each time starting with all remain-
ing fractional edges of G = (V, E) – so all pruning and contraction steps are undone and the
T -join forest F is added back in to the graph.
    If we would omit Step 1, the algorithm does not guarantee to make progress when m′ = O(n),
since then 109
               m′ − |F | could be 0, and no further edges are rounded. However, by Step 1, we
                ′
have m′ ≥ 5 , or equivalently n′ ≤ 65 m′ and hence 10
              6n                                              9
                                                                m′ − |F | ≥ 109
                                                                                m′ − 56 = 151
                                                                                              m′ . Hence
we always remove a 15 /n 1   o(1) = 1/n -factor of the edges that are not part of the T -join
                                         o(1)

forest F . The edges that survive this iteration are the edges in F , together with all edges on
the cycles that did not become integral. Thus, the number of fractional edges decreases to
m′′ ≤ |F | + (1 − 1/no(1) )(m′ − |F |), or equivalently m′′ − |F | ≤ (1 − 1/no(1) )(m′ − |F |). Hence,
we claim that m′ = |F | after log n · no(1) iterations and thus we are only left with a forest of
fractional edges.

2.2    Linear Programming Formulation
Let OPT denote the optimal value of the Santa Claus problem. By a standard binary search
framework, the following decision variant of the Santa Claus problem is equivalent to an α-
approximation algorithm for some α > 1: Given a threshold T ≥ 0, either compute a solution
of value T /α or determine that OPT < T . Intuitively, the threshold T can be thought of as the
optimal value that was found by binary search. Throughout, we assume that T is known and
partition the set of gifts into big gifts B := {g ∈ G : vg ≥ T /α} and small gifts S := {g ∈ G :
vg < T /α}. Originally introduced by [LST90], this distinction has become the standard in the
literature on Santa Claus. Importantly, as we are showing an α-approximation, any child that
receives one big gift is satisfied and does not require any more gifts. Due to that insight, we
implicitly assume that all big gifts have a value of T for the rest of the section.
    In order to compute a fractional solution, we use the following non-trivial LP of Davies,
Rothvoss and Zhang [DRZ20] (this expanded version was first used in [RRW25]) that we refer
to as SantaLP(T ) throughout.
                                                !
                X                        X
                   vs · zcs ≥ T · 1 −       xcb                ∀c ∈ C                        (1)
                s∈S                            b∈B
                                        X
                            zcs ≤ 1 −         xcb                 ∀c ∈ C, s ∈ S                     (2)
                                        b∈B
                      X
                            xcb ≤ 1                               ∀b ∈ B                            (3)
                      c∈C
                      X
                            xcb ≤ 1                               ∀c ∈ C                            (4)
                      b∈B
                      X
                            zcs ≤ 1                               ∀s ∈ S                            (5)
                      c∈C
                      xcb , zcs ≥ 0                               ∀c ∈ C, b ∈ B, s ∈ S              (6)

During the following explanation of the constraints, it is helpful to think of an integral solution:
Constraints (3) and (4) ensure that each big gift b is assigned to at most one child c and vice
versa. If child c is assigned a big gift b, then zcs = 0 and c does not receive any small gifts as


                                                     16
enforced by Constraint (2). Otherwise, we have zcs ≤ 1 and c is compensated in small gifts only.
The same argument applies to Constraint (1), where the right-hand side is zero if c is assigned
a big gift or T if it is not. In the latter case, child c receives at least a value of T in small gifts.
Constraint (5) guarantees that each small gift is assigned at most one time.
    Furthermore, Constraints (1) and (2) enforce the fundamental property that any child c ∈ C
that receives small gifts with zc > 0|S| is always assigned more than α many gifts. More
formally, let Sc ⊆ S denote the set of small gifts that c receives. By definition of the small gifts
and Constraints (2) and (1) follows that
                                              !                            !
      X               X                X            |Sc |           X           |Sc | X
           vs · zcs <     T /α · 1 −       xcb =          ·T · 1−       xcb ≤        ·    vs · zcs .
                                                     α                           α
      s∈Sc          s∈Sc              b∈B                             b∈B            s∈Sc

Consequently, any child c with zc > 0|S| is assigned strictly more than α many small gifts. Thus,
it is always possible to scale the small gift assignment of c to be of value T , i. e. we set
                                                  1
                                    zc′ =        P          · zc ≤ 1|S|
                                            1−    b∈B xcb

such that s∈Sc vs · zcs  ′ ≥ T . While z ′ is not necessarily a feasible solution to SantaLP(T )
            P
anymore, we use this property to compute our approximation.
    Given a fractional solution (x, y) ∈ [0, 1]|C|·|G| to SantaLP(T ), the vectors x ∈ [0, 1]|C|·|B|
and y ∈ [0, 1]|C|·|S| denote the assignments for the big and small gifts, respectively. In addition,
let Gx = (C ∪ B, E) denote the big gift graph between children c ∈ C and big gifts b ∈ B
where an edge {c, b} ∈ E of weight xcb is present if xcb > 0. Similarly, we define the small gift
graph Gy = (C ∪ S, E ′ ) for c ∈ C and s ∈ S where each edge {c, s} ∈ E ′ of weight ycs is present
if ycs > 0.

2.3     Computing an Integral Gift Assignment
Starting from an optimal fractional solution (x, y) to SantaLP(T ), we show how to compute
an integral gift assignment (X, Z) such that each child receives a value of T /α throughout this
section.

2.3.1    Big Gift Clustering
As a first step, we transform an optimal fractional solution (x, y) to SantaLP(T ) into another
feasible fractional solution (x′ , y) that corresponds to an acyclic subgraph Gx′ ⊆ Gx . Similar
to Bansal and Sviridenko [BS06], our goal is to cluster children and big gifts in Gx′ such that
we can always find one child in the cluster to be satisfied in small gifts while all remaining
children receive exactly one big gift. Recall that any child is satisfied with receiving one big gift
of value T and any non-zero small gift assignment can be scaled to a value of T , as explained
in Section 2.2. We start by showing that the result of removing cycles from Gx as described in
Section 2.1 still corresponds to a feasible solution to SantaLP(T ).

Corollary 12 (Acyclic Big Gift Graph). Let (x, y) be a feasible fractional solution to SantaLP(T ).
    b √n + D) rounds of CONGEST, we can compute another feasible solution (x′ , y) such that
In O(
the corresponding big gift graph Gx′ ⊆ Gx is a forest.

Proof. Applying Lemma 4 to Gx = (C∪B, E) results in aP        sparse subgraph GxP          b √n+D)
                                                                                 ′ ⊆ Gx in O(

rounds of CONGEST. From property (2) follows that c∈C x′cb ≤ 1 and b∈B x′cb ≤ 1. Thus,
the Constraints (3) and (4) are still satisfied. Since y does not change, the Constraints (1), (5)
and (2) are also still satisfied. Hence, (x′ , y) is a feasible solution to SantaLP(T ).

   The following lemma uses similar arguments as Bansal and Sviridenko [BS06, Lemma 6].

                                                      17
Lemma 13 (Big Gift Clusters). Let (x′ , y) be the fractional solution computed in Corollary 12.
    e √n + D) rounds of CONGEST, we can compute a feasible fractional solution (x∗ , y) to
In O(
SantaLP(T ) such that the corresponding big gift graph Gx∗ is a forest where we have for any
tree T ∗ = (C ∗ ∪ B ∗ , E ∗ ) that
   1. Each big gift b ∈ B ∗ has degree at most two in T ∗ ;
   2. For any c ∈ C ∗ , there always exists an integral assignment of big gifts b ∈ B ∗ to the
      remaining C ∗ \{c} children; and
   3. If we cannot assign a big gift to every child c ∈ C ∗ , then the total value in small gift
      assignments in each T ∗ must be at least T /2, i. e. we have
                                        XX
                                                 vs ycs ≥ T /2.                             (7)
                                              c∈C ∗ s∈S

Proof. Let T = (C ∪ B, E) be a tree in Gx′ , then distinguish two cases in the pruning process.
If T contains just one child c ∈ C, then Properties 1 and 2 are is trivially satisfied. Since (x′ , y)
is a feasible solution to SantaLP(T ) and c is isolated in Gx′ , it receives a total value of T in
small gifts alone and Property 3 is satisfied.
    If T contains at least one big gift, then we prune T as follows: Using Lemma 5, we root T
at an arbitrary child in O(e √n + D) rounds and orient all edges in T towards the root. For each
big gift b ∈ B with deg(b) =: d > 2, there is at most one child c ∈ N (b) with x′cb > 1/2. We
select d − 2 children c1 , . . . , cd−2 such that x′ci b ≤ 1/2 for all i = 1, . . . , d − 2. For each selected
child ci , we remove the edge (ci , b) from the graph which disconnects the components of its two
endpoints.
    Let T ∗ = (C ∗ ∪ B ∗ ) ⊆ T be a tree after the pruning process, then there are two different
cases. If T ∗ contains a big gift b as a leaf, all children in C ∗ can receive a big gift. Let c ∈ C ∗
be the only child neighboring b in T ∗ , then we can assign b to c, root T ∗ at c and assign each
big gift to its only child.
    If all leaves are children, we show that there exists an integral assignment of the big gifts in
B ∗ to the children in C ∗ \ {c}. As each big gift has degree at most two, we can root T ∗ at c and
assign each big gift b ∈ B ∗ to its only child. Therefore, every child in C ∗ \ {c} can receive a big
gift in this assignment and we have |B ∗ | = |C ∗ | − 1. It remains to show Property 3. First, we
show that at most one child in C ∗ loses an edge during the pruning process. By construction,
each child can only lose the edge to its parent gift. Let c1 , c2 be two children that lost an edge
during the pruning process, then the path between c1 and c2 traverses one of their parents.
Thus, c1 and c2 cannot be in the same connected component after the pruning. Let c∗ ∈ C ∗
be the child that lost an edge to a big gift b ∈ B \ B ∗ . Since (x′ , y) is a feasible solution to
SantaLP(T ), it follows from Constraint (1) that
                                                                              !
                               XX                                XX
                                         vs · ycs ≥ T · |C ∗ | −          x′cb .
                               c∈C ∗ s∈S                        c∈C ∗ b∈B

Using x′c∗ b ≤ 1/2 and c∈C ∗ x′cb ≤ 1 for all b ∈ B ∗ , it holds that
                         P

                   XX                   X X
                        x′cb = x′c∗ b +           x′cb ≤ 1/2 + |B ∗ | = |C ∗ | − 1/2.
                   c∈C ∗ b∈B                c∈C ∗ b∈B ∗

Together, both equations yield Equation (7).

    Importantly, even though T ∗ is a tree in the big gift graph Gx∗ , any child c ∈ C ∗ with a non-
zero small gift assignment is still connected to more than α many small gifts in Gy∗ . Together
with Equation (7), this is crucial when randomly picking one child c ∈ C ∗ for each T ∗ to be
compensated in small gifts of value at least T /α in the next subsection.

                                                      18
2.3.2    Small Gift Assignment
In the following, we compute an integral small gift assignment Z of value T /α for exactly one
child c in each tree T ∗ computed in Lemma 13. This automatically implies an integral big gift
assignment X by rooting all trees T ∗ in their respective roots c and assign all big gifts to their
child nodes (see Lemma 17).
    First, we show that we can randomly pick exactly one child c in each tree T ∗ to be satisfied in
a fractional small gift assignment. We use the following Chernoff bound from [Kus25, Corollary
13] to bound the number of times that one small gift is fractionally assigned to a child.

Lemma 14 (Chernoff Bound).                           ∈ [0, 1] be independent random variables with
                               Pn Let X1 , . . . , XnP
means p1 , . . . , pn . Let µ = i=1 pi and let X = ni=1 Xi . Then, for any r ≥ 2 with 1 ≤ rµ,

                                          P[X ≥ rµ] ≤ O(1/r)Ω(rµ) .

    The most important insight to the following lemma is that the random selection happens
independently and in parallel for all T ∗ such that all respective decisions whether a small gift is
assigned to a tree are in fact independent. More formally, we show the following lemma.

Lemma 15 (Randomized Selection). Let (x∗ , y) be the fractional solution to SantaLP(T ) com-
puted in Lemma 13. In O(  e √n + D) rounds of CONGEST, we can transform y into a fractional
small gift assignment z such that for some β = O(log n/ log log n) it holds that

  1. W. h. p. for all T ∗ there is one child c ∈ T ∗ such that s∈S vs · zcs ≥ T /β.
                                                              P

               P
  2. W. h. p. c∈C zcs ≤ 1 for all s ∈ S.

Proof. Let p ∈ [n] denote the number of disjoint big gift clusters that x∗ induces and assume
w. l. o. g. that these clusters are (C1 , B1 ), (C2 , B2 ), . . . , (Cp , Bp ). If |Bi | ≥ |Ci |, then all children
in Ci receives exactly one big gift and no small gifts. Otherwise, if |Bi | = |Ci |P                    − 1, then
we pick one child to be satisfied with small gifts. For all c ∈ Ci , let VS (c) :=                        s∈S vs ycs
denote the totalPvalue that c receives in small gifts. By Property (3) of Lemma 13, we have
that VS (Ci ) := c∈Ci VS (c) ≥ T /2.
    For each (Ci , Bi ), we first define a probability distribution and then randomly pick exactly
one child in Ci . The weight of each child corresponds to its relative value of small gifts that it
contributes to the cluster.
                          P More precisely, for each c ∈ Ci , we set pc := VS (c)/VS (Ci ). Clearly,
this definition satisfies c∈Ci pc = 1 for all i ∈ [p].

CONGEST implementation. Next, we show how we can implement this random process for
each cluster in parallel. We implement a Rake and Compress style procedure that decomposes
each cluster (Ci , Bi ) in parallel. Since |Bi | = |Ci | − 1, every leaf in the cluster has to be a kid.
Thus, due to property 1 in Lemma 13 we get that every gift b ∈ Bi has degree two. Hence, we
may contract all paths P = (c, b, c′ ), where b ∈ Bi and c, c′ ∈ Ci to the single edge {c, c′ }. Thus,
we create a virtual tree T that contains only the children in Ci . Now we iteratively apply the
following two operations to T . Define T0 := T and w0 : V (T ) → [0, 1] by w(c) = pc and obtain
(Ti+1 , wi+1 ) from (Ti , wi ) as follows:

    • Rake: Remove each child c ∈ Ci of degree one from Ti and send wi (c) to its only neighbor
      in Ti .

    • Compress: Contract each path P of at least two degree-2 vertices into a single vertex c
      and gather the weights of all vertices in P at c.

    • For each surviving vertex c, set wi+1 (c) as wi (c) plus the sum of all weights sent to c.



                                                        19
First, we observe that after O(log n) iterations of Rake and Compress we have decomposed the
entire tree [CP19]. Let Vi,1 := {v ∈ V (Ti ) : deg(v) = 1}, Vi,2 := {v ∈ V (Ti ) : deg(v) = 2} and
Vi,3 := {v ∈ V (Ti ) : deg(v) ≥ 3}. If |Vi,2 | < 3/5 · |V (Ti )|, then due to |Vi,1 | > |Vi,3 | we have that
|Vi,1 | > 1/5 · |V (Ti )| and thus a constant fraction of vertices are removed in a single iteration.
Otherwise, if |Vi,2 | ≥ 3/5 · |V (Ti )|, then there are at most |Vi,1 | + |Vi,3 | − 1 connected components
in the subgraph of T induced by Vi,2 . Since at most one vertex survives in every connected
component, this implies that at least 1/5 · |V (Ti )| vertices are removed from Ti . Further, we
observe that due to Lemma 45 each iteration can be implemented in O(                  e √n + D) rounds of
CONGEST.
     Now we show how to use this decomposition to efficiently sample a vertex from every cluster
in parallel. Let Tk denote the last non-empty tree computed by the above procedure. Note
that every vertex of Tk must have been removed by the Rake operation and thus Tk contains at
most two vertices. We first sample a vertex from Tk according to the probability distribution
wk . Now we show how to use repeated subsampling to sample a vertex from T according to the
probabilities pc for c ∈ Ci . Suppose that we have sampled a vertex vi+1 from Ti+1 . Let Compressi
be the (possibly empty) set of vertices that were contracted into vi+1 by the Compress operation
on Ti . If Compressi ̸= ∅, then vi+1 picks exactly one vertex from Compressi ∪{vi+1 } according to
the probability distribution pi (v) := wi (v)/wi+1 (vi+1 ). Then it broadcasts the random decision
to all vertices in Compressi within O(    e √n+D) rounds using Lemma 45. Denote the picked vertex
as vic . Next, let Rakei be the (possibly empty) set of vertices neighboring vic in Ti that were
removed from Ti due to the Rake operation. Again, vic randomly picks a vertex from Rakei ∪{vic }
and broadcasts this decision to all vertices in Rakei . This takes one round on Ti and according
to Lemma 45 one round on Ti can be simulated in O(         e √n + D) rounds on G. After k iterations,
this yields a randomly sampled vertex from T according to probability distribution w0 (c) = pc .
Since k = O(log n) the repeated subsampling procedure takes O(           e √n + D) rounds in total.

Scaling Small Gifts. Let Cs = {ci : i = 1, . . . , p} ⊆ C denote the set of children chosen
to receive small gifts where each ci uniquely identifies cluster pair i ∈ [p]. We define a new
fractional small gift assignment z as follows:
                                      (
                                        ycs · T /VS (c), if c ∈ Cs ,
                               zcs :=
                                        0,               otherwise.

Using Constraints (1) and (2) of SantaLP(T ), we get for all c ∈ C and s ∈ S that
                                                          ! P
                                                     X
                                                        ∗            vs · ycs
             zcs ≤ ycs · T /VS (c) ≤ T /VS (c) · 1 −   xcb ≤ s∈S              = 1.                      (8)
                                                                   VS (c)
                                                              b∈B

Further, it holds that s∈S vs zcs = T for all children c ∈ Cs .
                       P
    As a last step, we show that the random choice of z (fractionally) assigns each small gift to
at most β many children with high probability. For each small gift s ∈ S and cluster pair i,
define the random variable Zis ∈ [0, 1] by Zis := zci s . For a fixed gift s ∈ S, the p many random
variables {Zis : i ∈ [p]} are independent, because the random selection of children ci happens
independently in all p clusters. For each small gift s ∈ S, we have that
                                     
                               X          X                XX
                           E     Zis  =     E [Zis ] =            pc · zcs .
                                i∈[p]         i∈[p]             i∈[p] c∈Ci

Recall that pc = Vs (c)/Vs (Ci ). Then we get that
                                                     P
                                                         c∈Ci ycs
                  X             XX                X                  X
               E      Zis  =         pc · zcs =   T·            ≤2   ycs ≤ 2,                         (9)
                                                        VS (Ci )
                    i∈[p]        i∈[p] c∈Ci           i∈[p]                    c∈C


                                                      20
where the last inequality follows from Constraint (5) of SantaLP(T ). Let β = C · log n/ log log n
for a sufficiently large constant C, then using Lemma 14 it holds that
                                                             
                    X                   X                  X
                P      Zis > β  = P     Zis > β/2 · E    Zis  ≤ O(2/β)Ω(β)
                  i∈[p]                i∈[p]                          i∈[p]

                                 = O(log log n/ log n)         Ω(log n/ log log n)
                                                                                     = 2−Ω(log n) .

Further, we have that              X               X                 X
                                           Zis =           zci s =         zcs .
                                   i∈[p]           i∈[p]             c∈C

Using a union bound over all small gifts, we see that each small gift is w. h. p. fractionally
assigned at most β times. As a last step, each child c ∈ Cs locally scales down their small gift
assignment by β such that zc ∈ [0, 1]S . Consequently, each child receives w. h. p. a total value
of T /β and each small gift is w. h. p. fractionally assigned at most once.

    Intuitively, the parameter β measures the distance to the optimal solution where each small
gift is assigned at most once. Therefore, it is closely related to our approximation factor by α =
4β. As the last step, we round z to an integral assignment Z of small gifts, such that no gift is
assigned to multiple children. The high-level    idea of the rounding can be described as follows:
For a fixed child c ∈ Cs , let kc =     s∈S zcs denote the (fractional) number of small gifts c
                                      P
receives in solution z. Next we show how to round this fractional solution such that each child
receives ⌊kc ⌋ small gifts. Hence, each child loses the value of at most one small gift. In the
worst case, this is the most valuable gift of value maxs∈S vs and each child receives a value of
at least T /β − maxs∈S vs . More formally, we show the following lemma.
Lemma 16 (Integral Assignment). Let z be the fractional small gift assignment in Lemma 15.
   b √n + D) rounds, we can compute an integral small gift assignment Z such that w. h. p.
In O(
                                            X                    T
                               ∀c ∈ Cs :          vs · Zcs ≥       − max vs .                         (10)
                                                                 β   s∈S
                                            s∈S

Proof. We prove the lemma in two steps: First we remove all cycles in Gz to obtain the for-
est Gz ′ ⊆ Gz , then we integrally assign the gifts for each tree of Gz ′ such that each child loses
at most one gift. Our algorithm consists of two parts, first we remove cycles and then we round
the remaining forest.
    Algorithm Part 1. Lemma 4 shows how to remove cycles in a weighted graph. We cannot
apply this lemma directly to Gz , since we have two types of weights: we have the fractional
weights on the edges zcs , but we also have the weights of the small gifts vs . We apply Lemma 4
to Gz with an auxiliary weight function w and two small adjustment. First, we describe this
weight function. In order to ensure that the cycle removal maintains the total value of T /β for
each child, we set the edge weights to wcs := zcs · vs for all c ∈ Cs and s ∈ S. These weights are
no longer in [0, 1] as in Lemma 4. We give the two adjustments to the algorithm. First, to round
each cycle, we compute w := min{wcs , vs − wcs } and alternatingly change the edge weights to
  ′ = w ± w. At the same time we update z ′ = w ′ /v for all c ∈ C and s ∈ S. By the choice
wcs      cs                                    cs      cs s              s
of w, at least one edge in each cycle becomes integral with zcs ′ ∈ {0, 1} while we have z ′ ∈ [0, 1]
                                                                                          cs
for all other edges. This leads us to the second adjustment: we remove an edge {c, s} from
Gz if wcs ∈ {0, vs }, which corresponds to zcs ∈ {0, 1} being integral. Note that removing an
edge zcs = 1 means that the small gift s is permanently assigned to child c and zcs = 0 means
the child forgoes on the gift.
    These two adjustment do not affect correctness or the running time in Lemma 4, hence we
eliminate cycles from Gz in O( b √n + D) rounds. Finally, we obtain the edge weights in Gz ′ by
scaling zcs
          ′ = w /v for all c ∈ C and s ∈ S. We are left with the acyclic graph G ′ .
                 cs s             s                                                   z


                                                      21
    Algorithm Part 2. Next, we show how to round the remaining forest Gz ′ . For each tree T
in Gz ′ , we permanently assign small gifts s ∈ S to children c ∈ Cs starting from the leaves.
We root T at an arbitrary child c ∈ T . Then, each gift is assigned to its parent in the tree.
Since each child has at most one parent in T , it loses at most maxs∈S vs in value and thus
Equation (10) holds.
    Round Complexity. A naive distributed implementation of this algorithm takes diameter(T )
rounds, which could be as big as n − 1. Next we show how to implement this algorithm in
 b √n + D) rounds.
O(
    The main observation hereto is that on a path, all nodes are determined by what happens
on the endpoints. This can be seen as follows: consider a path that ends in a degree 1 vertex. If
this is a gift, then all odd edges on the path are rounded up to 1 and all even edges are deleted.
If the last vertex is a child, then all odd edges are deleted and all even edges are rounded up to
1. Hence, each edge only needs to know 1) is the endpoint of the path a gift or a child and 2) are
there an odd or even number of edges till this endpoint. Hence, all paths can be contracted and
unrolled once the endpoints are known. We perform this with a version of Rake and Compress;
see Lemma 5:

   • Rake: Decide on all edges incident to a vertex of degree one.

   • Compress: Contract all paths into a single edge, storing on the edge whether this contains
     an odd or even number of vertices.

   By the same proof as Lemma 5, the graph is empty after O(log n) iterations and each iteration
                    b √n + D) rounds.
can be performed in O(

    We conclude with the following lemma that shows how to efficiently compute an integral big
gift assignment X.

Lemma 17. Let x∗ be the fractional big gift assignment in Lemma 13 and Z the integral small
gift assignment in Lemma 16. In O(   e √n + D) rounds of CONGEST, we can compute a big gift
assignment X for all c ∈ C with Zc = 0|S| .
           e √n + D) rounds, we root all trees T ∗ in parallel at their respective children c∗
Proof. In O(
with Zc∗ ̸= 0|S| using Lemma 5. By Lemma 13, each big gift in T ∗ has degree at most 2. Thus,
we integrally assign each child its parent big gift. Hence, we computed a big gift assignment X
    e √n + D) rounds.
in O(

2.4   Proof of the Approximation Factor
We conclude the previous subsections with the proof of Theorem 2.

Proof of Theorem 2. Let β = O(log n/ log log n) be as in Lemma 15 and α = 4β. Through-
out this proof, we explicitly state which α is used in the LP formulation of Santa Claus by
writing SantaLPα (T ). We compute an α-approximation in two steps: First, we determine a
value T ≥ OPT via global binary search and repeatedly approximately solving SantaLPα (T )
for different values of T . Recall that OPT denotes the optimal (integral) value of the Santa
Claus problem. Second, we carefully round an approximate solution (x, y) into an integral
solution (X, Z) that is an O(log n/ log log n)-approximation.
    Find Optimal Value and Fractional Solution. Let ε = 1/2 and V = g∈G vg denote
                                                                                P
the total sum of gift values. In O(D) rounds, we elect a leader that coordinates the binary
search. The goal of our binary search is to find a value T such that SantaLPα/2 (T /2) is feasible
and T ≥ OPT. Let a, d ∈ {0, . . . , V } with a ≤ d, then we maintain the following invariant for
our search interval [a, d]: SantaLPα/2 (a) is feasible and d ≥ OPT. This is trivially satisfied in
the beginning, as SantaLPα/2 (0) is always feasible and d = V ≥ OPT.

                                               22
    In each of the following steps, the leader communicates the next value T = ⌊(a + d)/2⌋
to all other nodes in O(D) rounds. Based on T and α, all gift nodes can locally distinguish
whether they belong to the big gifts B := {g ∈ G : vg ≥ T /α} or the small gifts S := {g ∈
G : vg < T /α}. Observe that the gift size distinction is the same for both SantaLPα (T ) and
SantaLPα/2 (T /2), thus they only differ in Constraint (1). Next, we try to compute a feasible
fractional solution (x, y) to SantaLPα/2 (T /2) using Theorem 29. Depending on the outcome,
the leader adjusts the search interval to [T, d] if SantaLPα/2 (T /2) is feasible and [a, T ] otherwise.
Once our search interval contains a single value, we have determined our value T and stop. Note
that by Theorem 29, our solution (x, y) only undershoots the covering Constraint (1) such that
for all c ∈ C, it holds that                                     !
                                 X               T        X
                                     vs · ycs ≥ · 1 −        xcb .
                                                 2
                                  s∈S                      b∈B

Since binary search takes at most O(log V ) steps, where each step takes O(D    e    + D · log3 n)
rounds due to Theorem 29, we can find T ≥ OPT and a feasible fractional solution (x, y)
to SantaLPα/2 (T /2) in O(D
                          e · log3 n · log V ) rounds of CONGEST.
    Round to Integral Solution. Based on (x, y), we compute a series of feasible fractional
solutions to SantaLPα/2 (T /2) where all transformations take O( b √n + D) rounds. With Corol-
lary 12, we obtain a fractional solution (x′ , y) such that Gx′ is acyclic. Using Lemma 13, we
compute a fractional solution (x∗ , y) where Gx∗ is a forest of highly structured trees T ∗ . Based
on y, we use Lemma 15 to compute a fractional small gift assignment z such that all children
in Cs receive w. h. p. a total value of T /2β in small gifts. As a last step, with Lemma 16, we
obtain an integral small gift assignment Z where each child c ∈ Cs receives w. h. p. at least a
value of
                                   T               2T    T    T
                                      − max vs ≥      − = ,
                                   2β    s∈S        α    α    α
where the inequality follows from the definition of small gifts S and α. By Lemma 17, we compute
an integral big gift assignment X where each child receives exactly one big gift of value at
                                                                                b √n+D·log V )
least T /α. Hence, we computed w. h. p. an O(log n/ log log n)-approximation in O(
rounds of CONGEST.




                                                  23
3    Lower Bounds
The goal of this section is to prove the hardness result of the Santa Claus problem in the
CONGEST model. In fact, we show a lower bound of Ω(      e √n + D) rounds to decide whether
a solution of non-zero value exists. Additionally, this result implies that any (multiplicative)
approximation to the integral Santa Claus problem also obeys this lower bound. A simpler
version of the CONGEST construction also shows a diameter lower bound for the same problem
in the LOCAL model. Moreover, we show that solving the fractional version of the Santa Claus
problem exactly also requires at least diameter rounds in the distributed setting.

Theorem 1. Any CONGEST algorithm that computes any multiplicative approximation of the
                                      e √n + D) rounds in the worst case.
integral Santa Claus problem requires Ω(

    We construct a family of graphs SCn with O(n) nodes and O(log n) diameter, such that
solving the Santa Claus problem on SCn is as hard as solving the set-disjointness problem on
               √
sets of size O( n) in the two-party model. Our construction is motivated by the construction
of Peleg and Rubinovich [PR00].
                                                                                                  √
Construction. The construction we use for the lower bound is a graph consisting of n
                               √
disjoint paths of length O( n), where each path is its own Santa Claus instance with value 0
or 1 depending on the input for Alice and Bob. To reduce the diameter of the graph, we add a
binary tree of height O(log n) on top of the paths, allowing for shortcuts between the endpoints
of the graph. This yields a graph of diameter O(log n), and finally, we show that the bandwidth
of the binary tree is so small that the graph still needs Ω(      e √n + D) rounds to solve the Santa
Claus problem on all paths.
                                        √                                          √
    Formally, let n ∈ N such that n ∈ N. The graph SCn consists of n disjoint paths Pi of
         √
length 2 n − 1 and are alternating child-gift paths, where each gift has a value of 1, which are
                                            √
connected by a full binary tree T with n child leaves ℓ1 , . . . , ℓ√n . Each leaf ℓj connects to the
jth gift gji of every path Pi . To ensure that we are considering a Santa Claus instance, the levels
of the tree T are alternating between children and gifts, e.g., the parents of the leaves are gifts.
In particular, we want the binary tree not to interfere with the solution of the paths, nor change
the overall optimal solution size. To ensure that, we also add a private gift pc to each gift child
                                   √
cT ∈ V (T ). Formally, we have n copies P1 , . . . , P√n of the path P:
                                  √                         √
    • V (P) = {cj | j = 1, . . . , n} ∪ {gj | j = 1, . . . , n − 1},
                                         √                                     √
    • E(P) = {{cj , gj } | j = 1, . . . , n} ∪ {{gj , c(j+1) } | j = 1, . . . , n − 1},

and we denote gifts and children of the path Pi as cij , and gji respectively.
    Finally, since we want to reduce the Santa Claus instance to a set-disjointness problem in
the two-party model, we explain how the input for Alice and Bob influences the construction.
                                √
Both Alice and Bob receive a n-bit binary string, a1 a2 . . . a√n and b1 b2 . . . b√n . Alice and Bob
                                             √
are both child nodes and are connected to n + 1 many gifts. One of those gifts is a private
gift pA (resp. pB ) that is used to make Alice (resp. Bob) happy, i.e., they have exclusive access
                              √                                     √
to that gift. The remaining n gifts giA (resp. giB ), i = 1, . . . , n, are connected to Alice (resp.
Bob) and the leftmost child of the path Pi ci1 (resp. rightmost child ci√n ). The values of giA and
(giB ) is given by ai and bi , respectively.

Remark 18. The graph SCn has O(n) nodes and diameter D = O(log n).

Lemma 19. Any distributed algorithm that decides whether there exists a solution of value 1 in
the graph SCn also solves the set-disjointness problem for

                                 A = {i | ai = 0},        B = {i | bi = 0}.

                                                     24
                                                  T



                a1                                                                  b1
         P1

                a2                                                                  b2
         P2

                a3                                                                  b3
         P3

Alice           a4                                                                  b4           Bob
         P4



              a√n−1                                                                 b√n−1
         P√n−1

                a√n                                                                 b√ n
         P√ n

        Figure 1: The lower bound graph SCn . Boxes are gifts, and circles are children.

                                                √
Proof. If A ∩ B = ∅, then for every i ∈ [ n] at least one of ai or bi is 1. Without loss of
generality assume that ai = 1, then we can assign the gift giA with value ai = 1 to ci1 and for the
rest of the ith path assign gji to ci(j+1) , and thus every child cij gets assigned one gift of value
1. The children in the binary tree, as well as Alice and Bob, get assigned their private gifts of
value 1, and thus also get assigned at least one gift each.
    On the other hand, if A ∩ B ̸= ∅, there exists at least one index i such that ai = bi = 0.
                              √                        √
Thus, the ith path contains n children, but only n − 1 gifts of value 1, and since each child
is only adjacent to the gifts of that path, at least one child cannot get assigned any gift. Thus,
the value of this instance is 0.
                                                                                         √
    It is well known that the set-disjointness problem defined in Lemma 19 needs Ω( n) bits of
                                                       √
communication, since the bit strings are of length n [Raz92]. Thus, due to Lemma 19, Alice
                                              √
and Bob need to communicate at least Ω( n) bits to solve the given Santa Claus instance.
    To bound the number of bits Alice and Bob can communicate in T rounds on the SCn
graphs, we will need the notion of moving cuts, inspired by [PR00].
Definition 20. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with two distinguished nodes P     a, b (Alice and Bob). A
moving cut is an assignment ℓ : E → Z≥0 . We say ℓ has capacity C = e∈E ℓ(e) and distance
T if d1+ℓ (a, b) ≥ T , where d1+ℓ (v, w) denotes the shortest path distance from v to w when each
edge has cost 1 + ℓ(e).
Lemma 21. Let G = (V, E) be a graph where each edge carries k bits of information per round,
and let a, b ∈ V be distinguished nodes (Alice and Bob). Suppose ℓ : E → Z≥0 is a moving-cut
of capacity C and distance T between a and b. Then any distributed protocol that completes in
at most T − 1 rounds can communicate at most C · k bits from a to b.
Proof. This is also motivated by [Pel00], and a proof of the exact statement can be found
in [Gor25].

                                                 25
   Finally, to prove that any set-disjointness protocol on the graphs SCn , and hence the Santa
                                     e √n) rounds, we construct a moving cut of small capacity,
Claus problem, must run for at least Ω(
but large distance:
Lemma 22. For every γ > 0 and every n ∈ N there exists a moving cut ℓn in SCn with
                                1√                                1√
                                                                    
            capacity(ℓn ) = O      n log n , distance(ℓn ) = Ω       n .
                                γ                                 γ
Proof. Set ℓ(e) = 0 for all edges that are not part of the binary tree. Also set ℓ(e) = 0 for all
edges between children and their private gifts in the binary tree. Let the height of a tree node be
the distance to the leaves, i.e., the level of the leaves is 0, and the level of their parents is 1, and
                             √
the level of the root is log( n) = O(log n). Assign to the parent edge of each node with height
                       h                               √
h the value ℓ(e) = ⌊ 2γ ⌋. Since there are at most n/2h nodes at height h, the total capacity of
the moving cut ℓ is at most
                         O(log n) √           O(log n) √
                                    n 2h                          1√
                                                                           
                           X                    X        n
                                      ·    =               =O        n log n .
                                  2h γ                  γ         γ
                           h=0                  h=0
                                                                           √ 
    To check that any path from Alice to Bob is at least of length Ω γn in the 1 + ℓ distance,
we observe that if we shortcut 2k edges of a path Pi via the tree, we have to use a path in T
that uses at least one node of height ⌈log k⌉. Thus, a path of length 2k (in one of the Pi ’s) can
be replaced with a path in the tree of (1 + ℓ) distance at least
                                  ⌈log k⌉             ⌈log k⌉
                                   X             2h−1   X 2h
                                            2·        =      ≥ k/γ.
                                                  γ       γ
                                   h=1                    h=1

Lemma 23. In the SCn graph, any distributed algorithm that uses k-bit messages per edge per
round to decide whether there is a solution to the Santa Claus problem of value at least 1 requires
e √n/k) rounds.
Ω(
Proof. By Lemma 19, any distributed algorithm that decides whether there exists a solution to
the Santa Claus problem of value at least 1 also solves set-disjointness for
                                A = {i | ai = 0},         B = {i | bi = 0}.
From [Raz92] we know that any distributed protocol solving this set-disjointness instance (of
        √                  √
size Θ( n)) requires Ω( n) bits of communication between Alice and Bob. By Lemma 22, with
γ = c · k · log n (for a sufficiently large constant c > 0), we know that there exists a moving cut
ℓn with
                                         √                          √        
                                             n                              n
                     capacity(ℓn ) = O          , distance (ℓn ) = Ω              .
                                           ck                          ck log n
By Lemma 21, in T − 1 = distance(ℓn ) − 1 rounds one can transmit at most capacity(ℓn ) · k =
   √
O( n/c) bit from Alice to Bob. This is insufficient to solve set-disjointness, and hence decide
the Santa Claus problem. Thus, any algorithm requires at least T = Ω( e √n) rounds.

Proof of Theorem 1. We argue that any CONGEST multiplicative approximation algorithm that
computes a (local) solution to the Santa Claus problem also solves the decision problem described
in Lemma 23. If the solution size is 1, then any (multiplicative) approximation algorithm will
output a solution of size > 0, and thus all children get assigned at least one gift of value 1. On
the other hand, if the solution size is 0, at least one child gets no gift of value > 0. Let xA (resp.
xB ) be a bit that indicates whether all children Alice (resp. Bob) has access of get at least one
gift. In particular, xA = 1 if and only if all children that Alice has access of get at least one gift.
Now Alice and Bob can exchange xA and xB and output xA ∧ xB , and thus decide whether it is
a 0 or 1 instance; which implies the Ω(e √n) lower bound by Lemma 23 with k = O(log n).

                                                     26
   If we move to the stronger LOCAL model, a simpler instance shows that we still need at least
diameter rounds to compute any (multiplicative) approximation to the integral Santa Claus
problem.
Lemma 24. Any LOCAL algorithm that computes any (multiplicative) approximation of the
integral Santa Claus problem requires Ω(D) rounds in the worst case.
Proof. Consider an alternating child-gift path P of length 2n − 1, similar to the paths used in
the construction of SCn . Note that P starts and ends with a child node, i.e., we have n child
nodes and n − 1 gift nodes. We consider three instances:
  1. I1 : the path ends with children on both ends (we do not change P ),

  2. I2 : we add one gift to the leftmost child of the path,

  3. I3 : we add one gift to the rightmost child of the path.
Observe that I1 has solution size 0, since there are more children than gifts, and I2 and I3 have
a solution of size 1, which can be obtained by assigning each gift to its left (resp. right) child
neighbor; see Figure 2. Thus, any approximation algorithm needs to learn in which direction
the gifts have to be assigned, i.e., in particular, the middle gift of the path needs to know if
it gets assigned to its left or right child neighbor. This can only be decided if this gift knows
whether there is an additional gift at the left or right end of the path. Therefore, any LOCAL
approximation algorithm takes at least D/2 = Ω(D) rounds.



                           Figure 2: Gift assignment for instance I2 .

    The lower bound family of graphs SCn and also the single path construction show that
the non-existence of short augmenting paths does not imply a good approximation, i.e., the
non-existence of short augmenting paths is not a certificate for a good approximation, thereby
separating the Santa Claus problem from the Matching problem. By augmenting paths in the
context of the Santa Claus problem, we refer to alternating gift-child paths that start at an
unassigned gift and end with a child. Then, assigning the unassigned gift to the first child of
the path and shifting all gifts along the path frees up the last gift of the path for the endpoint
(child) of the path. Additionally, we require that augmenting along a path like that increases
the solution size on that path.
Remark 25. There exists a family of graphs, with diameter O(log n), and a non-optimal solution
                                                √
such that any augmenting path has length Ω( n). There exists a family of graphs and a non-
optimal solution such that any augmenting path has length Ω(n).
                                                                                              √
Proof. The first graph class is SCn . Assume that ai = 1, and bi = 0 for all i = 1, . . . , n.
Consider the non-optimal solution where, in one path Pi , each gift gji is assigned to cij . Then
ci√n has no assigned gift of value 1, and thus the solution size is 0. Now the only augmenting
                                                                                      √
path increasing the value of the optimal solution is Pi itself, and thus has length Ω( n).
    The second family of graphs are the path graphs considered in Lemma 24. Again, if all gifts
are assigned to their left child in the instance I2 , the only augmenting path is the whole path,
and thus has length Ω(n).

   Secondly, we show that even the fractional relaxation of the Santa Claus problem is already
hard to solve in the distributed setting via a reduction from the fractional perfect matching
problem. In fact, we show the more general statement that any general fractional Mixed Packing-
Covering LP solver requires at least diameter rounds.

                                               27
Lemma 26. Any distributed algorithm that computes a feasible fractional solution to any Mixed
Packing-Covering LP takes at least Ω(D) rounds.

Proof. We can model the perfect fractional matching problem for a given graph G = (V, E) as
a Mixed Packing-Covering LP:
                          X
                              xe ≤ 1                         ∀v ∈ V,
                           e∈δ(v)
                            X
                                    xe ≥ 1                      ∀v ∈ V,
                           e∈δ(v)

                          0 ≤ xe ≤ 1                           ∀e ∈ E.

To solve this problem, any distributed algorithm needs to distinguish between paths of odd
length (LP is feasible) and paths of even length (LP is infeasible). This implies a lower bound
of Ω(D) rounds. The lower bound also holds for ∆-regular graphs for any ∆ ≥ 2.

    In general, the feasibility problem and the optimization problem are closely related. In
the sequential setting, it is easy to use the feasibility problem combined with a binary search
framework to obtain an approximation for the optimization problem. In the distributed setting,
this technique already implies a runtime of Ω(D), as we have to (globally) communicate the next
choice of the value we want to test feasibility for. But since many global problems, such as the
Santa Claus problem, already incur an Ω(D) lower bound, it is possible to use this technique in
those cases, as we will see in more detail in Section 4




                                              28
4    Solver for Mixed Packing-Covering LPs
In this section, we show how to solve Mixed Packing-Covering LPs in the CONGEST model.

Definition 27 (Mixed Packing-Covering LPs). For given matrices P ∈ Rnp ×m , C ∈ Rnc ×m and
corresponding vectors p ∈ Rnp , c ∈ Rnc , the Mixed Packing-Covering LP for (P, C, p, c) is the
optimization problem

                                min{λ | Px ≤ λp, Cx ≥ c, x ≥ 0},                                (11)

where P, C, p, c all have non-negative entries.

    In particular, we consider a bipartite graph G = (V, E) with V = C ∪ X, where |C| = nc + np
has a node for each covering, and each packing constraint, and |X| = m has a node for each
variable. We always connect a variable node i ∈ [m] with a packing constraint node jp ∈ [np ] or
a covering constraint node jc if the corresponding entry of C or P is non-zero, i.e., E = {{i, jp } |
Pijp ̸= 0} ∪ {{i, jc } | Cijc ̸= 0}. Additionally each packing constraint node jp and each covering
constraint node jc has access to the jp th row Pjp and the jc th row Cjc respectively. With slight
abuse of notion we will refer to covering and packing constraints just by j and will not note the
additional index. Additionally, every node knows np , nc , and m (this could also be computed in
O(D) rounds).
    For our application to the Santa Claus problem in Section 2, we are interested in the version
where we are allowed to violate the covering constraints instead of the packing constraints. Since
the two formulations are equivalent, it does not matter which one we solve.

Remark 28. For given matrices P ∈ Rnp ×m , C ∈ Rnc ×m and matching vectors p ∈ Rnp , c ∈
Rnc , the following LP

                                max{γ | Px ≤ p, Cx ≥ γc, x ≥ 0},                                (12)

is equivalent, up to scaling, to the LP in (11). Namely, for any solution x of (11) with value λ,
e = x/λ is a solution of the LP (12) with value γ := 1/λ and vice versa. Let λ∗ and γ ∗ be the
x
value of an optimal solution of (11) and (12), respectively. In particular given a solution (x, λ)
of the LP (11) such that

                                        λ∗ ≤ λ ≤ (1 + ε)λ∗ ,

then x
     e = x/λ satisfies

                                       γ ∗ /(1 + ε) ≤ γ ≤ γ ∗ .

Proof. Let (x, λ) be a solution of the LP 11. Let x
                                                  e = x/λ and γ = 1/λ, then

                                     x = P(x/λ) ≤ λp/λ = p
                                    Pe
                                     x = C(x/λ) ≥ c/λ = γc.
                                    Ce

So (e
    x, γ) is a feasible solution of the LP 12. More over, if λ∗ ≤ λ ≤ (1 + ε)λ∗ , we have

                            1/γ ∗ = λ∗ ≤ λ ≤ (1 + ε)λ∗ = (1 + ε)/γ ∗ .

Since γ = 1/λ we get γ ∗ /(1 + ε) ≤ γ ≤ γ ∗ .

    In the model described, we will solve Mixed Packing-Covering LPs as follows.




                                                  29
Theorem 29. There is a deterministic CONGEST algorithm that, given a Mixed Packing-
Covering LP of the form (12) with m constraints and n variables, computes a feasible solution
(x, γ), such that

                                         (1 − ε)γ ∗ ≤ γ ≤ γ ∗ ,
                                                                                  
                                                                  D log2 n log m
where γ ∗ denotes the value of the optimal solution, in O
                                                        e
                                                                        ε3
                                                                                       rounds.

   In the remainder of this section, we will prove Theorem 29. In Section 4.3 we show that we
can implement the algorithm with small messages of size O(log n), therefore we do not address
message sizes in Section 4.1.

4.1     Solving the Feasibility Problem
Similar to sequential and parallel approaches for solving Mixed Packing-Covering LPs, we reduce
it to the (1 + ε)-Feasibility Problem. This reduction is done via a standard binary search and
scaling argument; for details, see Section 4.2.

Definition 30 ((1 + ε)-Feasibility Problem). For given matrices P, C and matching vectors
p = 1, c = 1, the Mixed Packing-Covering (1 + ε)-feasibility problem is to either find a x ≥ 0
such that

                               0 < max(Px)j ≤ (1 + ε) min(Cx)j                                   (13)
                                     j                        j

or conclude that the following LP is infeasible

                                          Cx ≥ 1
                                          Px ≤ (1 − 10ε)1                                        (14)
                                            x ≥ 0.

    To stay consistent with the literature, we formulated the Feasibility Problem w.r.t. formu-
lation 11 of the Mixed Packing-Covering LPs. As mentioned in Remark 28, it does not matter
which formulation we consider, since they are equivalent up to scaling. In the remainder of this
subsection, we will show how we can solve the Feasibility Problem.

Lemma 31 (Solving the Feasibility Problem). There is a deterministic CONGEST         algorithm
                                                                1000 ln2 n ln( m )
for the (1 + ε)-Feasibility Problem with round complexity O D ·        ε3
                                                                               ε
                                                                                     .

    We implement the parallel algorithm of [MRWZ16] in the CONGEST model and describe
how this can be done in Section 4.1.1. For completeness, we give a brief overview of their proof
of correctness in Section 4.1.2, and finally, we show that our implementation meets the running
time.

4.1.1    The Algorithm
The goal of this section is to present the algorithm that solves the (1 + ε)-Feasibility Problem
in the CONGEST model.
    To read the description, we advise the reader to follow along the pseudocode provided in
Algorithm 3. Readers familiar with the parallel Mixed Packing-Covering algorithm of [MRWZ16]
will see that we do the same computation. Still, we distribute them among the constraints and
variables, dependent on which information is needed. For better readability, we will omit the
                                                                                (t)
iteration counter in the following description, i. e. , we write xi instead of xi and so forth.


                                                  30
 Algorithm 3: Distributed Algorithm for the Approximate Feasibility Problem
   Input : P, C, ε
   Output: infeasible or xi ≥ 0 at each node i s.t. maxj (Px)j ≤ (1 + ε) minj (Cx)j
                  1000 ln2 n ln( m
                                    
                                   )
 1 Let R = O D ·                 ε
                                       , K = 10 εln n and t = 0 for each variable i do
                         ε3
          (0)
 2      xi      = m||P1:,i ||∞                        —Each variable j can send pji to the variable i in one round
              (0)
 3      Send xi to all constraints j ∈ N (i)
 4 while not Stop and t ≤ R do
 5      for each packing constraint j do —j has access to {pji }ni=0 and xi for all i ∈ N (j)
 6         if (Pj x(t) ) < K then
                (t)                                   (t)
               yj = exp(Pj x(t) ) = exp( i∈N (j) pji xi )
                                        P
 7
                       (t)                (t)
 8                    aij = pji yj for all i ∈ N (j)
                                                                   (t)      (t)
 9                    To each i ∈ N (j) send yj and aij
                                                             (t)
10                    else Broadcast Stopp —If one packing constraint broadcasts Stopp , we abort

11      for each covering constraint j do
12         if (Cj x(t) ) < K then
                (t)                                     (t)
               zj = exp(−Cj x(t) ) = exp(− i∈N (j) cji xi ),
                                          P
13
                       (t)                (t)
14                    bij = cji zj
                                                                   (t)      (t)
15                    To each i ∈ N (j) send zj and bij
                                                             (t)
16                    else Broadcast Stopc                         —If all covering constrains broadcast Stopc , we abort

17      for each variable i do
                  Pnp (t)
18         y (t) = j=1  yj —y (t) and z (t) can be computed in O(D) rounds, see Lemma 36
                         (t)
           z (t) = nj=1
                  P  c
19                      zj     —Only consider covering constraints that sent values zj , bij
                             P            (t)
              (t)                j∈N (i) aij
20           ai =                  y (t)
                            P            (t)
                (t)             j∈N (i) bij
21           bi =                 z (t)
                      (t)   ε                   (t)
22           if ai > (1 − 50  )bi then       —If all variables broadcast "infeasible", return
               "infeasible"
                   (t)
23               ∆i = 0 and Broadcast infeasible(t)
24               else
                                                       (t)
                                 (t)                  ai
25                           ∆i = 12 (1 −              (t)   ) ∈ [ε/100, 12 ]
                                                      bi

                (t+1)               (t)                (t)
26           xi ← xi (1 + K1 ∆i )
27           t←t+1
                                                                            (t+1)
28           To each constraints j ∈ N (i) send xi                                  and t

29 if t > R then                 return "infeasible"
                                                                              (T )
30 Let T be the first iteration, where one packing constraint broadcasted Stopp    or all
                                            (T )
    covering constraints broadcasted Stopc .
                                          (T )
                                         xi
31 for each variable i do return xi = K




     In the beginning we start with an initial solution xi = m||P1:,i ||∞ , for all i ∈ [m] (Line 3), and
keep increasing these values until max{maxj (Px)j , minj (Cx)j } ≥ K = 10 εln n . We encode this


                                                                           31
stopping condition in Line 7 and Line 13 for the packing constraints and covering constraints,
respectively. We encode maxj (Px)j ≥ K by stopping as soon as either one packing constraint
fulfills (Pj x) > K (Line 11) or all covering constraints fulfill (Cj x) > K (Line 17). In the
parallel setting, [MRWZ16] delete all covering constraints that have already reached K, we do
not need to explicitly delete those constraints, but instead they do not contribute anything to
the computation of bi , since no values zj , bij are sent.
     We then compute values yj and zj in the packing and covering constraints, respectively.
                                                                                                   np
These values are exponentials of one packing or covering constraint and thus the vectors {yi }i=1
and {zi }ni=1 c
                 are exponentials of the packing and covering constraints, respectively. In a similar
fashion, we compute aij , bij and using those we compute ai , bi in each variable i. {ai }m   i=1 and
{bi }m
     i=1   can  be interpreted as gradients of lmax(Px) and lmin(Cx)  and  we use  them  to update  x.
In particular we update an entry xi of x multiplicatively, by a factor dependent on abii , if ai >
(1 − 50  ε
           )bi (Line 25). Furthermore, observe that we encode the infeasibility condition {i | ai ≤
(1− 50 )bi } = ∅ by checking each variable for that condition (Line 23) and if all of them Broadcast
       ε

infeasible, each variable also returns infeasible.

4.1.2   Proof of Correctness
In this section, we give a brief overview of why the presented algorithm is correct. Since this is a
distributed implementation of the algorithm presented in [MRWZ16], we only give an overview
of the proof strategy.
    First, we show that Algorithm 3 will terminate and output the correct answer.

Lemma 32 ([MRWZ16]). By duality, the LP (14) is infeasible if there exists y, z ≥ 0 s.t.

                                                    CT z   PT y
                                        (1 − 10ε)        <      .                                    (15)
                                                    1T z   1T y
   Lemma 33 shows that every variable broadcasting "infeasible" certifies the infeasibility of the
input instance, which shows that it correctly terminates in the case that the input is infeasible.

Lemma 33 ([MRWZ16] ). If the problem instance is feasible, then
                                                              ε
                               ∀x ≥ 0, B = {i | ai ≤ (1 −       )bi } ̸= ∅.
                                                             50
    On the other hand, if we never output "infeasible", in each iteration of the while loop at least
                                                                                 2
on variable xi gets increased by factor of (1+ K1 ∆i ) ≥ (1+ K1 100
                                                                  ε
                                                                    ) = (1+ 1000ε ln n ), so the algorithm
must reach one of the termination conditions after a finite number of iterations. In the rest of this
section, we will certify that the output x = {xi }ni=1 satisfies 0 < maxj (Px)j ≤ (1+ε) minj (Cx)j .
For the analysis, we need the soft-max lmax(Px) and soft-min lmin(Cx) in the potential function
                                                                                          
                              X                                           X
          lmax(Px) = ln          exp(Px)j  , and lmin(Cx) = − ln            exp(Cx)j  .
                               j                                              j

   If we consider the potential function

                                    f (x) = lmax(Px) − lmin(Cx),

we get the following results as shown in [MRWZ16].

Lemma 34. [MRWZ16, Lemma 4] Given maxj (Px(t) )j < 10 εln n and minj (Cx(t) )j < 10 εln n , we
always have f (x(t) ) ≤ 2 ln n during the execution of Algorithm 3.



                                                    32
   This bounds the difference of lmax(Px) and lmin(Cx) by 2 ln n, together with the fact that
these functions approximate maxj (Px)j and minj (Cx)j :

                           max(Px)j ≤ lmax(Px) ≤ max(Px)j + ln n,
                            j                           j

                           min(Cx)j ≤ lmin(Cx) ≤ min(Cx)j − ln n.
                             j                         j

This yields the desired approximation once the terms are large at termination.
Lemma 35. [MRWZ16, Lemma 5] If the algorithm terminates in line 31, then x = {xi }ni=1
fulfills x ≥ 0 with 0 < maxj (Px)j ≤ (1 + ε) minj (Cx)j .
   So far, we have shown that Algorithm 3 will terminate and output {x}ni=1 satisfying (13) or
terminate earlier and correctly certify that the LP (14) is infeasible. In this section
                                                                                     we show
                                                                         1000 ln2 n ln( m )
                                                                 
that if the LP (14) is feasible Algorithm 3 will terminate after O D ·        ε3
                                                                                  ε
                                                                                      rounds, so
if it takes more rounds, we can terminate it and output that the LP (14) is infeasible.
     Essentially, we will show that every iteration of the parallel algorithm of [MRWZ16] runs
in O(D) rounds in the CONGEST model. Then, using their analysis to bound the number of
iterations yields the overall desired runtime.
     First, we show that we can compute the sums y (t) and z (t) efficiently.
Lemma 36 (Inner Product). Let 0 ≤ t ≤ T . The sums y (t) and z (t) can be computed in O(D)
rounds.
Proof. Compute a BFS tree rooted at an arbitrary node v ∈ V , e.g., the largest ID node in
O(D) rounds. Now starting from the leaves, each node i sends the sum of the value it received
                          (t)   (t)
from its children and yi (zi respectively) to its parent. If the node is a constraint, it just
sends the information forward towards v and does not change it. Then after O(D) rounds the
two values y (t) and z (t) are stored in v. These can now be broadcasted to all the nodes using
the computed BFS tree.

Lemma 37. Each iteration of the while loop of Algorithm 3 runs in O(D) rounds.
Proof. We will consider an arbitrary iteration 0 ≤ t ≤ T .
    First observe that at the beginning iteration t before the while loop in line 6 starts, each
                                                                         (t)
packing constraint jp and each covering constraint jc has access to xi for all i ∈ N (jp ) and i ∈
                                                                                        (t) (t) (t)
N (jc ), respectively, which holds due to line 5 and line 29. Thus the computations of yj , aij , zj
     (t)
and bij can be executed locally in the node corresponding to the respective constraint. This
finishes the computations executed at constraints.
     Since y (t) and z (t) can be seen as inner products Lemma 36 shows that they can be computed
                                                                               (t) (t) (t)     (t)
in O(D) rounds. Due to line 11 and line 17, each variable i has access to aij , yj , bij and zj
for all j ∈ N (i). This allows to execute lines 22 to 28 locally.
                                                               (t)        (t)
     Finally, observe that broadcasting the stop tokens Stopp and Stopc can be done in O(D)
rounds and does not yield congestion, since we can represent each token by 2 bits; one repre-
senting weather the corresponding constraint wants to stop or not and the other one indicating
if the sending constraint is a packing or covering constraint. A similar behavior happens for the
broadcast of "infeasible(t) " in line 25, which can also be done in O(D) rounds.

   The analysis of [MRWZ16] bounds the number of iterations by
                                                       2              
                log n     ln n ln(m/ε) ln n ln(m/ε)         log n log(m/ε)
            O         ·               +                =O                    .                 (16)
                   ε             ε           ε2                    ε3
   Now we are ready to prove the main result of this section.

                                                33
Proof of Lemma 31. Correctness follows by Section 4.1.2. So it suffices to show the desired
round complexity.
    Equation (16) bounds the number      of iterations, together with Lemma 37 this shows that
                                         log2 n log(m/ε)
                                    
the algorithm terminates after O D ·            ε3
                                                             rounds, if it is feasible. By the previous
discussion, the algorithm terminates earlier and outputs       "infeasible",  or we can stop running the
                                                   1000 log2 n log(m/ε)
                                                                        
algorithm if it did not terminate after O D ·               ε3
                                                                          iterations and output "infeasi-
ble". Finally, it might be the case that we have to wait an additional O(D) rounds to gather all
                                                            (T )
                      (t)          (t)                     xi
the stop tokens Stopc and Stopp , so we can return          K      .

4.2    Reducing Optimization to Feasibility
For completeness, we include a description of the reduction from the optimization problem given
by the LP 11 (or equivalently 12) to the feasibility problem, see Definition 30. In particular, this
will complete the proof of Theorem 29. This reduction is done explicitly in [You01] and stated
implicitly in [MRWZ16].
    First, observe that we can rescale a given Mixed Packing-Covering LP P, C, c, p such that
we are solving the problem

                                min{λ | Px
                                        e ≤ λ · 1, Cx
                                                   e ≥ 1, x ≥ 0},

where we divide each entry of the jth row of P and C by pj and cj , respectively.
   We will show that we can solve this formulation approximately, i.e., find a (λ, x) such that

                                         λ∗ ≤ λ ≤ (1 + ε)λ∗ ,

by finding a sequence of solutions to the feasibility problem invoked with P/λ′ , C and ε′ , for
different λ′ and ε′ , see Definition 30.
    This will be done in a similar fashion as binary search, and we will see which values of ε′
and λ′ we chose, namely [You01] showed

Lemma 38 ([You01]). The approximate optimization problem reduces to a sequence of approxi-
mate feasibility subproblems: O(log log m) subproblems       ′
                                                         ε = 1/2 and O (log(1/ε)) subprob-
                                                        with
                                                       i
lems where the ith-to-last subproblem has ε′ = Ω ε 34 .
                                                     


    Especially, the runtime is dominated by solving the feasibility problem O(log log m) times
for ε = 1/2 plus the time of solving one feasibility problem with ε′ = ε. For more details on how
to choose the subproblems, we refer to [You01].
    In order to execute a binary search in CONGEST, we have to broadcast the outcome and
the choice of the next λ′ to all the nodes. This can be done  in O(D) rounds using       Lemma 44.
                                                                     1000 ln2 n ln( m  )
Furthermore each of these subproblems can be solved in O D ·                ε′3
                                                                                    ε′
                                                                                          rounds using
Lemma 31. With the overhead of the broadcast for the binary search, we get a total runtime of
                                                                                 !
                                1000 ln2 n ln(2m)              1000 ln2 n ln m
                                                                               ε
         O log log m · D + D ·                         +D+D·
                                        1/8                             ε3
                                                    2       m
                                                              !
                                                log   n log
          = O log log m · D log2 n log m + D ·              ε
                                                        ε3

to solve a given Mixed Packing-Covering LP. Together with Remark 28, this almost completes
the proof of Theorem 29. It is left to show how to implement Algorithm 3 with small message
size, and still high (enough) precision, which we show in Section 4.3.


                                                   34
4.3    Implementation in CONGEST
In this section, we show that Algorithm 3 can be implemented in the CONGEST model. First,
we show that we can implement Algorithm 3 with small messages of size O(log n), and secondly,
we show that the communication models considered in Section 2 and Section 4 are equivalent
up to constant overhead.

Finite precision and CONGEST Implementation. Observe that the runtime of Theorem 29
exceeds O(n2 ), when ε < 1/n1.5 = 1/ poly n, and thus we can trivially match the runtime of
Theorem 29 by the whole graph in and solving the problem locally. Therefore, we only need to
consider the case, where ε > 1/ poly n.
Lemma 39. Let ε > 1/ poly n, then Algorithm 3 can be implemented in the CONGEST model
using only rational messages of O(log n) bits. Additionally, every output value xi is rational.
Proof. Let δin := ε/100. For every non-zero entry of P and C, replace it by a rational number
in the interval
                                         [(1 − δin )α, (1 + δin )α].

    In particular, we obtain rational matrices P,
                                               b Cb such that entrywise

                   (1 − δin )P ≤ P
                                 b ≤ (1 + δin )P,         (1 − δin )C ≤ C
                                                                        b ≤ (1 + δin )C.

Since P, C have non-negative entries and x ≥ 0, for every x ≥ 0 we have
                                  (1 − δin )Px ≤ Px
                                                 b ≤ (1 + δin )Px

and
                                  (1 − δin )Cx ≤ Cx
                                                 b ≤ (1 + δin )Cx.

Claim 40. Any vector x ≥ 0 satisfying
                                 b j ≤ (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3) min(Cx)
                             max(Px)                            b j
                              j                                        j

also satisfies
                                   max(Px)j ≤ (1 + ε) min(Cx)j .
                                     j                        j

Proof of Claim 40. If x ≥ 0 satisfies
                                 b j ≤ (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3) min(Cx)
                             max(Px)                            b j,
                              j                                        j

then
                                        1
                       max(Px)j ≤           max(Px)
                                                  b j
                         j           1 − δin j
                                     (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3)
                                   ≤                      min(Cx)
                                                               b j
                                            1 − δin        j
                                     (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3)(1 + δin )
                                   ≤                                min(Cx)j .
                                                1 − δin              j

For δin = ε/100, the prefactor is upper bounded by
                                         (1 + ε/100)2 (1 + ε/3)
                                                                .
                                               1 − ε/100
Using (1 + ε/100)2 ≤ 1 + 3ε/100 and 1/(1 − ε/100) ≤ 1 + 2ε/100 for ε ∈ (0, 1], we obtain
                 (1 + ε/100)2 (1 + ε/3)
                                        ≤ (1 + 3ε/100)(1 + ε/3)(1 + 2ε/100) ≤ 1 + ε.
                       1 − ε/100

                                                     35
    Thus, solving the rounded instance to accuracy (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3) is enough to obtain a
(1 + ε)-approximate solution for the original instance.
   Next, we show that the rounded instance can be executed with fixed floating-point precision.
Claim 41. There exists an absolute constant c > 0 such that if every communicated number is
rounded to relative precision
                                                                        ε
                                   1±δ          with         δ :=           ,
                                                                      200cR
where R is the iteration bound from Lemma 31, then the finite-precision execution outputs a
vector x satisfying
                             b j ≤ (1 + ε/100)(1 + ε/3) min(Cx)
                         max(Px)                             b j.
                            j                                               j

   Additionally, every communicated number can be represented by O(log n) bits.
    If claim 2 holds, the final output is still a (1+ε)-approximate feasible solution for the original
instance.

Proof of Claim 41. We consider the execution of Algorithm 3 on the rounded rational instance
(P, b Every quantity that is ever communicated is replaced by a rational approximation with
 b C).
relative error at most δ = ε/(200cR), where c > 0 will be defined later in the proof:

                                         e ← (1 + δ)⌊log1+δ u⌋
                                         u

Here u
     e denotes the rounded representation of any communicated quantity u.
   In one iteration, each communicated value is obtained from previously stored values by a
constant number of additions, multiplications, divisions, and one evaluation of exp(·). Since all
quantities that occur before termination satisfy

                                 0 ≤ (Px)    b j ≤ K = 10 ln n ,
                                      b j , (Cx)
                                                          ε

the arguments of all exponentials lie in [−K, K], and hence all values yj = exp((Px)
                                                                                 b j ) and
            b j ) lie in a range whose logarithm is O(K). Further, taking logarithms of the
zj = exp(−(Cx)
update rule
                                                                      (t)
                                        (t+1)      (t)
                                                                 ∆i 
                                      xi        = xi         1+
                                                                   K
yields
                                                                            (t)
                                     (t+1)        (t)
                                                                       ∆ 
                                log xi     = log xi + log             1+ i .
                                                                         K
            (t)
Since 0 ≤ ∆i ≤ 1/2 and log(1 + u) ≤ u for all u ≥ 0, we obtain
                                               (t)
                                             ∆      1
                                       log 1 + i   ≤    .
                                               K     2K
                                                       (t)
Summing over all R iterations shows that log xi increases by at most O(R/K) over the entire
execution. Consequently, every transmitted number k ∈ {yj , zj , xi , aij , bij } can be stored in
normalized floating-point form

                                            k = ± M · 2E


                                                       36
with O(log(R/ε)) bits for the mantissa M and O(log K + log R) bits for the exponent E, since
R = poly(log n, 1/ε, log m) and ε ≥ 1/ poly(n), this is O(log n) bits in total.
    It remains to bound the effect of arithmetic rounding. Because all quantities occurring in the
execution are positive and each newly stored value is computed from previously stored values by
only constantly many operations, one iteration increases the current relative error by at most a
multiplicative factor 1 + cδ for some absolute constant c > 0. Hence, if after iteration t every
stored value approximates the exact value within a factor 1 + ηt , then after the next iteration
the error is at most
                                   1 + ηt+1 ≤ (1 + cδ)(1 + ηt ).
Starting with η0 = 0, induction yields

                                  1 + ηt ≤ (1 + cδ)t ≤ exp(ctδ).

Therefore, for all t ≤ R,
                                         1 + ηt ≤ exp(cRδ).
Choosing δ ≤ ε/(200cR) implies

                               exp(cRδ) ≤ exp(ε/200) ≤ 1 + ε/100,

so the total arithmetic error over the entire execution is at most ε/100 multiplicatively.

    Hence, the finite-precision execution computes a solution that is (1 + ε/3)-feasible for the
rounded instance up to an additional factor 1 + ε/100, and therefore, by Claim 40 it is still a
(1 + ε)-approximate solution for the original instance. Finally, every communicated quantity
is rational by construction, and since the update rule multiplies rational numbers by rational
approximations, every output value xi is rational as well.

Equivalent models. First, let us recall the two different communication models we consider.
In Section 2, we consider the bipartite input child-gift graph G = (C ∪ G, E) where we always
have an edge {c, g} ∈ E if the child c desires g, as our communication network. In Section 4,
we consider the bipartite graph, where nodes are variables and constraints (of the LP), and we
always connect a variable-node with a constraint-node if the corresponding entry in the matrix
is non-zero.
    We show that these two models are equivalent up to a constant round overhead, i.e., we can
in fact, invoke Algorithm 3 using the communication network of Section 2.

Remark 42. Given a weighted bipartite graph G = (C ∪ G, E) and vertex weights vg ∈ R≥0 for
all g ∈ G, we can simulate Algorithm 3 with input (SantaLP(T ) , ε), on G such that any round
of Algorithm 3 takes O(1) rounds.

Proof. We may assume that every entity holds its corresponding constraints of SantaLP(T ), i.e.,
each child has access to its corresponding constraints 1, 2, and 4, each small gift has access to
2 and 5, and each big gift has access to 3. Variables are defined on the edges between a child
and a gift, so we may assume that children take charge of the variable nodes in Algorithm 3.
Packing/covering constraints are simulated by the corresponding entities that have access to the
corresponding constraint. Finally, we observe that by the definition of SantaLP(T ) variables
xcg for a child c and a gift g only show up if there exists an edge {c, g} in G, i.e., entries in the
packing/covering matrices are positive if and only if there exists an edge in G.




                                                 37
References
[ABL20]     Sepehr Assadi, Aaron Bernstein, and Zachary Langley. “Improved Bounds for
            Distributed Load Balancing”. In: 34th International Symposium on Distributed
            Computing (DISC 2020). Ed. by Hagit Attiya. Vol. 179. Leibniz International
            Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl –
            Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020, 1:1–1:15. isbn: 978-3-95977-168-9. doi:
            10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2020.1 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[AFS12]     Arash Asadpour, Uriel Feige, and Amin Saberi. “Santa claus meets hypergraph
            matchings”. In: ACM Trans. Algorithms 8.3 (2012), 24:1–24:9. doi: 10 . 1145 /
            2229163.2229168 (cit. on p. 3).
[AKO18]     Mohamad Ahmadi, Fabian Kuhn, and Rotem Oshman. “Distributed Approximate
            Maximum Matching in the CONGEST Model”. In: 32nd International Symposium
            on Distributed Computing, DISC 2018, New Orleans, LA, USA, October 15-19,
            2018. Ed. by Ulrich Schmid and Josef Widder. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
            Zentrum für Informatik, 2018, 6:1–6:17. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2018.6 (cit.
            on p. 3).
[AKS15]     Chidambaram Annamalai, Christos Kalaitzis, and Ola Svensson. “Combinatorial
            Algorithm for Restricted Max-Min Fair Allocation”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-
            Sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2015, San
            Diego, CA, USA, January 4-6, 2015. Ed. by Piotr Indyk. SIAM, 2015, pp. 1357–
            1372. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611973730.90 (cit. on pp. 3, 8).
[BBHO+19]   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël Rabie,
            and Jukka Suomela. “Lower Bounds for Maximal Matchings and Maximal Inde-
            pendent Sets”. In: 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
            Science, FOCS 2019, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, November 9-12, 2019. Ed. by
            David Zuckerman. IEEE Computer Society, 2019, pp. 481–497. doi: 10.1109/
            FOCS.2019.00037 (cit. on p. 3).
[BCDE+19]   Nir Bachrach, Keren Censor-Hillel, Michal Dory, Yuval Efron, Dean Leitersdorf,
            and Ami Paz. “Hardness of Distributed Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the 2019
            ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2019, Toronto,
            ON, Canada, July 29 - August 2, 2019. Ed. by Peter Robinson and Faith Ellen.
            ACM, 2019, pp. 238–247. doi: 10.1145/3293611.3331597. arXiv: 1905.10284
            (cit. on p. 3).
[BCG09]     MohammadHossein Bateni, Moses Charikar, and Venkatesan Guruswami. “MaxMin
            allocation via degree lower-bounded arborescences”. In: Proceedings of the 41st
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2009, Bethesda, MD,
            USA, May 31 - June 2, 2009. Ed. by Michael Mitzenmacher. ACM, 2009, pp. 543–
            552. doi: 10.1145/1536414.1536488 (cit. on p. 9).
[BD05]      Ivona Bezáková and Varsha Dani. “Allocating indivisible goods”. In: SIGecom
            Exch. 5.3 (2005). Full version with all proofs available at https://newtraell.
            cs . uchicago . edu / files / tr _ authentic / TR - 2004 - 10 . pdf, pp. 11–18. doi:
            10.1145/1120680.1120683 (cit. on pp. 3, 8, 9).
[BEG18]     Leonid Barenboim, Michael Elkin, and Cyril Gavoille. “A fast network-decomposition
            algorithm and its applications to constant-time distributed computation”. In:
            Theor. Comput. Sci. 751 (2018), pp. 2–23. doi: 10.1016/J.TCS.2016.07.005
            (cit. on p. 4).




                                             38
[BFKL21]    Ruben Becker, Sebastian Forster, Andreas Karrenbauer, and Christoph Lenzen.
            “Near-Optimal Approximate Shortest Paths and Transshipment in Distributed
            and Streaming Models”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 50.3 (2021). Announced at DISC
            2017, pp. 815–856. arXiv: 1607.05127 (cit. on p. 3).
[BGR21]     Étienne Bamas, Paritosh Garg, and Lars Rohwedder. “The Submodular Santa
            Claus Problem in the Restricted Assignment Case”. In: 48th International Col-
            loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2021, July 12-16,
            2021, Glasgow, Scotland (Virtual Conference). Ed. by Nikhil Bansal, Emanuela
            Merelli, and James Worrell. Vol. 198. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum
            für Informatik, 2021, 22:1–22:18. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2021.22 (cit. on
            p. 3).
[BHR18]     Ravi B. Boppana, Magnús M. Halldórsson, and Dror Rawitz. “Brief Announce-
            ment: Simple and Local Independent Set Approximation”. In: Proceedings of the
            2018 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2018,
            Egham, United Kingdom, July 23-27, 2018. Ed. by Calvin Newport and Idit Kei-
            dar. ACM, 2018, pp. 163–165. doi: 10.1145/3212734.3212793 (cit. on p. 4).
[BLMR+24]   Étienne Bamas, Alexander Lindermayr, Nicole Megow, Lars Rohwedder, and Jens
            Schlöter. “Santa Claus meets Makespan and Matroids: Algorithms and Reduc-
            tions”. In: 35th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, (SODA
            2024). SIAM, 2024, pp. 2829–2860. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611977912.100 (cit. on
            p. 3).
[BMR25]     Étienne Bamas, Sarah Morell, and Lars Rohwedder. “The Submodular Santa
            Claus Problem”. In: Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
            on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15,
            2025. Ed. by Yossi Azar and Debmalya Panigrahi. SIAM, 2025, pp. 616–640. doi:
            10.1137/1.9781611978322.19 (cit. on p. 3).
[BO20]      Leonid Barenboim and Gal Oren. “Distributed Backup Placement in One Round
            and its Applications to Maximum Matching Approximation and Self-Stabilization”.
            In: 3rd Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms, SOSA 2020, Salt Lake City, UT,
            USA, January 6-7, 2020. Ed. by Martin Farach-Colton and Inge Li Gørtz. SIAM,
            2020, pp. 99–105. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611976014.14 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[BR23]      Étienne Bamas and Lars Rohwedder. “Better Trees for Santa Claus”. In: Proceed-
            ings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023,
            Orlando, FL, USA, June 20-23, 2023. Ed. by Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio.
            ACM, 2023, pp. 1862–1875. doi: 10.1145/3564246.3585174 (cit. on p. 9).
[BS06]      Nikhil Bansal and Maxim Sviridenko. “The Santa Claus problem”. In: 38th Annual
            ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, (STOC 2006). ACM, 2006, pp. 31–40.
            doi: 10.1145/1132516.1132522 (cit. on pp. 3, 5, 6, 8, 17).
[CCK09]     Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Julia Chuzhoy, and Sanjeev Khanna. “On Allocating
            Goods to Maximize Fairness”. In: 50th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations
            of Computer Science, FOCS 2009, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, October 25-27, 2009.
            IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 107–116. doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2009.51 (cit. on
            pp. 3, 9).
[CG21]      Yi-Jun Chang and Mohsen Ghaffari. “Strong-Diameter Network Decomposition”.
            In: PODC ’21: ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Virtual
            Event, Italy, July 26-30, 2021. Ed. by Avery Miller, Keren Censor-Hillel, and
            Janne H. Korhonen. ACM, 2021, pp. 273–281. doi: 10.1145/3465084.3467933.
            arXiv: 2102.09820 (cit. on p. 12).


                                           39
[CL21]    Corinna Coupette and Christoph Lenzen. “A Breezing Proof of the KMW Bound”.
          In: 4th Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms, SOSA 2021, Virtual Conference,
          January 11-12, 2021. Ed. by Hung Viet Le and Valerie King. SIAM, 2021, pp. 184–
          195. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611976496.21 (cit. on p. 3).
[CL23a]   Yi-Jun Chang and Zeyong Li. “The Complexity of Distributed Approximation of
          Packing and Covering Integer Linear Programs”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM
          Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2023, Orlando, FL,
          USA, June 19-23, 2023. Ed. by Rotem Oshman, Alexandre Nolin, Magnús M.
          Halldórsson, and Alkida Balliu. ACM, 2023, pp. 32–43. doi: 10.1145/3583668.
          3594562. arXiv: 2305.01324 (cit. on p. 3).
[CL23b]   Yi-Jun Chang and Zeyong Li. “The Complexity of Distributed Approximation of
          Packing and Covering Integer Linear Programs”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM
          Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2023, Orlando, FL,
          USA, June 19-23, 2023. Ed. by Rotem Oshman, Alexandre Nolin, Magnús M.
          Halldórsson, and Alkida Balliu. ACM, 2023, pp. 32–43. doi: 10.1145/3583668.
          3594562 (cit. on p. 4).
[CM18]    Siu-Wing Cheng and Yuchen Mao. “Restricted Max-Min Fair Allocation”. In: 45th
          International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP
          2018, July 9-13, 2018, Prague, Czech Republic. Ed. by Ioannis Chatzigiannakis,
          Christos Kaklamanis, Dániel Marx, and Donald Sannella. Vol. 107. LIPIcs. Schloss
          Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018, 37:1–37:13. doi: 10 . 4230 /
          LIPICS.ICALP.2018.37 (cit. on pp. 3, 8).
[CM22]    Siu-Wing Cheng and Yuchen Mao. “Restricted Max-Min Allocation: Integrality
          Gap and Approximation Algorithm”. In: Algorithmica 84.7 (2022), pp. 1835–1874.
          doi: 10.1007/S00453-022-00942-Y (cit. on pp. 3, 8).
[CP19]    Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. “A Time Hierarchy Theorem for the LOCAL
          Model”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 48.1 (2019), pp. 33–69. doi: 10.1137/17M1157957
          (cit. on p. 20).
[CPS20]   Keren Censor-Hillel, Merav Parter, and Gregory Schwartzman. “Derandomizing
          local distributed algorithms under bandwidth restrictions”. In: Distributed Com-
          put. 33.3-4 (2020). Announced at DISC’17, pp. 349–366. doi: 10.1007/S00446-
          020-00376-1. arXiv: 1608.01689 (cit. on p. 15).
[CS20]    Yi-Jun Chang and Thatchaphol Saranurak. “Deterministic Distributed Expander
          Decomposition and Routing with Applications in Distributed Derandomization”.
          In: 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS
          2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16-19, 2020. Ed. by Sandy Irani. IEEE, 2020,
          pp. 377–388. doi: 10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00043. arXiv: 2007.14898 (cit. on
          p. 13).
[CS26]    Yi-Jun Chang and Hsin-Hao Su. “Narrowing the LOCAL-CONGEST gaps in
          sparse networks via expander decompositions”. In: Distributed Comput. 39.2 (2026).
          Announced ad PODC’22, p. 6. doi: 10.1007/S00446-025-00496-6 (cit. on pp. 3,
          5).
[DRZ20]   Sami Davies, Thomas Rothvoss, and Yihao Zhang. “A Tale of Santa Claus, Hyper-
          graphs and Matroids”. In: 31st Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
          rithms, (SODA 2020). SIAM, 2020, pp. 2748–2757. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611975994.
          167 (cit. on pp. 3, 5, 8, 16).




                                          40
[EGK20]     Yuval Efron, Ofer Grossman, and Seri Khoury. “Beyond Alice and Bob: Improved
            Inapproximability for Maximum Independent Set in CONGEST”. In: PODC ’20:
            ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, Virtual Event, Italy,
            August 3-7, 2020. Ed. by Yuval Emek and Christian Cachin. ACM, 2020, pp. 511–
            520. doi: 10.1145/3382734.3405702 (cit. on p. 3).
[Fei08]     Uriel Feige. “On allocations that maximize fairness”. In: 19th Annual ACM-SIAM
            Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2008). SIAM, 2008, pp. 287–293 (cit.
            on pp. 3, 8).
[FGGK+23]   Salwa Faour, Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, Fabian Kuhn, and Václav
            Rozhon. “Local Distributed Rounding: Generalized to MIS, Matching, Set Cover,
            and Beyond”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
            Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023. Ed. by Nikhil
            Bansal and Viswanath Nagarajan. SIAM, 2023, pp. 4409–4447. doi: 10.1137/1.
            9781611977554.CH168 (cit. on pp. 3, 9).
[FGLP+21]   Sebastian Forster, Gramoz Goranci, Yang P. Liu, Richard Peng, Xiaorui Sun, and
            Mingquan Ye. “Minor Sparsifiers and the Distributed Laplacian Paradigm”. In:
            Proc. of the 62nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
            FOCS 2021. IEEE, 2021, pp. 989–999. arXiv: 2012.15675 (cit. on pp. 9, 11, 47).
[FGV21]     Sebastian Forster, Martin Grösbacher, and Tijn de Vos. “An Improved Random
            Shift Algorithm for Spanners and Low Diameter Decompositions”. In: 25th Inter-
            national Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems, OPODIS 2021, Stras-
            bourg, France, December 13-15, 2021. Ed. by Quentin Bramas, Vincent Gramoli,
            and Alessia Milani. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
            2021, 16:1–16:17. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2021.16. arXiv: 2111.08975
            (cit. on p. 12).
[FHS15]     Laurent Feuilloley, Juho Hirvonen, and Jukka Suomela. “Locally Optimal Load
            Balancing”. In: Distributed Computing - 29th International Symposium, DISC
            2015, Tokyo, Japan, October 7-9, 2015, Proceedings. Ed. by Yoram Moses. Lec-
            ture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2015, pp. 544–558. doi: 10.1007/978-
            3-662-48653-5\_36 (cit. on p. 4).
[Fis20]     Manuela Fischer. “Improved deterministic distributed matching via rounding”.
            In: Distributed Comput. 33.3-4 (2020), pp. 279–291. doi: 10.1007/S00446-018-
            0344-4 (cit. on p. 9).
[FV23]      Sebastian Forster and Tijn de Vos. “Brief Announcement: The Laplacian Paradigm
            in Deterministic Congested Clique”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium
            on Principles of Distributed Computing, PODC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June
            19-23, 2023. Ed. by Rotem Oshman, Alexandre Nolin, Magnús M. Halldórsson,
            and Alkida Balliu. ACM, 2023, pp. 75–78. doi: 10 . 1145 / 3583668 . 3594577.
            arXiv: 2304.02315 (cit. on p. 11).
[GG23]      Mohsen Ghaffari and Christoph Grunau. “Faster Deterministic Distributed MIS
            and Approximate Matching”. In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium
            on Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June 20-23, 2023.
            Ed. by Barna Saha and Rocco A. Servedio. ACM, 2023, pp. 1777–1790. doi:
            10.1145/3564246.3585243 (cit. on p. 9).
[GG24]      Mohsen Ghaffari and Christoph Grunau. “Near-Optimal Deterministic Network
            Decomposition and Ruling Set, and Improved MIS”. In: 65th IEEE Annual Sym-
            posium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL, USA,
            October 27-30, 2024. IEEE, 2024, pp. 2148–2179. doi: 10 . 1109 / FOCS61266 .
            2024.00007 (cit. on p. 9).

                                          41
[GGHI+23]   Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, Bernhard Haeupler, Saeed Ilchi, and Václav
            Rozhon. “Improved Distributed Network Decomposition, Hitting Sets, and Span-
            ners, via Derandomization”. In: Proceedings of the 2023 ACM-SIAM Symposium
            on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 22-25, 2023. Ed.
            by Nikhil Bansal and Viswanath Nagarajan. SIAM, 2023, pp. 2532–2566. doi:
            10.1137/1.9781611977554.CH97. arXiv: 2209.11669 (cit. on p. 12).
[GGR21]     Mohsen Ghaffari, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhon. “Improved Determin-
            istic Network Decomposition”. In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Sympo-
            sium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2021, Virtual Conference, January 10 -
            13, 2021. Ed. by Dániel Marx. SIAM, 2021, pp. 2904–2923. doi: 10.1137/1.
            9781611976465.173. arXiv: 2007.08253 (cit. on pp. 9, 12, 15).
[Gha19]     Mohsen Ghaffari. “Distributed Maximal Independent Set using Small Messages”.
            In: Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Al-
            gorithms, SODA 2019, San Diego, California, USA, January 6-9, 2019. Ed. by
            Timothy M. Chan. SIAM, 2019, pp. 805–820. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611975482.50
            (cit. on p. 3).
[GK21]      Mohsen Ghaffari and Fabian Kuhn. “Deterministic Distributed Vertex Coloring:
            Simpler, Faster, and without Network Decomposition”. In: 62nd IEEE Annual
            Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2021, Denver, CO, USA,
            February 7-10, 2022. IEEE, 2021, pp. 1009–1020. doi: 10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.
            00101 (cit. on p. 9).
[GKM17]     Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, and Yannic Maus. “On the complexity of local
            distributed graph problems”. In: Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT
            Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017, Montreal, QC, Canada, June
            19-23, 2017. Ed. by Hamed Hatami, Pierre McKenzie, and Valerie King. ACM,
            2017, pp. 784–797. doi: 10.1145/3055399.3055471 (cit. on p. 4).
[Gor25]     Goran Zuzic. Lecture Notes, Principles of Distributed Computing. Accessed: 2026-
            04-29. 2025 (cit. on p. 25).
[GPS88]     Andrew V. Goldberg, Serge A. Plotkin, and Gregory E. Shannon. “Parallel Symmetry-
            Breaking in Sparse Graphs”. In: SIAM J. Discret. Math. 1.4 (1988), pp. 434–446.
            doi: 10.1137/0401044 (cit. on p. 47).
[HK73]      John E. Hopcroft and Richard M. Karp. “An n5/2 Algorithm for Maximum
            Matchings in Bipartite Graphs”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 2.4 (1973), pp. 225–231.
            doi: 10.1137/0202019 (cit. on p. 4).
[HKN21]     Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai. “A Deter-
            ministic Almost-Tight Distributed Algorithm for Approximating Single-Source
            Shortest Paths”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 50.3 (2021). Announced at STOC’16. doi:
            10.1137/16M1097808. arXiv: 1504.07056 (cit. on p. 47).
[HKPR18]    Magnús M. Halldórsson, Sven Köhler, Boaz Patt-Shamir, and Dror Rawitz. “Dis-
            tributed backup placement in networks”. In: Distributed Comput. 31.2 (2018),
            pp. 83–98. doi: 10.1007/S00446-017-0299-X (cit. on p. 4).
[HS23]      Shang-En Huang and Hsin-Hao Su. “(1 − ε)-Approximate Maximum Weighted
            Matching in poly(1/ε, log n) Time in the Distributed and Parallel Settings”. In:
            Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Comput-
            ing, PODC 2023, Orlando, FL, USA, June 19-23, 2023. Ed. by Rotem Oshman,
            Alexandre Nolin, Magnús M. Halldórsson, and Alkida Balliu. ACM, 2023, pp. 44–
            54. doi: 10.1145/3583668.3594570 (cit. on p. 3).



                                           42
[HS25]    Penny Haxell and Tibor Szabó. “Improved Integrality Gap in Max-Min Allocation,
          or, Topology at the North Pole”. In: Comb. 45.2 (2025), p. 22. doi: 10.1007/
          S00493-025-00141-7 (cit. on p. 3).
[HSS11]   Bernhard Haeupler, Barna Saha, and Aravind Srinivasan. “New Constructive As-
          pects of the Lovász Local Lemma”. In: J. ACM 58.6 (2011), 28:1–28:28. doi:
          10.1145/2049697.2049702 (cit. on p. 8).
[HSS16]   David G. Harris, Johannes Schneider, and Hsin-Hao Su. “Distributed (∆ + 1)-
          coloring in sublogarithmic rounds”. In: Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM
          SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2016, Cambridge, MA,
          USA, June 18-21, 2016. Ed. by Daniel Wichs and Yishay Mansour. ACM, 2016,
          pp. 465–478. doi: 10.1145/2897518.2897533 (cit. on p. 3).
[IKY24]   Taisuke Izumi, Naoki Kitamura, and Yutaro Yamaguchi. “A Nearly Linear-Time
          Distributed Algorithm for Exact Maximum Matching”. In: Proceedings of the 2024
          ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2024, Alexandria, VA,
          USA, January 7-10, 2024. Ed. by David P. Woodruff. SIAM, 2024, pp. 4062–
          4082. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611977912.141 (cit. on p. 3).
[JR20]    Klaus Jansen and Lars Rohwedder. “A note on the integrality gap of the configu-
          ration LP for restricted Santa Claus”. In: Inf. Process. Lett. 164 (2020), p. 106025.
          doi: 10.1016/J.IPL.2020.106025 (cit. on p. 3).
[JRS02]   Lujun Jia, Rajmohan Rajaraman, and Torsten Suel. “An efficient distributed al-
          gorithm for constructing small dominating sets”. In: Distributed Comput. 15.4
          (2002), pp. 193–205. doi: 10.1007/S00446-002-0078-0 (cit. on p. 4).
[KMW06]   Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. “The price of being
          near-sighted”. In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium
          on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2006, Miami, Florida, USA, January 22-26, 2006.
          ACM Press, 2006, pp. 980–989 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[KMW16]   Fabian Kuhn, Thomas Moscibroda, and Roger Wattenhofer. “Local Computation:
          Lower and Upper Bounds”. In: J. ACM 63.2 (2016), 17:1–17:44. doi: 10.1145/
          2742012 (cit. on pp. 3, 4).
[Kus25]   William Kuszmaul. “A Simple and Combinatorial Approach to Proving Cher-
          noff Bounds and Their Generalizations”. In: 2025 Symposium on Simplicity in
          Algorithms, SOSA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 13-15, 2025. Ed. by
          Ioana Oriana Bercea and Rasmus Pagh. SIAM, 2025, pp. 77–93. doi: 10.1137/
          1.9781611978315.6 (cit. on p. 19).
[LST90]   Jan Karel Lenstra, David B. Shmoys, and Éva Tardos. “Approximation Algo-
          rithms for Scheduling Unrelated Parallel Machines”. In: Math. Program. 46 (1990),
          pp. 259–271. doi: 10.1007/BF01585745 (cit. on pp. 8, 9, 16).
[MPX13]   Gary L. Miller, Richard Peng, and Shen Chen Xu. “Parallel graph decompositions
          using random shifts”. In: 25th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and
          Architectures, SPAA ’13, Montreal, QC, Canada - July 23 - 25, 2013. Ed. by
          Guy E. Blelloch and Berthold Vöcking. ACM, 2013, pp. 196–203. doi: 10.1145/
          2486159.2486180. arXiv: 1307.3692 (cit. on p. 12).
[MR89]    Gary L. Miller and John H. Reif. “Parallel Tree Contraction Part 1: Fundamen-
          tals”. In: Adv. Comput. Res. 5 (1989), pp. 47–72 (cit. on pp. 12, 47).




                                           43
[MRWZ16]   Michael W. Mahoney, Satish Rao, Di Wang, and Peng Zhang. “Approximating the
           Solution to Mixed Packing and Covering LPs in Parallel Õ(ϵ−3 ) Time”. In: 43rd
           International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP
           2016, July 11-15, 2016, Rome, Italy. Ed. by Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Michael
           Mitzenmacher, Yuval Rabani, and Davide Sangiorgi. Vol. 55. LIPIcs. Schloss
           Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016, 52:1–52:14. doi: 10 . 4230 /
           LIPICS.ICALP.2016.52 (cit. on pp. 4, 5, 30, 32–34).
[MS25]     Slobodan Mitrovic and Wen-Horng Sheu. “A framework for boosting matching
           approximation: parallel, distributed, and dynamic”. In: Proceedings of the 37th
           ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA 2025,
           Portland, OR, USA, 28 July 2025 - 1 August 2025. ACM, 2025, pp. 443–457.
           doi: 10.1145/3694906.3743312 (cit. on p. 3).
[OBL18]    Gal Oren, Leonid Barenboim, and Harel Levin. “Distributed Fault-Tolerant Backup-
           Placement in Overloaded Wireless Sensor Networks”. In: Broadband Communica-
           tions, Networks, and Systems - 9th International EAI Conference, BROADNETS
           2018, Faro, Portugal, September 19-20, 2018, Proceedings. Ed. by Victor Sucasas,
           Georgios Mantas, and Saud Althunibat. Lecture Notes of the Institute for Com-
           puter Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering. Springer,
           2018, pp. 212–224. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-05195-2\_21 (cit. on p. 4).
[Pel00]    David Peleg. Distributed Computing: A Locality-Sensitive Approach. SIAM, 2000
           (cit. on pp. 3, 25, 47).
[PR00]     David Peleg and Vitaly Rubinovich. “A Near-Tight Lower Bound on the Time
           Complexity of Distributed Minimum-Weight Spanning Tree Construction”. In:
           SIAM Journal on Computing 30.5 (2000), pp. 1427–1442. doi: 10.1137/S0097539700369740.
           eprint: https://doi.org/10.1137/S0097539700369740 (cit. on pp. 24, 25).
[PS16]     Lukás Polácek and Ola Svensson. “Quasi-Polynomial Local Search for Restricted
           Max-Min Fair Allocation”. In: ACM Trans. Algorithms 12.2 (2016), 13:1–13:13.
           doi: 10.1145/2818695 (cit. on p. 3).
[PY19]     Merav Parter and Eylon Yogev. “Optimal Short Cycle Decomposition in Almost
           Linear Time”. In: 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
           Programming, ICALP 2019, Patras, Greece, July 9-12, 2019. Ed. by Christel
           Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi. LIPIcs.
           Full version: https://www.weizmann.ac.il/math/parter/sites/math.parter/
           files / uploads / main - icalp - cycles - full . pdf. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-
           Zentrum für Informatik, 2019, 89:1–89:14. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2019.89
           (cit. on pp. 6, 14, 15).
[Raz92]    Alexander A. Razborov. “On the Distributional Complexity of Disjointness”. In:
           Theor. Comput. Sci. 106.2 (1992), pp. 385–390. doi: 10.1016/0304- 3975(92)
           90260-M (cit. on pp. 8, 25, 26).
[REGH22]   Václav Rozhon, Michael Elkin, Christoph Grunau, and Bernhard Haeupler. “De-
           terministic Low-Diameter Decompositions for Weighted Graphs and Distributed
           and Parallel Applications”. In: 63rd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
           Computer Science, FOCS 2022, Denver, CO, USA, October 31 - November 3,
           2022. IEEE, 2022, pp. 1114–1121. doi: 10.1109/FOCS54457.2022.00107. arXiv:
           2204.08254 (cit. on p. 12).




                                           44
[RG20]      Václav Rozhon and Mohsen Ghaffari. “Polylogarithmic-time deterministic net-
            work decomposition and distributed derandomization”. In: Proceedings of the
            52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2020,
            Chicago, IL, USA, June 22-26, 2020. Ed. by Konstantin Makarychev, Yury Makarychev,
            Madhur Tulsiani, Gautam Kamath, and Julia Chuzhoy. ACM, 2020, pp. 350–363.
            doi: 10.1145/3357713.3384298. arXiv: 1907.10937 (cit. on p. 12).
[RGHZ+22]   Václav Rozhon, Christoph Grunau, Bernhard Haeupler, Goran Zuzic, and Jason
            Li. “Undirected (1+ϵ)-shortest paths via minor-aggregates: near-optimal deter-
            ministic parallel and distributed algorithms”. In: STOC ’22: 54th Annual ACM
            SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, Rome, Italy, June 20 - 24, 2022.
            Ed. by Stefano Leonardi and Anupam Gupta. ACM, 2022, pp. 478–487. doi:
            10.1145/3519935.3520074. arXiv: 2204.05874 (cit. on pp. 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 47).
[RHG23]     Václav Rozhon, Bernhard Haeupler, and Christoph Grunau. “A Simple Deter-
            ministic Distributed Low-Diameter Clustering”. In: 2023 Symposium on Sim-
            plicity in Algorithms, SOSA 2023, Florence, Italy, January 23-25, 2023. Ed. by
            Telikepalli Kavitha and Kurt Mehlhorn. SIAM, 2023, pp. 166–174. doi: 10.1137/
            1.9781611977585.CH16. arXiv: 2210.11784 (cit. on p. 12).
[RRW25]     Lars Rohwedder, Arman Rouhani, and Leo Wennmann. “Cost Preserving Depen-
            dent Rounding for Allocation Problems”. In: 52nd International Colloquium on
            Automata, Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2025, July 8-11, 2025, Aarhus,
            Denmark. Ed. by Keren Censor-Hillel, Fabrizio Grandoni, Joël Ouaknine, and
            Gabriele Puppis. Vol. 334. LIPIcs. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Infor-
            matik, 2025, 127:1–127:20. doi: 10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2025.127 (cit. on pp. 3,
            16).
[SHKK+12]   Atish Das Sarma, Stephan Holzer, Liah Kor, Amos Korman, Danupon Nanongkai,
            Gopal Pandurangan, David Peleg, and Roger Wattenhofer. “Distributed Verifi-
            cation and Hardness of Distributed Approximation”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 41.5
            (2012). Announced at STOC ’11, pp. 1235–1265. doi: 10.1137/11085178X. arXiv:
            1011.3049 (cit. on p. 3).
[SHPK22]    Max Springer, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, Debmalya Panigrahi, and Moham-
            mad Reza Khani. “Online Algorithms for the Santa Claus Problem”. In: Advances
            in Neural Information Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Infor-
            mation Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, Novem-
            ber 28 - December 9, 2022. Ed. by Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal,
            Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh. 2022. arXiv: 2210.07333 (cit. on p. 3).
[Vos23]     Tijn de Vos. “Minimum Cost Flow in the CONGEST Model”. In: Structural
            Information and Communication Complexity - 30th International Colloquium,
            SIROCCO 2023, Alcalá de Henares, Spain, June 6-9, 2023, Proceedings. Ed.
            by Sergio Rajsbaum, Alkida Balliu, Joshua J. Daymude, and Dennis Olivetti.
            Vol. 13892. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Announced at PODC’23. Springer,
            2023, pp. 406–426. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-32733-9\_18. arXiv: 2304.01600
            (cit. on p. 4).
[You01]     N.E. Young. “Sequential and parallel algorithms for mixed packing and cover-
            ing”. In: Proceedings 42nd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science.
            2001, pp. 538–546. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.2001.959930 (cit. on p. 34).
[ZGYH+22]   Goran Zuzic, Gramoz Goranci, Mingquan Ye, Bernhard Haeupler, and Xiaorui
            Sun. “Universally-Optimal Distributed Shortest Paths and Transshipment via
            Graph-Based ℓ1 -Oblivious Routing”. In: Proceedings of the 2022 ACM-SIAM Sym-
            posium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022, Virtual Conference / Alexandria,

                                           45
Figure 3: A fractional assignment of gifts in a graph with k children, k − 1 big gifts of value T
and T small gifts of value 1.


               VA, USA, January 9 - 12, 2022. Ed. by Joseph (Seffi) Naor and Niv Buchbinder.
               SIAM, 2022, pp. 2549–2579. doi: 10.1137/1.9781611977073.100 (cit. on p. 3).


A     A Counterexample for Naive Sparsification
In this section, we provide a counterexample, showing that given a fractional solution to Santa
Claus, we cannot always find an approximate integral solution that is a subset of non-zero
fractional edges.

Example 43. Let k be an arbitrary integer. We give an example of a graph, together with an
optimal fractional solution, where any k-approximation of the optimal integral solution requires
edges that are not part of the fractional solution. We consider an example with k children, k − 1
big gifts of value T and T many small gifts of value 1. Consider the graph depicted in Figure 3.
In this example, each big gift has value T and each small gift has value 1. Every child desires
every small gift in this example.
    An optimal integral solution in this example has value T . It consists of assigning k − 1
children a big gift and assigning one child all the small gifts.
    We give a fractional solutions of value T as follows. The fractional solution for the big gifts
is depicted by weights on the edges. Moreover, the fractional solution assigns T /k small gifts
exclusively to each child (with fractionality 1), depicted by the blue sets. In this solution, each
child receives (k − 1)/k · T of fractional value by the big gifts and T /k value by small gifts, for
a total of T .
    Most edges between children and small gifts now have fractionality 0. That is, the value
that any child in this tree can get from small gifts alone is capped by T /k, unless edges with
fractionality 0 can be considered for the integral solution. Since there has to be a child that does
not receive a big gift in any integer allocation, we can only achieve a value of T /k, if we ignore
edges with fractionality 0 in this particular fractional assignment.




                                                46
B      CONGEST Primitives
In this section, we provide several CONGEST primitive that we use throughout our algorithms.
For completeness, we provide algorithms and proofs for each procedure.

Broadcast and Convergecast. In the CONGEST model, there are standard Broadcast and
Convergecast procedures, also known as “pipelining” [Pel00]. Here information is either broad-
casted from one node or gathered in one. We include a proof here for completeness.
Lemma 44. There is a CONGEST algorithm that, given a graph G = (V, E) with information of
t bits divided over the nodes, aggregates this information at a single node v ∈ V in O(t/ log n+D)
rounds. Conversely, in O(t/ log n + D) rounds we can make t bits known by a single node v ∈ V ,
known to all nodes in the network.
Proof. Create a BFS-tree rooted at v ∈ V in O(D) rounds. Upcast the information along this
tree. For a single bit, this takes at most O(D) rounds. Since each message can contain at most
O(log n) bits, the congestion can be at most t/ log n, giving a time of O(t/ log n + D) rounds.
The converse result is obtained by downcasting the information towards the leaves.

Rake and Compress. For our algorithm, we often need to run subroutines on subgraphs of
our communication network. These subgraphs might contain long paths and thus have a much
higher diameter compared to our original communication network. To overcome this issue, we
show how to circumvent the dependency on the diameter of the subgraph by shortcutting via
the additional edges in the communication graph. Similar techniques are for example used
in [FGLP+21; RGHZ+22]. We will use two simple operations inspired by Miller & Reif [MR89].
    • Compress: Contract all paths where all interior nodes have degree two into a single edge.
    • Rake: Remove all vertices of degree at most one.
Lemma 45. Let G = (V, E) denote a CONGEST communication network and let G′ ⊆ G denote
                                                         e √n)-round CONGEST algorithm that
a bipartite subgraph. Then, there exists a deterministic O(
computes a set S ⊆ V of shortcut vertices such that
   1. one round on Compress(G′ ) can be simulated within O( e √n + D) rounds on G and

    2. each contracted edge in Compress(G′ ) can broadcast a message to all edges on its associated
               e √n + D) rounds on G.
       path in O(
Proof. Let P be the set of all paths of at least than two consecutive degree-2 vertices in G′ . For
                                        √
any path P ∈ P of length at most O( n), we can simply route messages over this path. Now
                                  √                       √
we note that there are at most n paths of length Ω( n). The endpoints of these paths are
determined in O(e n + D) rounds by stitching together parts of length O(√n). This is easy to
                  √
obtain using randomization: sample O(  e √n) vertices uniformly at random denoted by S. This
                                                    √
breaks the long paths up into paths of length O( n) between vertices in S. We can also find
such a set S of vertices deterministically. This can either be done by a hammer, like the overlay
                                                          √      √                    √
network in [HKN21], or more directly by computing a ( n, Õ( n))-ruling set in Õ( n) rounds
(implicit in [GPS88], explicit in [HKN21]).
   Since P is a set of vertex-disjoint paths, the graph consisting of endpoints of long paths
                             √                     √
plus the set S has both O( n) vertices and O( n) edges. It can be made known globally in
   √
O( n+D) rounds using Lemma 44. Now all nodes know the endpoints of long paths, and hence
                                                     √
messages over these long paths can be routed in O( n + D) rounds, again using Lemma 44.

Lemma 5. Let G = (V, E) denote a CONGEST communication network and let F ⊆ G be a
                                 e √n + D)-round CONGEST algorithm that roots every tree
forest. There is a deterministic O(
T ∈ F at an arbitrary vertex r ∈ T and informs everyone of their parent in the tree.

                                                47
Proof. We run the following iterative algorithm on every tree T ∈ F in parallel: Define T0 := T
and obtain Ti+1 from Ti by applying one Rake operation followed by one Compress operation
on Ti . Now we claim that this procedure terminates after k = ⌈log n⌉ iterations with an empty
graph Tk+1 . This follows from the fact that in any tree at most half of the vertices have a degree
greater than two. Now note that Compress removes all vertices of that currently have degree
two from U , while Rake removes all vertices that currently have degree one from U . Thus,
every iteration removes at least half of the vertices from U . Finally, we note that none of the
operations disconnect U and thus U remains a tree throughout the execution of the algorithm.
     In order to bound the round complexity of our procedure we first inductively prove the
following invariants:

    1. One round on Ti can be simulated in O( e √n + D) rounds on G.

  2. Any edge e ∈ E(Ti ) corresponds to a path P (e) in T and can send a message to all edges
                  e √n + D) rounds on G.
     f ∈ P (e) in O(

    Clearly, T0 = T satisfies the first two invariants with P (e) = {e} for all e ∈ E(T ). Now
suppose Ti satisfies the two invariants above. To construct Ti+1 , we first perform the Rake
operation. This operation takes one round on Ti and thus O(        e √n + D) rounds on G. To
implement the Compress operation, we “uncompress” the graph Ti by replacing each edge e with
its associated path P (e). Let us call the resulting graph Ti′ . According to invariant 2 this takes
at most O(e √n + D) rounds on G. Now, since T ′ ⊆ G we can invoke Lemma 45 to compute
                                                    i
Ti+1 := Compress(Ti′ ), which ensures that Ti+1 satisfies both invariants.
    Since every tree Ti+1 can be constructed from Ti in O( e √n + D) rounds and the number of
iterations to decompose T is bounded by O(log n), the overall runtime to compute the decom-
             e √n + D).
position is O(
    Finally, we show how to use the decomposition to efficiently root T . We traverse the virtual
subtrees in reverse order. Consider the last non-empty graph Tk in the sequence. Since the last
operation of the sequence has to be Rake, Tk is either just a single vertex or consists of two
vertices connected by a single edge. In any case, we can pick a root r in Tk in a single round on
Tk and (if necessary) orient the only edge towards r. Now suppose all edges in Ti+1 are oriented
towards a common root r. For every edge e = (u → v) ∈ E[Ti+1 ] we orient all edges on P (e)
towards v in O(e √n + D) rounds on G. This orients all edge that were removed from Ti by the
Compress operation. For any vertex v removed by the Rake operation from Ti , we orient all
incident edges {u, v} from v to u. Hence, after processing all subtrees Tk , . . . , T0 := T we have
successfully rooted T . Since k = O(log n), the whole algorithm runs in O(   e √n + D) rounds of
CONGEST.




                                                48
