Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bounded
Shrub-Depth and the Expressive Power of MSO
Nikolas Mählmann #
University of Bremen, Germany

      Abstract
The graph parameter shrub-depth is a dense analog of tree-depth. We characterize classes of
bounded shrub-depth by forbidden induced subgraphs. The obstructions are well-controlled flips
of large half-graphs and of disjoint unions of many long paths. Applying this characterization, we
show that on every hereditary class of unbounded shrub-depth, MSO is more expressive than FO.
This confirms a conjecture of [Gajarský and Hliněný; LMCS 2015] who proved that on classes of
bounded shrub-depth FO and MSO have the same expressive power. Combined, the two results fully
characterize the hereditary classes on which FO and MSO coincide, answering an open question by
[Elberfeld, Grohe, and Tantau; LICS 2012].
    Our work is inspired by the notion of stability from model theory. A graph class C is MSO-stable,
if no MSO-formula can define arbitrarily long linear orders in graphs from C. We show that a
hereditary graph class is MSO-stable if and only if it has bounded shrub-depth. As a key ingredient,
we prove that every hereditary class of unbounded shrub-depth FO-interprets the class of all paths.
This improves upon a result of [Ossona de Mendez, Pilipczuk, and Siebertz; Eur. J. Comb. 2025]
who showed the same statement for FO-transductions instead of FO-interpretations.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Finite Model Theory

Keywords and phrases Shrub-Depth, Forbidden Induced Subgraphs, MSO, Stability Theory

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.167

Category Track B: Automata, Logic, Semantics, and Theory of Programming

Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13903 [25]

Funding Supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) with grant agreement No. 444419611.

Acknowledgements The author thanks Patrice Ossona de Mendez, Sebastian Siebertz, and Szymon
Toruńczyk for fruitful discussions on the topic of this paper.


 1      Introduction
The main result of this paper is the following Theorem 1 yielding various characterizations for
hereditary graph classes of bounded shrub-depth, in terms of forbidden induced subgraphs,
(counting) monadic second-order logic (MSO and CMSO), and first-order logic (FO). All
appearing notions will be motivated and defined in the remainder of this introduction.

▶ Theorem 1. For every hereditary graph class C, the following are equivalent.
1. C has bounded shrub-depth.
2. There is a t ∈ N such that C excludes all flipped half-graphs of order t and all flipped tPt .
3. There is a t ∈ N such that C excludes all flipped half-graphs of order t and all flipped 3Pt .
4. C is MSO-stable.
5. C is monadically MSO-stable.
6. C is CMSO-stable.
7. C is monadically CMSO-stable.
8. C does not 1-dimensionally FO-interpret the class of all paths.
9. FO and MSO have the same expressive power on C.
             © Nikolas Mählmann;
                                                                                                      EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                      TC S




52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2025).
Editors: Keren Censor-Hillel, Fabrizio Grandoni, Joël Ouaknine, and Gabriele Puppis
Article No. 167; pp. 167:1–167:18
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
167:2   Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


        Stability
        We start motivating Theorem 1 by introducing the model-theoretic notion of stability, a
        context in which the graph parameter shrub-depth will naturally arise. Originating in the 70s
        and pioneered by Shelah, stability theory is a prolific branch of model theory which seeks to
        classify the complexity of theories (or in our case: graph classes). There, stability is the most
        important dividing line, which separates the well-behaved stable classes from the complex
        unstable ones. Intuitively, a graph class C is stable, if one cannot define arbitrarily large
        linear orders in C using logical formulas. More precisely, for a logic L ∈ {FO, MSO, CMSO},
        an L-formula φ(x̄, ȳ), and a graph class C, we say φ has the order-property on C, if for
        every ℓ ∈ N there is a graph G ∈ C and a sequence āi , . . . , āℓ of tuples of vertices of G, such
        that for all i, j ∈ [ℓ]

             G |= φ(āi , āj )   ⇔     i ⩽ j.

        For example the FO-formula φ(x, y) expressing “the neighborhood of x is a superset of the
        neighborhood of y” has the order-property on the class of all half-graphs, as it orders the
        sequence a1 , . . . , at in the half-graph Ht of order t for every t ∈ N, as depicted in Figure 1.

                                         a1 a2 a3 a4
                                                                 p1 p2 p3 p4 p5 p6

                                          b1 b2 b3 b4

           Figure 1 On the left: the half-graph of order 4 (denoted as H4 ) with vertices {a1 , . . . , a4 , b1 , . . . , b4 }
        and edges between ai and bj if i ⩽ j. On the right: the 6-vertex path (denoted as P6 ).


            Similarly, the MSO-formula ψ(x1 x2 , y1 y2 ) expressing “x1 and x2 are not connected after
        deleting y1 ” has the order-property on the class of all paths, as it orders the sequence
        of 2-tuples p1 pt , p2 pt , . . . , pt pt in the t-vertex path Pt for every t ∈ N. A graph class C is
        L-stable if no L-formula has the order-property on C, and L-unstable otherwise. The class of
        all half-graphs (all paths) is the arguably simplest example of an FO-unstable (MSO-unstable)
        graph class.
            Apart from its extensive study on infinite structures in model theory, FO-stability has
        recently gained a lot of attention in finite model theory, in particular in structural and
        algorithmic graph theory. Podewski and Ziegler [29] and Adler and Adler [1] observed that
        on monotone 1 graph classes, FO-stability coincides with the combinatorial property of being
        nowhere dense. Nowhere dense classes are very general classes of sparse graphs [26], enjoying
        strong combinatorial and algorithmic properties, such as fixed-parameter tractable (fpt) FO
        model checking [18]. The equivalence of FO-stability and nowhere denseness in monotone
        classes elegantly bridges the fields of model theory and structural graph theory. It has
        prompted the question whether also hereditary 2 FO-stable graph classes are combinatori-
        ally well-behaved. In the hereditary setting, FO-stability significantly generalizes nowhere
        denseness: for example the class of all cliques and the class of all map graphs are both
        FO-stable but not nowhere dense. A current research program has uncovered multiple natural
        combinatorial characterizations of hereditary FO-stable classes [8, 10, 15, 5] and shown that
        they also admit fpt FO model checking [15, 8, 9].


        1
            A graph class is monotone, if it is closed under taking subgraphs.
        2
            A graph class is hereditary, if it is closed under taking induced subgraphs.
N. Mählmann                                                                                         167:3


    In contrast to the rich literature on FO-stability, we are not aware of any previous
works studying its natural restriction MSO-stability. We attribute this to the fact that
the compactness theorem, which is the main tool for working on infinite structures where
stability originates, fails for MSO. Now, the recent successes in the study of FO-stable classes
of finite graphs raise the question whether also MSO-stability can be understood through
the lens of structural graph theory. In this work we show that this is indeed the case, by
proving the following.

▶ Theorem 2. A hereditary graph class is MSO-stable if and only if it has bounded shrub-
depth.

    The folklore fact that every monotone class of bounded shrub-depth also has bounded
tree-depth yields the following corollary.

▶ Corollary 3. A monotone graph class is MSO-stable if and only if it has bounded tree-depth.

Shrub-Depth
Shrub-depth is a parameter for graph classes introduced in [16]. It generalizes tree-depth
to dense classes and can be seen as a bounded depth analog of clique- and rank-width,
similar to how tree-depth is a bounded depth analog of tree-width. Classes of bounded
shrub-depth are extremely well-behaved from algorithmic, combinatorial, and logical points
of view. For instance, they admit quadratic time isomorphism testing [27] and fpt MSO
model checking with an elementary dependence on the size of the input formula [14, 16];
they can be characterized by vertex minors and FO-transductions [28]; and FO and MSO
have the same expressive power on these classes [14].
    The above examples show that the structure side of bounded shrub-depth is well charted.
Indeed, we prove the direction “bounded shrub-depth implies MSO-stability” of Theorem 2
using mainly existing tools. In contrast, proving the “hereditary and unbounded shrub-depth
implies MSO-instability” direction requires insights about the non-structure side of shrub-
depth (i.e., the properties shared by all classes that have unbounded shrub-depth). Up until
now, the picture here was much more vague: In [17] it is proved that for every d ∈ N there
exists a finite set of graphs Fd such that a graph has shrub-depth at most d if and only if
it excludes all of Fd as induced subgraphs. This result is non-constructive and does not
reveal the concrete sets Fd . In [21] and [28] it is shown that the class of all paths can be
produced from any class C of unbounded shrub-depth by taking vertex-minors and also by an
FO-transduction, respectively. The high expressive power and irreversibility of vertex-minors
and transductions limits our ability to draw conclusions about the structure of the original
class C from these two results. In this paper, we improve the non-structure situation by
providing a characterization of classes of bounded shrub-depth by explicitly listing forbidden
induced subgraphs.

Forbidden Induced Subgraphs
We will briefly introduce the notions needed to state the obstructions. For two graphs G
and H on the same vertex set and a partition P of V (G), we say H is a P-flip of G if it can be
obtained by complementing the edge relation between pairs of parts of P (see Figure 2). We
refer to the preliminaries for formal definitions. Our obstructions for bounded shrub-depth
will be well-controlled flips of disjoint unions of long paths and of large half-graphs, as made
precise in the following two definitions and their accompanying Figures 2 and 3.



                                                                                                   ICALP 2025
167:4   Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


        ▶ Definition 4. Pt is the t-vertex path and mPt is the disjoint union of m many Pt , with
        vertices [m]×[t], where (i, j) is the jth vertex on the ith path. A flipped mPt is an L-flip of mPt
        for the partition L = {L1 , . . . , Lt } of the paths into layers, where Lj = {(1, j), . . . , (m, j)}
        contains the jth vertices of all the paths for j ∈ [t].

                             (1, 1)




                                                                                         (3, 8)

                              L1      L2       L3      L4      L5       L6      L7       L8

           Figure 2 A flipped 3P8 . More precisely the depicted graph is an L-flip of 3P8 with L =
        {L1 , . . . , L8 }, where the following parts were flipped: L2 with L3 (red), L4 with L7 (blue), L7
        with L7 (purple).


        ▶ Definition 5. The half-graph of order t (denoted as Ht ) is the bipartite graph on vertices A =
        {a1 , . . . , at } and B = {b1 , . . . , bt } where ai and bj are adjacent if and only if i ⩽ j. A
        flipped Ht is a P-flip of Ht , for the partition P = {A, B}.




             Figure 3 All flipped H4 s (up to isomorphism). Replicated with permission from [24, Fig. 2.5].

             We are now ready to state our characterization.
        ▶ Theorem 6. A graph class C has bounded shrub-depth if and only if there is t ∈ N such
        that C excludes all flipped Ht and all flipped tPt as induced subgraphs.
            Moreover, our proofs show that in Theorem 6, one can replace tPt with 3Pt . While the
        stated tPt variant of the theorem is more useful for hardness proofs, the 3Pt variant is a step
        towards finding the simplest obstructions that cause unbounded shrub-depth. It remains
        open whether the theorem also holds for 2Pt , but we know it fails for 1Pt , as every graph
        on t vertices is a flipped 1Pt .

        Interpretations and Monadic Stability
        In order to prove the stability characterization (Theorem 2) from the induced subgraph
        characterization (Theorem 6), we visit another model-theoretic concept called interpretations.
        For a logic L a 1-dimensional3 L-interpretation I is defined by two L-formulas: a domain
        formula δ(x) and an irreflexive, symmetric edge formula φ(x, y). It maps each graph G to
        the graph H := I(G) with vertex set V (H) := {v ∈ V (G) : G |= δ(v)} and edges E(H) :=
        {(u, v) ∈ V (H)2 : G |= φ(u, v)}. We say a graph class C interprets a graph class D, if there
        is an interpretation I such that D ⊆ {I(G) : G ∈ C}. Building on our forbidden induced
        subgraph characterization, we show the following.


        3
            We will later also define and work with higher dimensional interpretations, whose formulas have tuples
            as free variables.
N. Mählmann                                                                                                      167:5


▶ Theorem 7. A hereditary graph class has unbounded shrub-depth if and only if it 1-
dimensionally FO-interprets the class of all paths.

    As we have already seen, the class of all paths is MSO-unstable. Theorem 7 can be used
to lift instability to all hereditary classes of unbounded shrub-depth. This is a strengthening
of a recent result by Ossona de Mendez, Pilipczuk, and Siebertz [28], which states that every
class of unbounded shrub-depth FO-transduces 4 the class of all paths. Their result implies
that every class of unbounded shrub-depth is monadically MSO-unstable: a graph class C is
monadically L-stable if every coloring of C is L-stable. In general, monadic MSO-stability
is more restrictive than MSO-stability. For instance the class K of all 1-subdivided cliques
is MSO-stable, but monadically MSO-unstable. When considering only hereditary classes,
this example fails: the hereditary closure of K contains every 1-subdivided graph and is
FO-unstable (so in particular also monadically FO-unstable, MSO-unstable, and monadically
MSO-unstable). Braunfeld and Laskowski showed that FO-stability and monadic FO-stability
coincide in all hereditary classes [4]. We show that the same collapse happens for MSO and
CMSO.

▶ Theorem 8. For hereditary graph classes, the notions MSO-stability, monadic MSO-
stability, CMSO-stability, and monadic CMSO-stability are all equivalent.

The Expressive Power of MSO
For a graph class C, we say FO and MSO have the same expressive power on C if for every
MSO-sentence φ, there exists an FO-sentence ψ such that for every graph G ∈ C we have
G |= φ ⇔ G |= ψ. Otherwise, we say MSO is more expressive than FO on C.
    It was shown by Elberfeld, Grohe, and Tantau that for all monotone classes C, FO and
MSO have the same expressive power if and only if C has bounded tree-depth [12]. As an
open question, they asked for a characterization of the hereditary classes where FO and
MSO coincide. As a dense analog of bounded tree-depth, bounded shrub-depth is a natural
candidate here. Indeed, Gajarský and Hliněný showed that FO and MSO have the same
expressive power on every class of bounded shrub-depth [14, Thm. 5.14]. However, they
could not prove the reverse direction, which they attributed to a lack of known obstructions
for classes of bounded shrub-depth. As an application of our forbidden induces subgraph
characterization, we provide the missing part of the puzzle by showing that MSO is more
expressive than FO on every hereditary class of unbounded shrub-depth. Together with the
result by Gajarský and Hliněný, this completely characterizes the hereditary classes on which
FO and MSO coincide.

▶ Theorem 9. For every hereditary graph class C, FO and MSO have the same expressive
power on C if and only if C has bounded shrub-depth.

Overview of the Paper
We present an extended abstract of the paper. Proofs of statements marked with ♣ can
be found in the full version [25] of the paper. Figure 4 shows the implications which
comprise Theorem 1. The only notion in the figure that has not been discussed so far is


4
    A transduction first colors the input graph non-deterministically, and then applies a fixed 1-dimensional
    interpretation that can access these colors. For a single input graph G, it produces multiple (possibly
    isomorphic) output graphs: one for each coloring of G. Due to the access to an arbitrary coloring,
    transductions are more expressive than interpretations.




                                                                                                                ICALP 2025
167:6   Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


                                     not FO-                                         Lem. 12
                                   interpreting
                                     all paths

                                         Prop. 28

               no flipped   def.    no flipped      Prop. 19                 [11]     bounded     Prop. 35                 def.
                                                                                                             monadically
                                                               ∞-flip-flat                                                        MSO-stable
               Ht and 3Pt           Ht and tPt                                      shrub-depth     [28]     CMSO-stable

                                         Prop. 37

                                   FO and MSO                  [14]
                                     coincide

                                                               Prop. 36


             Figure 4 A map of Theorem 1: characterizations of hereditary classes of bounded shrub-depth.


        ∞-flip-flatness. This is another characterization of shrub-depth with strong ties to stability
        theory, recently proved by Dreier, Mählmann, and Toruńczyk [11], which we define in the
        upcoming preliminaries (Section 2). The proofs of the individual implications are presented
        in Sections 3–6. We conclude with an outlook in Section 7, where we discuss potential
        strengthenings of our induced subgraph characterization and a second major dividing line
        from model theory, named dependence.


         2       Preliminaries
        We use [n] to refer to the set {1, . . . , n}. For an s-tuple ā = a1 . . . as , we use |ā| to refer to
        its length s and ā[i] to refer to its ith component ai .

        Colored Structures and Graphs. A (relational) signature Σ is a set of relation symbols,
        each with an implicitly assigned arity. A structure G over Σ is called a Σ-structure. We
        denote by Σ(k) := Σ ∪ {C1 , . . . , Ck } the expansion of Σ by k many new unary predicates,
        which we can think of as colors. A single element is allowed to have multiple colors, but
        this will not be important. A Σ(k) -structure G+ is a k-coloring of G, if G is the Σ-structure
        obtained by forgetting the color predicates in G+ . For a class of Σ-structures C, we denote
        by C (k) the class of Σ(k) -structures consisting of all the k-colorings of structures from C.
            A graph is a Γ-structure for the signature Γ := {E} consisting of a single binary relation
        (called edge relation) that is interpreted symmetrically and irreflexive. For any structure G,
        we use V (G) to refer to its universe: if G is a graph, then V (G) is its vertex set.

        Logic and Stability. We assume familiarity with first-order logic (FO) and monadic second-
        order logic (MSO). As we model graphs as structures with a binary edge relation, MSO
        on graphs allows for quantification of vertex sets, but not of edge sets. This is also known
        as MSO1 in the literature. Counting monadic second-order logic (CMSO) extends MSO
        for all set variables X and 0 ⩽ r < k by the cardinality constraint cardr,k (X) that holds
        true if and only if |X| ≡ r (mod k). For a logic L ∈ {FO, MSO, CMSO} and a signature Σ.
        We use L[Σ] to refer to the set of L-formulas over Σ. An L[Σ]-formula φ(x̄, ȳ) has the
        ℓ-order-property on a Σ-structure G, if there exists a sequence (āi )i∈[ℓ] of tuples of elements
        of G, such that for all i, j ∈ [ℓ] we have G |= φ(āi , āj ) ⇔ i ⩽ j. The formula φ has the
        order-property on a class of Σ-structures C, if for every ℓ ∈ N there is G ∈ C such that φ
        has the ℓ-order-property on G. We call a class of Σ-structures L-stable, if no L[Σ]-formula
        has the order-property on C. Moreover, C is monadically L-stable if for every k ∈ N, the
        class C (k) of k-colorings from C is L-stable.
N. Mählmann                                                                                         167:7


Interpretations. For a logic L, d ∈ N, and signatures Σ1 and Σ2 , a d-dimensional L-
interpretation I from Σ1 to Σ2 consists of
    an L[Σ1 ]-formula δI (x̄) called the domain formula,
    an L[Σ1 ]-formula φI,R (x̄1 , . . . , x̄k ) for every k-ary relation R in Σ2 ,
where x̄ and all x̄i are d-tuples. Given a Σ1 -structure G, we define the H := I(G) to be
the Σ2 -structure with the universe V (H) := {ā ∈ V (G)d : G |= δI (ā)} and relations R(H) :=
{ā1 . . . āk ∈ V (H)k : G |= φI,R (ā1 , . . . , āk )} for every k-ary relation R in Σ2 .
    We will use interpretations as a reduction mechanism. The following lemma is crucial for
this purpose. It follows by a simple formula rewriting procedure. See, e.g., [20, Thm. 4.3.1].
▶ Lemma 10. For every d-dimensional FO-interpretation I from Σ1 to Σ2 , and FO[Σ2 ]-
formula φ(x̄) there exists an FO[Σ1 ]-formula φI (x̄) such that for every Σ1 -structure G and
tuple ā ∈ V (I(G))|x̄| we have I(G) |= φ(ā) if and only if G |= φI (ā).
    The above lemma also holds for MSO- and CMSO-interpretations, when restricted to a
single dimension. See, e.g., [6, Thm. 7.10]. Higher dimensions are problematic because MSO
and CMSO cannot quantify over sets of tuples.
▶ Lemma 11. Fix L ∈ {MSO, CMSO}. For every 1-dimensional L-interpretation I from Σ1
to Σ2 , and L[Σ2 ]-formula φ(x̄) there exists an L[Σ1 ]-formula φI (x̄) such that for every Σ1 -
structure G and tuple ā ∈ V (I(G))|x̄| we have I(G) |= φ(ā) if and only if G |= φI (ā).
   For an interpretation I and a class C, we write I(C) for the class {I(G) : G ∈ C}. We say C
d-dimensionally L-interprets a class D, if there exists a d-dimensional L-interpretation I
such that D ⊆ I(C). We have already seen in the introduction, that the class of all paths is
MSO-unstable. Lemma 11 lifts instability to all classes that 1-dimensionally MSO-interpret it.
▶ Lemma 12. Fix L ∈ {MSO, CMSO}. Every class that 1-dimensionally L-interprets the
class of all paths is L-unstable.

Flips. Fix a graph G and a partition P of its vertices. For every vertex v ∈ V (G) we denote
by P(v) the unique part Q ∈ P satisfying v ∈ Q. Let F ⊆ P 2 be a symmetric relation. We
define H := G ⊕ (P, F ) to be the graph with vertex set V (G), and edges defined by the
following condition, for distinct u, v ∈ V (G):
                  (
                     uv ∈/ E(G) if (P(u), P(v)) ∈ F,
    uv ∈ E(H) ⇔
                     uv ∈ E(G) otherwise.

We call H a P-flip of G. If P has at most k parts, we say that H a k-flip of G. Flips are
reversible: G ⊕ (P, F ) ⊕ (P, F ) = G; and hereditary: for every k-flip H of G and A ⊆ V (G),
H[A] is also a k-flip of G[A].
   It will be convenient to work with flip-partitions that are minimal in the following sense.
▶ Definition 13. Let H and G be two graphs on the same vertex set. We call a partition P
of V (G) and a relation F ⊆ P 2 irreducible (H, G)-flip-witnesses if
    H = G ⊕ (P, F ),
    H is not a (|P| − 1)-flip of G,
    F does not include (Q, Q) for any part Q ∈ P with |Q| = 1.
    Clearly for every two graphs H and G on the same vertex set, there exist irreducible (H, G)-
flip-witnesses. In particular, as we work with loopless graphs, every flip-relation F can be
modified to satisfy the last condition stating that no singleton part is flipped with itself. We
now argue that the irreducible flip-witnesses are uniquely determined.



                                                                                                   ICALP 2025
167:8   Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


        ▶ Lemma 14. Let H and G be two graphs on the same vertex set and P and F be irredu-
        cible (H, G)-witnesses. For every two distinct parts Q1 , Q2 ∈ P there exists a part Q∆ ∈ P
        such that (Q1 , Q∆ ) ∈ F ⇔ (Q2 , Q∆ ) ∈
                                              / F. We say Q∆ discerns Q1 and Q2 .

        Proof. Otherwise, we can merge Q1 and Q2 , which contradicts irreducibility.                  ◀

        ▶ Lemma 15 (♣). Let H and G be two graphs on the same vertex set, let P and F be
        irreducible (H, G)-flip-witnesses, and let P ′ and F ′ any partition and relation such that H =
        G ⊕ (P ′ , F ′ ). Then P is a coarsening of P ′ .

        ▶ Lemma 16 (♣). For every two graphs H and G on the same vertex set, the irredu-
        cible (H, G)-flip-witnesses are uniquely determined.

            For every two graph H and G on the same vertex set, we call P the irreducible (H, G)-
        flip-partition and F the irreducible (H, G)-flip-relation, if P and F are the unique irredu-
        cible (H, G)-flip-witnesses, as justified by Lemma 16.

        Shrub-Depth, Distances, and Flatness. We will not work with the original definition of
        bounded shrub-depth, as given in [16], and which we omit from this paper. Instead, we will
        use an equivalent definition called ∞-flip-flatness [11], which we will define in a moment.
            The length of a path is the number of edges it contains, i.e., Pt has length t − 1.
        For a graph G and two vertices u, v ∈ V (G) we define distG (u, v) to be the length of a
        shortest path between u and v in G. If no such path exists, then u and v are in different
        connected components of G, and we define distG (u, v) := ∞. For r ∈ N, a graph G, and
        a vertex v ∈ V (G) let NrG [v] := {u ∈ V (G) : distG (u, v) ⩽ r} be the (closed) radius-r
        neighborhood of v. We drop the superscript G if it is clear from the context. For r ∈ N, we
        call a set A ⊆ V (G) distance-r independent in G if distG (u, v) > r for every two distinct
        vertices u, v ∈ A. Similarly, A is distance-∞ independent in G if no two vertices of A are in
        the same connected component of G.

        ▶ Definition 17. For r ∈ N ∪ {∞} and k ∈ N, a set A of vertices in a graph is (r, k)-flip-flat,
        if there exists a k-flip H of G in which A is distance-r independent. A graph class C is
        r-flip-flat, if there are margins kr ∈ N and Mr : N → N, such that for every G ∈ C and m ∈ N,
        every set W ⊆ V (G) of size |W | ⩾ Mr (m) contains an (r, kr )-flip-flat subset of size m.

            We refer to [24] for an introduction to flatness properties. Crucially, flip-flatness charac-
        terizes both monadic FO-stability [10] and bounded shrub-depth [11].

        ▶ Theorem 18 ([10] and [11]). For every graph class C:
           C is monadically FO-stable if and only if C is r-flip-flat for every r ∈ N.
           C has bounded shrub-depth if and only if C is ∞-flip-flat.

         3     Forbidden Induced Subgraphs
        Flipped half-graphs Ht and flipped tPt s were defined in the introduction (Definitions 4 and 5).
        We say a graph class C is pattern-free, if there is a t ∈ N such that C excludes as induced
        subgraphs every flipped Ht and every flipped tPt . Our goal is to show the following.

        ▶ Proposition 19. Every pattern-free class is ∞-flip-flat.

           In the full paper, we also give a short proof showing that every class of bounded shrub-
        depth is pattern-free, using the SC-depth characterization of shrub-depth [16].
N. Mählmann                                                                                               167:9


3.1    Establishing Monadic FO-Stability
As a first step, we will show that pattern-free classes are monadically FO-stable. This
will follow from a known characterization of monadic FO-stability by forbidden induced
subgraphs. We first introduce the required definitions.
    For r ⩾ 1, the star r-crossing of order t is the r-subdivision of Kt,t (the biclique of
order t). The clique r-crossing of order t is the graph obtained from the star r-crossing
of order t by turning the neighborhood of each principle vertex (i.e., each original vertex
of the Kt,t ) into a clique. Examples are depicted in Figure 5, which also shows how the
vertices of each star/clique r-crossing are partitioned into layers L = {L0 , . . . , Lr+1 }. A
flipped star/clique r-crossing is a graph obtained from a star/clique r-crossing by performing
a flip where the parts of the flip-partition are the layers of the r-crossing. The following
characterization was originally proven in [8], but we use the notation from [24, 11].

▶ Theorem 20 ([8]). A graph class is monadically FO-stable if and only if for every r ⩾ 1
there exists t ∈ N such that C excludes as induced subgraphs
    all flipped star r-crossings of order t, and
    all flipped clique r-crossings of order t, and
    all flipped Ht .

          L5        b1       b2      b3


          L4


          L3


          L2


          L1


          L0        a1       a2      a3

   Figure 5 From left to right: the star 4-crossing of order 3, the clique 4-crossing of order 3, and
the rook graph of order 4. Highlighted in blue we show how each of the three patterns of order k
contains an induced path on at least k vertices.


▶ Lemma 21. For every r ⩾ 1 and t ∈ N, the star r-crossing and the clique r-crossing of
order t both contain an induced Pt .

Proof. For star r-crossings with r ⩾ 1 and for clique r-crossing with r ⩾ 2, this is easy to
see in the left/middle panel of Figure 5. For the clique 1-crossing of order t, note that its
vertices {start(πi,j ) = end(πi,j ) : i, j ∈ [t]} induce the rook graph of order t (also known as
the cartesian square of Kt ). This graph is defined as the graph on vertices [t] × [t], where
the vertices (i, j) and (i′ , j ′ ) are adjacent if and only if i = i′ or j = j ′ . The right panel of
Figure 5 shows how Pt embeds into the rook graph of order t.                                        ◀

▶ Lemma 22 (♣). For every monadically FO-unstable graph class C there exists k ∈ N such
that C contains as induced subgraphs either
   a flipped Ht for every t ∈ N, or
   a k-flip of Pt for every t ∈ N.

Proofsketch. By Theorem 20 and Lemma 21. See the full paper for details.                            ◀



                                                                                                         ICALP 2025
167:10 Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


       ▶ Lemma 23. Every k-flip of (m·k t )Pt contains an induced flipped mPt , for every k, m, t ∈ N.

       Proof. Choose any k-flip of (m · k t )Pt and let P be a witnessing partition of size at most k.
       We can color the vertices of the Pt according to their membership in P. This yields at
       most k t different ways to color a Pt . By the pigeonhole principle, there must be a set S
       of at least m many Pt that are colored in the same way. This means for every i ∈ [t] all
       the ith vertices of paths in S are in the same part of P. Hence, the paths in S induce a
       flipped mPt .                                                                                ◀

           By cutting a long path into multiple shorter ones, we observe that Pt′ contains an
       induced mPt for t′ := m · (t + 1). Combining this observation with Lemma 23 yields the
       following Corollary 24. The combination of Corollary 24 and Lemma 22 yields Proposition 25.

       ▶ Corollary 24. Every k-flip of Pt′ contains an induced flipped tPt for every k, t ∈ N
       and t′ := t · k t · (t + 1).

       ▶ Proposition 25. Every pattern-free class is monadically FO-stable.

       3.2    Proving ∞-Flip-Flatness
       ▶ Lemma 26. For every m, t ∈ N, graph G, and distance-2t independent set A of size 2m
       in G either
          a size m subset of A is distance-∞ independent in G, or
          G contains an induced mPt .




           Figure 6 The two cases from Lemma 26. The circles are the layering of a BFS tree around the
       vertices of A. There is a large subset A′ ⊆ A whose outermost layers are either all empty (left panel),
       or all non-empty (right panel). Therefore, the vertices of A′ are either in pairwise different connected
       components, or the vertices of A′ are the endpoints of pairwise vertex-disjoint long induced paths.


       Proof. By the assumption of the lemma, the radius-(t − 1) neighborhoods of the vertices in A
       are pairwise disjoint, and every edge is incident to at most one of these neighborhoods. For
       each a ∈ A, let X(a) ⊆ Nt−1 [a] be the set of vertices that are at distance exactly t − 1 from a
       in G. By the pigeonhole principle, there is a set A′ ⊆ A of size m such that either X(a) is
       empty for all a ∈ A′ or X(a) is non-empty for all a ∈ A′ (see Figure 6). In the first case this
       means for each a ∈ A′ , Nt−1 [a] contains the entire connected component of a in G, and A′ is
       distance-∞ independent. In the second case for each a ∈ A′ , Nt−1 [a] contains an induced Pt
       (which starts at a and ends in X(a)), and G contains an induced mPt .                         ◀

          Using Lemma 23, the previous lemma lifts to flipped graphs.

       ▶ Corollary 27. For every k, m, t ∈ N, graph G, k-flip H of G, and distance-2t independent
       set A of size 2k t · m in H either
           a size k t · m subset of A is distance-∞ independent in H, or
           G contains an induced flipped mPt .
N. Mählmann                                                                                             167:11


     We are now ready to prove Proposition 19, which we restate for convenience.

▶ Proposition 19. Every pattern-free class is ∞-flip-flat.

Proof. Fix a pattern-free class C. Then there is t ∈ N such that C contains no induced
flipped tPt . By Proposition 25, C is monadically FO-stable, and by Theorem 18, also r-
flip-flat for some margins kr and Mr for every r ∈ N. We claim that C is ∞-flip-flat with
                                                        t
margins k∞ := k2t and M∞ (m) := M2t (max(2m, 2k2t         · t)). Choose any G ∈ C, m ∈ N,
and W ⊆ V (G) of size |W | ⩾ M∞ (m). By flip-flatness, there is a k∞ -flip H of G in which a
                 t
size max(2m, 2k2t  · t) subset A ⊆ W is distance-2t independent. By Corollary 27, either
                       t
    a size max(2m, 2k2t   · t)/2 ⩾ m subset of A ⊆ W is distance-∞ independent in H, or
    G contains an induced flipped m′ Pt for some m′ ⩾ max(2m, 2k2t  t         t
                                                                      · t)/(2k2t ) ⩾ t.
The second case contradicts pattern-freeness of C, so we have successfully established ∞-flip-
flatness for C.                                                                             ◀


 4         Interpreting Paths
In this section we will prove the following.

▶ Proposition 28. There is a 1-dimensional FO-interpretation I with the following property.
If C is a hereditary graph class that contains for every t ∈ N either a flipped Ht or a flipped tPt ,
then the class of all paths is contained in I(C).

   Notably, a single interpretation works for all classes that contain these patterns. We first
show that the paths of length at most 3 appear already as induced subgraphs.

▶ Lemma 29. Every flipped 2P3 and every flipped H3 contains P3 as an induced subgraph.

Proof. Exhaustive case distinctions are depicted in Figure 7.                                     ◀




L1    L2    L3




    Figure 7 On the left: An enumeration of all flipped 2P3 . To reduce the number of cases, we do
not account for flips that flip a layer Li with itself. Edges that could possibly be created by such
flips are marked as dashed. In each flipped 2P3 we have highlighted an induced P3 that contains
no dashed edges. This proves that every flipped 2P3 contains an induced P3 . On the right: An
enumeration of all flipped H3 , each with a highlighted induced P3 .



4.1        Interpreting Paths in Flipped tPt s
Two vertices u and v are twins in a graph G, if N1G [u] \ {u, v} = N1G [v] \ {u, v}. This relation
is FO-definable: twins(x, y) := ∀z : (z ̸= x ∧ z ̸= y) → (E(z, x) ↔ E(z, y)).

▶ Observation 30. Let H be a P-flip of G. Two vertices u, v ∈ V (G) that are contained in
the same part of P are twins in G if and only if they are twins in H.



                                                                                                        ICALP 2025
167:12 Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO




                           L1      L2      L3      L4     L5      L6      L7      L8

           Figure 8 The induced subgraph of a flipped 5P8 in which the interpretation I can interpret P8 .
       In this example the following layers were flipped: L2 with L3 (red), L4 with L7 (blue), L7 with L7
       (purple).


       ▶ Lemma 31. There exists an FO-interpretation I such that for every t ⩾ 4, every flipped 5Pt
       contains an induced subgraph H such that I(H) = Pt .


       Proof of Lemma 31. By assumption C contains a graph H ′ that is an L-flip of 5Pt , where L
       is the usual partition of the vertices of 5Pt into layers. We will interpret Pt in the induced
       subgraph H := H ′ [A] where A := X ∪ S with
                                                                        (
                                                                           {(2, i), (3, i)} if i is odd,
           X = {(1, i) : i ∈ [t]} and S := S1 ∪ · · · ∪ St and Si :=
                                                                           {(4, i), (5, i)} if i is even.

       See Figure 8 for an example. In the non-flipped setting, taking the subgraph of 5Pt induced
       on the same vertex set A yields a graph G := (5Pt )[A] that is the disjoint union of a single Pt
       (formed by the X vertices) and an independent set of size 2t (formed by the S vertices).
       Observe that H is an L|A -flip of G, where L|A is the restriction of L to A. Let Q and F ⊆ Q2
       be the irreducible (H, G)-flip-witnesses such that H = G ⊕ (Q, F ). By Lemma 15, Q is a
       coarsening of L|A and, by Lemma 14, for every two distinct parts Q1 , Q2 ∈ Q there exists a
       discerning part Q∆ ∈ Q such that (Q1 , Q∆ ) ∈ F ⇔ (Q2 , Q∆ ) ∈    / F . In order to interpret Pt
       from H, it suffices to establish the following two claims.

       ▷ Claim 32. The set X is definable in H. This means there is a formula δ(x) such that for
       all v ∈ V (H) = A we have H |= δ(v) ⇔ v ∈ X.

       ▷ Claim 33. The edges of G[X] are definable in H. This means there is a formula φ(x, y)
       such that for all u, v ∈ X we have H |= φ(u, v) ⇔ G |= E(u, v).

          If we define the interpretation I using the formulas δI := δ and φI,E := φ from Claim 32
       and Claim 33, then I(H) = Pt . It will be clear from the proofs of the two claims, that we
       can choose δ and φ independently of t, such that I is the desired interpretation.

       Proof of Claim 32. We choose δ(x) := ∀y : x ̸= y → ¬twins(x, y) to be the formula expressing
       that x has no twins in H. We first verify that no vertex in S = A \ X satisfies δ. Indeed,
       each vertex u ∈ Si ∈ S has a twin v in Si in the graph G: both vertices have no neighbors at
       all in G. As both are in the same part of L|A and its coarsening Q, they are also twins in H
       by Observation 30.
           We next verify that every vertex in X satisfies δ. Fix a vertex u ∈ X and let Q1 be the
       part of Q containing it. Since we assumed t ⩾ 4, we know that u has no twins in G. Then,
       again by Observation 30, u has no twins in H that are also contained in the same part Q1 .
       Now let v ∈ Q2 ∈ Q be a vertex contained in a different part. By Lemma 14, there exists a
N. Mählmann                                                                                       167:13


part Q∆ such that (Q1 , Q∆ ) ∈ F ⇔ (Q2 , Q∆ ) ∈ / F . This means for every vertex w ∈ Q∆ , its
adjacency was flipped towards exactly one of u and v from G to H. By construction, Q∆
contains at least two vertices from S, so at least one vertex w ∈ S \ {u, v} = S \ {v}. As w
is non-adjacent to both u and v in G, we have that w is adjacent to exactly one of u and v
in H, so u and v are not twins in H.                                                        ◁
    To prove Claim 33 we will recover the partition Q using FO. Note that this is not possible
for the partition L|A , as it may contain distinct parts which behave the same. This is the
reason why we work with the coarsening Q, where parts that behave the same have been
merged.

Proof of Claim 33. The previous claim also yields a formula σ(x) := ¬δ(x) that defines the
set S in H. Consider the formula
                                                                
    π(x, y) := ∀z : (z ̸= x) ∧ (z ̸= y) ∧ σ(z) → E(x, z) ↔ E(y, z)

expressing that x and y have the same neighborhood on S \ {x, y}. We claim that for
all u ∈ X and v ∈ S, we have H |= π(u, v) if and only if u and v are in the same part of Q.
If u and v are in the same part of Q, we can verify that H |= π(u, v) using Observation 30
on the graphs H[S ∪ {u, v}] and G[S ∪ {u, v}]. If u and v are in different parts, we can verify
that H ̸|= π(u, v) using Lemma 14 as in the proof of the previous claim.
    Next, consider the formula

   φ⊕ (x, y) := ∃z : σ(z) ∧ π(z, y) ∧ E(x, z)

asking whether there exists a vertex z ∈ S that is in the same part of Q as y and which is
adjacent to x. We claim that φ⊕ detects between which vertices of X the adjacency was
flipped from G to H. More precisely, for all distinct vertices u, v ∈ X we want
                                
    H |= φ⊕ (x, y) ⇔ Q(u), Q(v) ∈ F.

To prove this property, let u, v ∈ X be distinct vertices. Assume first H |= φ⊕ (u, v). Then
there exists a vertex z ∈ S ∩ Q(v) which is adjacent to u in H. As all the vertices of S are
isolated in G, this means the adjacency
                                          between u and z must have    been created by the
flip, so we have Q(u), Q(z) = Q(v) ∈ F . Assume now Q(u), Q(v) ∈ F . By construction
there exists a vertex z ∈ Q(v) ∩ S. As z ∈ S is isolated in G, it must be connected to u in H.
Then z witnesses H |= φ⊕ (u, v). This proves that φ⊕ has the desired properties. We can
finish the proof of the claim by setting φ(x, y) := E(x, y) XOR φ⊕ (x, y).                  ◁

Combining the two claims yields the desired interpretation I satisfying I(H) = Pt . We again
stress that the construction of δ and φ was independent of t (but requires t ⩾ 4). This
finishes the proof of the lemma.                                                          ◀

4.2    Interpreting Paths in Flipped Half-Graphs
▶ Lemma 34 (♣). There exists an FO-interpretation I such that for every t ∈ N, every
flipped Ht+4 contains an induced subgraph G such that I(G) = Pt .

Proofsketch. Using hereditariness, we can insert twins, which we use to define the two sides
A and B of the half-graph. We can order the elements of A by their neighborhoods. The
successor relation of the order forms the desired path.                                   ◀

   In the full version, we show Proposition 28 by combining Lemmas 29, 31, and 34.



                                                                                                  ICALP 2025
167:14 Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


        5     Monadic Stability
       We quickly discuss the two implications from Figure 4 concerning monadic CMSO-stability.

       ▶ Proposition 35 (♣). Every bounded shrub-depth graph class is monadically CMSO-stable.

       ▶ Proposition 36 (♣). Every graph class, that for every t ∈ N contains as induced subgraphs
       either a flipped Ht or a flipped 3Pt , is monadically CMSO-unstable.

           Proposition 35 follows mostly from existing techniques. It is known that no class of
       bounded shrub-depth CMSO-transduces the class of all half-graphs [17]. This implies that
       no CMSO-formula φ(x, y) on free singleton variables has the order-property on any coloring
       of a class of bounded shrub-depth. Proving monadic CMSO-stability requires extending this
       fact to formulas ψ(x̄, ȳ) with tuple variables. In the full version, we do so by finitizing a
       model-theoretic result by Simon [31] (related to [3, 2]) and extending it from FO to CMSO.
           To prove Proposition 36, we give an FO-transduction that given a flipped 3Pt produces Pt
       (whose vertices are easy to order). This is similar to what we do in Lemma 31, but the more
       powerful transductions allow us to work in 3Pt s instead of 5Pt s.

        6     The Expressive Power of MSO
       ▶ Proposition 37 (♣). MSO is more expressive than FO on every hereditary graph class,
       that for every t ∈ N contains either a flipped Ht or a flipped tPt .

       Proofsketch. Fix a graph class C as in the statement By the pigeonhole principle and
       hereditariness, it is sufficient to prove the proposition in two separate cases: either C contains
       arbitrarily large flipped Ht or it contains arbitrarily large flipped tPt .
       Case 1. By Lemma 34, there exists a fixed interpretation I such that every flipped Ht+4
       contains an induced subgraph Ht⋆ on which I interprets Pt . Using this interpretation, we can
       show that there exists an MSO-sentence φeven that distinguishing Ht⋆ and Ht+1    ⋆
                                                                                            for every
       t ∈ N. The sentence φeven checks whether the interpreted Pt has even length, a property
       that is easily expressible in MSO. To show that there is no FO-sentence equivalent to φeven ,
       we show that there is a fixed multi-dimensional FO-interpretation I ′ that produces Ht⋆ from
       the linear order Lt = ([t], <) of size t. It is known that for every q ∈ N there is t ∈ N
       such that no FO-sentence of quantifier rank q can distinguish Lt and Lt+1 [23, Thm. 3.6].
       The interpretation I ′ lifts this result to Ht⋆ and Ht+1
                                                            ⋆
                                                                , which proves that no FO-sentence is
       equivalent to the MSO-sentence φeven on C.
       Case 2. If G is a flipped tPt with t ⩾ 2, we define nibble1 (G) to be the graph where the
       first vertex and last vertex of the first path are deleted, and nibble2 (G) to be the graph
       where the first vertex of the first path and the last vertex of the second path are deleted.
       Using techniques similar to Lemma 31 we can construct an interpretation I which reverses
       the flips on G. This means I(nibble1 (G)) is the disjoint union of t − 1 many Pt s and a
       single Pt−2 ; and I(nibble2 (G)) is the disjoint union of t − 2 many Pt s and two Pt−1 s. Using
       this interpretation I, we can construct an MSO-sentence φsameParity which for every graph G,
       that is a flipped tPt , distinguishes nibble1 (G) and nibble2 (G). This sentence checks whether
       all paths of the interpretation have the same parity: they are either all of even or all of odd
       length. By construction nibble1 (G) |= φsameParity and nibble2 (G) ̸|= φsameParity . To show
       that no FO-sentence is equivalent to φsameParity on C, we construct an FO-interpretation I ′
       that produces nibblei (G) from a coloring of nibblei (tPt ) for both i ∈ {1, 2}. Here the colors
       mark the parts of the flip-partition, which means each path is colored the same way. For
N. Mählmann                                                                                         167:15


every FO-sentence ψ, there is t ∈ N such that ψ cannot distinguish between the colorings
of nibble1 (tPt ) and nibble2 (tPt ): it cannot tell whether two endpoints of the same or of
different long paths are missing. Intuitively this is because FO cannot express connectivity.
This is easiest to formalize using Hanf locality [19, 13], but the classic Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé
games also work. Again this inexpressibility can be lifted through I ′ , which proves that no
FO-sentence is equivalent to the MSO-sentence φsameParity on C.                             ◀


 7     Outlook
In this work, we have characterized graph classes of bounded shrub-depth by forbidden
induced subgraphs. This has allowed us to derive further characterizations through logic, for
instance by the model theoretic property of MSO-stability, and by comparing the expressive
power of FO and MSO. In this last section we will discuss possible future work.

Stronger Obstructions. While the obstructions we found were sufficient to achieve our goal
of characterizing MSO-stability, we initially had a stronger characterization in mind, which
we could neither prove nor refute:

▶ Conjecture 38. For every graph class C of unbounded shrub-depth there exists k ∈ N such
that C contains as induced subgraphs either
   a flipped Ht for every t ∈ N, or
   a k-flip of Pt for every t ∈ N.

    As we have seen in Lemma 22, this conjecture holds for every class that is monadically
FO-unstable. Even stronger, the k-flips of Pt s appearing there can be assumed to be periodic.
This means, the flip-partition splits the paths in a repeating pattern. This is due to the
fact that we have extracted the k-flips of Pt , by “snaking” along the known obstructions
characterizing monadic FO-stability (see Figure 5). The advantage of these periodic flips is
that they can be finitely described: for every monadically FO-unstable class C there exists
an algorithm that given t ∈ N, returns a size-t obstruction (a flipped Ht or a k-flip of Pt )
that is contained in C. We currently do not know whether classes of unbounded shrub-depth
admit such algorithms, as we have little control over how the tPt s are flipped. Having such a
finite description would help to lift algorithmic hardness results from the class of all paths to
every hereditary classes of unbounded shrub-depth. One such result is by Lampis, who shows
that there is no fpt MSO model checking algorithm for the class of all paths whose runtime
dependence is elementary on the size of the input formula, under the complexity theoretic
assumption E ̸= NE [22]. Lifting this hardness result to hereditary classes of unbounded
shrub-depth would yield another characterization, as it is known that every class of bounded
shrub-depth admits elementary fpt MSO model checking [14, 16].

Relation to the SC-Depth Hierarchy. Our Theorem 1 only characterizes shrub-depth on
the coarse level, distinguishing between classes of bounded and unbounded shrub-depth.
One can ask whether the individual levels of the shrub-depth hierarchy (i.e., classes of
shrub-depth k for k ∈ N) can be characterized similarly. The answer to this is negative, as
shrub-depth cannot be meaningfully measured on single graphs, but only on graph classes
containing infinitely many arbitrarily large graphs. In particular, every graph class consisting
only of a single finite graph has shrub-depth at most 1. A more refined parameter that
can also be measured on single graphs is SC-depth. On the coarse level, SC-depth and
shrub-depth are equivalent: A graph class has bounded shrub-depth if and only if it has



                                                                                                    ICALP 2025
167:16 Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


       bounded SC-depth [16]. We strongly believe that a more fine-grained analysis of our proofs
       and the proofs in [28, 11] would yield a functional equivalence between SC-depth and the
       size of the obstructions we have uncovered in this work. More precisely, for a graph G define
       obstruction-depth(G) to be the size t of the largest flipped Ht or flipped tPt contained as an
       induced subgraph in G. We conjecture the following.

       ▶ Conjecture 39. There are functions f, g : N → N such that for every graph G holds
                                                                        
            obstruction-depth(G) ⩽ f SC-depth(G) ⩽ g obstruction-depth(G) .


       MSO-Dependence. Our last question concerns the model theoretic notion of dependence, a
       second major dividing line that generalizes stability. Similar to FO-stable classes, also FO-
       dependent classes have recently been shown to admit nice combinatorial characterizations [11].
       This raises the question whether also MSO-dependence can be combinatorially characterized.
       It is natural to conjecture the following.

       ▶ Conjecture 40. For every hereditary graph class C, the following are equivalent.
       1. C has bounded clique-width (or equivalently bounded rank-width).
       2. C is MSO-dependent.
       3. C is monadically MSO-dependent.
       4. C is CMSO-dependent.
       5. C is monadically CMSO-dependent.

           It is already known that a class has bounded clique-width if and only if it does not
       CMSO-transduce the class of all graphs [7]. In the full paper we show that this confirms the
       equivalence (1) ⇔ (5) of the conjecture. We remark that both of the two equivalence (1) ⇔ (2)
       and (1) ⇔ (3) would imply that every class of unbounded clique-width MSO-transduces the
       class of all graphs. In turn, this would imply the longstanding Seese’s conjecture stating that
       the MSO-theory of every graph class of unbounded clique-width is undecidable [30, 6]. This
       suggests that Conjecture 40 is a tough nut to crack.


             References
        1    Hans Adler and Isolde Adler. Interpreting nowhere dense graph classes as a classical notion
             of model theory. European Journal of Combinatorics, 36:322–330, 2014. doi:10.1016/J.EJC.
             2013.06.048.
        2    Peter John Anderson. Tree-decomposable theories. Master’s thesis, Simon Fraser University,
             1990.
        3    John T. Baldwin and Saharon Shelah. Second-order quantifiers and the complexity of theories.
             Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 26(3):229–303, 1985. doi:10.1305/NDJFL/1093870870.
        4    Samuel Braunfeld and Michael C. Laskowski. Existential characterizations of monadic nip.
             arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05120, 2022. arXiv:2209.05120.
        5    Hector Buffière, Eun Jung Kim, and Patrice Ossona de Mendez. Shallow vertex minors,
             stability, and dependence. Innovations in Graph Theory, 1:87–112, 2024. doi:10.5802/igt.5.
        6    Bruno Courcelle and Joost Engelfriet. Graph structure and monadic second-order logic: a
             language-theoretic approach, volume 138. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
        7    Bruno Courcelle and Sang-il Oum. Vertex-minors, monadic second-order logic, and a conjecture
             by Seese. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 97(1):91–126, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.
             jctb.2006.04.003.
N. Mählmann                                                                                         167:17


 8   Jan Dreier, Ioannis Eleftheriadis, Nikolas Mählmann, Rose McCarty, Michał Pilipczuk, and
     Szymon Toruńczyk. First-Order Model Checking on Monadically Stable Graph Classes . In
     2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 21–30,
     Los Alamitos, CA, USA, October 2024. IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/FOCS61266.
     2024.00012.
 9   Jan Dreier, Nikolas Mählmann, and Sebastian Siebertz. First-order model checking on
     structurally sparse graph classes. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, STOC 2023, pages 567–580, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for
     Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3564246.3585186.
10   Jan Dreier, Nikolas Mählmann, Sebastian Siebertz, and Szymon Toruńczyk. Indiscernibles
     and flatness in monadically stable and monadically NIP classes. In Kousha Etessami, Uriel
     Feige, and Gabriele Puppis, editors, 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
     and Programming, ICALP 2023, July 10-14, 2023, Paderborn, Germany, volume 261 of
     LIPIcs, pages 125:1–125:18. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.125.
11   Jan Dreier, Nikolas Mählmann, and Szymon Toruńczyk. Flip-breakability: A combinatorial
     dichotomy for monadically dependent graph classes. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2024, pages 1550–1560, New York, NY, USA,
     2024. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3618260.3649739.
12   Michael Elberfeld, Martin Grohe, and Till Tantau. Where first-order and monadic second-order
     logic coincide. ACM Trans. Comput. Logic, 17(4), September 2016. doi:10.1145/2946799.
13   Ronald Fagin, Larry J. Stockmeyer, and Moshe Y. Vardi. On monadic np vs monadic co-np.
     Information and Computation, 120(1):78–92, 1995. doi:10.1006/inco.1995.1100.
14   Jakub Gajarský and Petr Hliněný. Kernelizing mso properties of trees of fixed height, and
     some consequences. Logical Methods in Computer Science, Volume 11, Issue 1, April 2015.
     doi:10.2168/LMCS-11(1:19)2015.
15   Jakub Gajarský, Nikolas Mählmann, Rose McCarty, Pierre Ohlmann, Michał Pilipczuk,
     Wojciech Przybyszewski, Sebastian Siebertz, Marek Sokołowski, and Szymon Toruńczyk.
     Flipper Games for Monadically Stable Graph Classes. In Kousha Etessami, Uriel Feige,
     and Gabriele Puppis, editors, 50th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming (ICALP 2023), volume 261 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
     (LIPIcs), pages 128:1–128:16, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.128.
16   Robert Ganian, Petr Hliněný, Jaroslav Nešetřil, Jan Obdržálek, Patrice Ossona de Mendez,
     and Reshma Ramadurai. When trees grow low: Shrubs and fast MSO1. In Branislav Rovan,
     Vladimiro Sassone, and Peter Widmayer, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer
     Science 2012, pages 419–430, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
17   Robert Ganian, Petr Hliněný, Jaroslav Nesetril, Jan Obdrzálek, and Patrice Ossona de Mendez.
     Shrub-depth: Capturing height of dense graphs. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 15(1), 2019.
     doi:10.23638/LMCS-15(1:7)2019.
18   Martin Grohe, Stephan Kreutzer, and Sebastian Siebertz. Deciding first-order properties of
     nowhere dense graphs. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 64(3):1–32, 2017. doi:10.1145/3051095.
19   William Hanf. Model-theoretic methods in the study of elementary logic. In The Theory of
     Models, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 132–145. North-Holland,
     1965. doi:10.1016/B978-0-7204-2233-7.50020-4.
20   Wilfrid Hodges. A Shorter Model Theory. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
21   O-joung Kwon, Rose McCarty, Sang il Oum, and Paul Wollan. Obstructions for bounded
     shrub-depth and rank-depth. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 149:76–91, 2021.
     doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2021.01.005.
22   Michael Lampis. Model checking lower bounds for simple graphs. Logical Methods in Computer
     Science, Volume 10, Issue 1, March 2014. doi:10.2168/LMCS-10(1:18)2014.




                                                                                                    ICALP 2025
167:18 Forbidden Induced Subgraphs for Bd. Shrub-Depth and the Expr. Power of MSO


        23   Leonid Libkin. Elements of finite model theory, volume 41. Springer, 2004. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-662-07003-1.
        24   Nikolas Mählmann. Monadically Stable and Monadically Dependent Graph Classes: Charac-
             terizations and Algorithmic Meta-Theorems. PhD thesis, University of Bremen, 2024.
        25   Nikolas Mählmann. Forbidden induced subgraphs for bounded shrub-depth and the expressive
             power of mso. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13903, 2025. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2501.13903.
        26   Jaroslav Nešetřil and Patrice Ossona de Mendez. On nowhere dense graphs. European Journal
             of Combinatorics, 32(4):600–617, 2011. doi:10.1016/J.EJC.2011.01.006.
        27   Pierre Ohlmann, Michał Pilipczuk, Wojciech Przybyszewski, and Szymon Toruńczyk. Ca-
             nonical Decompositions in Monadically Stable and Bounded Shrubdepth Graph Classes. In
             Kousha Etessami, Uriel Feige, and Gabriele Puppis, editors, 50th International Colloquium on
             Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2023), volume 261 of Leibniz International
             Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 135:1–135:17, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023. Schloss
             Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.135.
        28   Patrice Ossona de Mendez, Michał Pilipczuk, and Sebastian Siebertz. Transducing paths in
             graph classes with unbounded shrubdepth. European Journal of Combinatorics, 123:103660,
             2025. SI: Sparsity in Algorithms, Combinatorics and Logic. doi:10.1016/j.ejc.2022.103660.
        29   Klaus-Peter Podewski and Martin Ziegler. Stable graphs. Fundamenta Mathematicae,
             100(2):101–107, 1978. URL: http://eudml.org/doc/210953.
        30   Detlef Seese. The structure of the models of decidable monadic theories of graphs. Annals of
             Pure and Applied Logic, 53(2):169–195, 1991. doi:10.1016/0168-0072(91)90054-P.
        31   Pierre Simon. A note on stability and nip in one variable. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15799,
             2021. arXiv:2103.15799.
