                                                              Efficiency of Self-Adjusting Heaps
                                                                Corwin Sinnamon∗                  Robert E. Tarjan∗


                                                                                        Abstract
                                                     Since the invention of the pairing heap by Fredman, Sedgewick, Sleator, and
arXiv:2307.02772v2 [cs.DS] 12 Feb 2025




                                                 Tarjan [8], it has been an open question whether this or any other simple “self-
                                                 adjusting” heap supports decrease-key operations in O(log log n) time, where n is
                                                 the number of heap items. Using powerful new techniques, we answer this question
                                                 in the affirmative. We prove that both slim and smooth heaps, recently introduced
                                                 self-adjusting heaps, support heap operations in the following amortized time bounds:
                                                 O(log n) for delete-min and delete, O(log log n) for decrease-key, and O(1) for all other
                                                 heap operations, including insert and meld, where n is the number of heap items that
                                                 are eventually deleted: Items inserted but never deleted do not count in the bounds.
                                                 We also analyze the multipass pairing heap, a variant of pairing heaps. For this heap
                                                 implementation, we obtain the same bounds except for decrease-key, for which our
                                                 bound is O(log log n · log log log n), where again items that are never deleted do not
                                                 count in n. Our bounds significantly improve the best previously known bounds for
                                                 all three data structures. For slim and smooth heaps our bounds are tight, since they
                                                 match lower bounds of Iacono and Özkan [13].


                                         1       Introduction
                                         A heap (or priority queue) is a data structure that stores a set of items, each with a key
                                         selected from a totally ordered key space. Heaps support the following operations:

                                                 make-heap(): Create and return a new, empty heap.

                                                 find-min(H): Return an item of smallest key in heap H, or null if H is empty.

                                                 insert(H, e): Insert item e with predefined key into heap H. Item e must not be in
                                                 any other heap.

                                                 delete-min(H): Delete find-min(H) from H. Heap H must be nonempty before the
                                                 delete-min.
                                            Department of Computer Science, Princeton University. Research partially supported by a gift from
                                             ∗

                                         Microsoft.




                                                                                            1
      meld(H1 , H2 ): Return a heap containing all items in item-disjoint heaps H1 and H2 ,
      destroying H1 and H2 in the process.

      decrease-key(H, e, k): Given a pointer to item e in heap H, and given that the key of
      e is at least k, change the key of e to k.

      delete(H, e): Given a pointer to item e in heap H, delete e from H.

     One can implement delete(H, e) as decrease-key(H, e, −∞) followed by delete-min(H),
where −∞ denotes a dummy key smaller than all those in the key space. We shall assume
this implementation and not further mention delete: In all the data structures we consider
the time bound of delete is the same as that of delete-min to within a constant factor.
     In discussing efficiency bounds for heap operations, we shall denote by n the number of
items in the heap or heaps involved in the operation. To simplify certain bounds we shall
assume that n ≥ 8. We denote log2 max{n, 1} by lg n.
     There is a vast literature on heap implementations. See [1] for a survey. If the only
operations on keys are comparisons, a sequence of n inserts followed by n delete-mins will
sort n numbers. Thus either insert or delete-min must take Ω(lg n) amortized time. Most
of the comparison-based heap implementations in the literature support all heap operations
in O(lg n) time per operation, possibly amortized.
     For certain applications, notably Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm, this bound may
not be good enough. On an n-vertex, m-arc graph, Dijkstra’s algorithm does at most n
inserts and at most n delete-mins, but the number of decrease-key operations can be as
many as m − n + 1. Making decrease-key operations faster can thus speed up Dijkstra’s
algorithm for certain graph densities.
     The Fibonacci heap [9] was designed to be optimal for such an application. In a Fi-
bonacci heap, each delete-min takes O(lg n) amortized time, but every other operation,
including decrease-key, takes O(1) amortized time. Hence Dijkstra’s algorithm runs in
O(m + n lg n) time if implemented using a Fibonacci heap. In fact, the Fibonacci heap sets
the theoretical standard: its amortized bounds are best possible for any comparison-based
heap. In practice, Fibonacci heaps are not especially efficient, however. Their theoretical
efficiency comes from maintaining a certain kind of balance. The time and extra space
needed to maintain balance makes them slower in practice than simpler implementations.
     A natural question, then, is whether there is a heap implementation that has the same
(optimal) amortized bounds as Fibonacci heaps and is simpler as well as faster in prac-
tice. The pairing heap [8] was devised as an answer to this question. The inventors of
this data structure proved that pairing heaps take O(1) time per make-heap and find-min
(both amortized and worst-case) and take O(lg n) amortized time for each other operation.
Iacono [12] later reduced the bound for insert and meld to O(1), a result Sinnamon and Tar-
jan [22] recently
                √
                   simplified. Pettie [20], in work predating Iacono’s, obtained an amortized
bound of O(4 lg lg N ) for insert, meld, and decrease-key, where N is the maximum number
of items ever in a heap, while preserving the O(lg n) bound for delete-min. Sinnamon [21]
simplified and slightly improved√ Pettie’s √
                                               result, reducing the amortized bound for insert,
                                             2 lg lg N
meld, and decrease-key to O( lg lg N2                  ).


                                              2
    The known bounds for decrease-key may be far from tight: The inventors of pairing
heaps conjectured that they have the same amortized efficiency as Fibonacci heaps, which
if true would make decrease-key an O(1)-time operation. But Fredman [7] disproved this
conjecture by showing that pairing heaps and similar data structures need Ω(lg lg n) amor-
tized time per decrease-key if insert and delete-min take O(lg n) amortized time. Whether
the efficiency of pairing heaps matches Fredman’s lower bound remains an open question.
    Nevertheless, the pairing heap is simple, robust, and efficient in practice. It is self-
adjusting: It does not explicitly maintain a “balanced” state, ready to serve any incoming
request quickly at all times, but rather reorganizes itself in a simple, uniform way that
guarantees efficiency in an amortized sense, i.e., over a long sequence of operations. In
general a self-adjusting data structure stores little or no auxiliary information about its
state – it does not need to, since it does not enforce any specific structure. Besides saving
space, self-adjusting heaps are often efficient in practice and easy to implement, as compared
to “balanced” heaps such as Fibonacci heaps [16].
    The question remains: Is there any self-adjusting heap that is both practical and the-
oretically competitive with Fibonacci heaps? Any heap that satisfies the conditions of
Fredman’s lower bounds cannot match the efficiency of Fibonacci heaps on decrease-key
operations. Moreover, an Ω(lg lg n) amortized lower bound for decrease-key was proved by
Iacono and Özkan [13] for the pure heap model, which captures another large class of self-
adjusting heaps. The self-adjusting heap models of Fredman and of Iacono and Özkan do
not cover all the possibilities. In particular, they assume that the decrease-key operation is
done by cutting a node and its subtree from the existing tree, as we describe in Section 2,
but there are other possibilities, such as removing the item from its node and putting it in
a new node, as in hollow heaps [10]. Indeed, the term “self-adjusting heap” does not have
a precise technical definition. Nevertheless, these lower bounds do provide some evidence
that no heap that is intuitively self-adjusting and natural can support decrease-key in O(1)
time.
    Elmasry [4, 5] presented a modification of pairing heaps that does support decrease-
key in O(lg lg n) amortized time. It keeps any items that have undergone a decrease-key
in a buffer, and periodically groups and sorts the buffer items by key to decide how to
restructure the heap. Elmasry’s bound for inserts is O(1); his bound for melds is O(lg lg n).
Elmasry’s heap is not subject to either of the lower bounds, however, and sorting buffer
groups is arguably not “self-adjusting”.
    We ask instead whether there is a self-adjusting heap subject to either Fredman’s or
Iacono and Özkan’s lower bounds that matches these bounds, i.e., that takes O(lg n) time
per delete-min, O(lg lg n) time per decrease-key, and O(1) time for each other heap oper-
ation. Although many heap implementations have been invented and analyzed since the
invention of pairing heaps, no work until ours has answered this question.
    We analyze three self-adjusting heaps: multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps, and smooth
heaps.
    Multipass pairing heaps are a variant of pairing heaps proposed and analyzed in the
original pairing heaps paper [8]. The amortized bounds obtained there are O(1) for make-
heap and find-min, O(lg n · lg lg n/ lg lg lg n) for delete-min, and O(lg n/ lg lg lg n) for insert,



                                                 3
meld, and decrease-key.1 These bounds are not tight: 32 years later, Dorfman, Kaplan,
Kozma, Pettie, and Zwick [3] proved that delete-min takes O(lg n · log∗ n · 2log N ) amortized
                                                                                  ∗


time, where N is the maximum number of items ever in a heap, and log∗ is the iterated
log function. They did not explicitly address the other heap operations, since delete-min
                                                                                         ∗
was their focus, but their potential function yields bounds of O(lg n/(lg lg n)2 · 2log N ) for
insert, meld, and decrease-key, and O(1) for find-min and make-heap.
    We obtain the following amortized time bounds for operations on multipass pairing
heaps: O(lg n) for delete-min, O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) for decrease-key, and O(1) for the other
heap operations. This result almost answers our question: only the bound for decrease-key
differs from the lower bounds, by a factor of lg lg lg n. Whether this factor is inherent or
can be eliminated by a better analysis we leave as an open problem.
    To completely answer our question, we analyze two more-recently invented self-adjusting
heaps, smooth heaps and slim heaps. Smooth heaps were invented by Kozma and Sara-
nurak [15] as one result of their study of a duality between heaps and binary search trees
(BST’s), in which they showed that an execution of a sequence of operations on a binary
search tree corresponds to a dual execution of a related sequence of heap operations, with
the two sequences taking the same time to within a constant factor. This duality maps the
greedy BST algorithm to the smooth heap. The greedy BST algorithm has many if not all
of the properties of the splay algorithm [2, 6, 17, 18, 19], but unlike splay it is not practical
to implement. On the other hand, smooth heaps are simple, as we shall see. Some results
about the greedy BST algorithm transfer to smooth heaps through the duality, but the
correspondence is limited to the sorting mode, in which the heap operations are a sequence
of insertions followed by a sequence of delete-mins.
    The slim heap, a close variant of the smooth heap, was introduced by Hartmann, Kozma,
Sinnamon, and Tarjan [11]. They extended smooth heaps and slim heaps to support the
entire repertoire of heap operations, and they did a direct analysis of both data structures,
obtaining amortized bounds of O(lg n) for delete-min and decrease-key and O(1) for the
other heap operations. They also showed that Elmasry’s mechanism can be used in both
data structures to reduce the amortized time for decrease-key to O(lg lg n). Like pairing
heaps, the implementations that use Elmasry’s idea are not subject to Iacono and Özkan’s
lower bound.
    We show that both slim heaps and smooth heaps without the Elmasry mechanism
answer our question in the affirmative: Both take O(lg n) time per delete-min, O(lg lg n)
time per decrease-key, and O(1) time for each other heap operation. These data structures
are subject to Iacono and Özkan’s lower bound, and are the first data structures in their
model to match their lower bounds for all operations.
    Our analytical tools are interesting in their own right. We adapt and extend an idea of
Iacono [12] that allows us to reduce the amortized time per insert and meld to O(1). More
significantly, we use a potential function based on one used in Pettie’s analysis of pairing
heaps [20], but modified to grow much more slowly. The use of this potential function in a
novel analysis allows us to significantly reduce the amortized time bound for decrease-key.
    Table 1 contains a summary of known bounds for pairing heaps, multipass pairing heaps,
   1
    The paper [8] only claims O(lg n lg lg n/ lg lg lg n) for each operation, but the potential function used
there yields the better bounds we have stated.



                                                     4
slim heaps, and smooth heaps, including our new results.
    An additional benefit of our analysis is that in our bounds we can take n to be the
number of items in the heap or heaps that are eventually deleted. That is, items inserted
but never deleted do not count, except for a cost of O(1) per insertion of such an item.
    Our paper is a combination and significant revision of two conference papers [23, 24].
In addition to this introduction, our paper contains ten sections. Section 2 presents a
framework for heap implementations that encompasses all the data structures we consider,
and many others. Section 3 presents pairing heaps, multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps,
and smooth heaps as instances of the canonical framework. Section 4 summarizes the
terminology and definitions used in our analysis. Section 5 outlines the proof structure
we use in the analysis of each of the heaps. Section 6 contains a few central lemmas that
apply to all three heaps. Sections 7, 8, and 9 analyze multipass pairing, slim, and smooth
heaps, respectively. Section 10 extends our results to lazy (forest) versions of the three
data structures. Section 11 contains some concluding remarks and open problems.


2    A Canonical Heap Framework
All the heap implementations we study, and many others, are instances of a canonical heap
framework. This framework represents a heap by a rooted tree whose nodes are the heap
items. That is, the data structure is endogenous [25]. We denote by v.key the key of heap
node v. The tree is heap-ordered by key: If v is the parent of w, v.key ≤ w.key. Thus the
root of the tree is a node of minimum key. Access to the tree is via the root, so a find-min
takes O(1) time.
    Heap-ordered trees are modified by links and cuts. A link of the roots of two node-
disjoint trees combines the two trees into one by making the root of smaller key the parent
of the root of larger key, breaking a tie arbitrarily. The new parent is the winner of the
link; the new child is the loser of the link. We denote by vw a link of two roots v and w
won by v and lost by w. We use the term “link” to denote the new parent-child pair vw
as well as the operation of making w a child of v.
    A cut of a child w breaks the link between w and its parent, say v. This breaks the tree
containing v and w into two trees, one containing w and all its descendants in the original
tree, the other containing all nodes in the original tree that are not descendants of w.
    Given an appropriate tree representation [8], a link or cut takes O(1) time.
    The canonical framework implements the heap operations as follows:

     make-heap(): Create and return a new, empty tree.

     find-min(H): If H is nonempty, return its root; otherwise, return null.

     insert(H, e): If H is nonempty, link e with the root of H; if H is empty, make e the
     root of H.

     meld(H1 , H2 ): If H1 or H2 is empty, return the other; if both are nonempty, link their
     roots and return the resulting tree.

                                             5
          Heap               delete-min/delete          decrease-key            insert/meld

      Fibonacci [9]               O(lg n)                    O(1)                   O(1)

       Pairing [8]                O(lg n)                   O(lg n)                O(lg n)

       Pairing [12]               O(lg n)                   O(lg n)                 O(1)
      Pairing [4, 5]                                                               
                                  O(lg n)                 O(lg lg n)           O(1) O(lg lg n)
 (variant decrease-key)
                                                               √                     √
       Pairing [20]               O(lg n)                O(22 lg lg N )         O(22 lg lg N )
                                                     √           √           √            √
       Pairing [21]               O(lg n)          O( lg lg N2 2 lg lg N ) O( lg lg N2 2 lg lg N )
                                                                                        
                                  lg n·lg lg n              lg n                      lg n
  Multipass pairing [8]      O lg lg lg n              O lg lg lg n            O lg lg lg n
                                                                 ∗                      ∗  
                                                           n·2log N              lg n·2log N
  Multipass pairing [3] O(lg n · log∗ n · 2log N )
                                               ∗
                                                     O lg lg 2
                                                               lg n
                                                                             O      lg2 lg n

    Multipass pairing
                                  O(lg n)            O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n)        O(1)
      [this work]

  Slim & Smooth [11]              O(lg n)                   O(lg n)                 O(1)
  Slim & Smooth [11]
                                  O(lg n)                 O(lg lg n)                O(1)
 (variant decrease-key)
    Slim & Smooth
                                  O(lg n)                 O(lg lg n)                O(1)
       [this work]

Table 1: New and previous bounds for self-adjusting heaps. The bounds for Fibonacci and pairing
heaps are included for comparison. All bounds are amortized. Here n denotes the number of items
in the heap at the time of the operation and N denotes the maximum number of items ever in
a heap. For the bounds in this work, n may be decreased to the number of items in the heap
that will eventually be deleted. The find-min and make-heap operations take constant time in
all cases. The heaps labeled “variant decrease-key” use Elmasry’s buffered sorting method for
decrease-key [4, 5]. Excluding these heaps and Fibonacci heaps, if insert and delete-min take
O(lg n) amortized time in a self-adjusting heap, then decrease-key must take Ω(lg lg n) amortized
time [7, 13].




                                                 6
      decrease-key(H, e, k): Change the key of e to k. If e is not the root of H, cut e from
      its parent and link e with the root of H.

      delete-min(H): Delete find-min(H) from H. This makes each child of the deleted
      root into a new root. Repeatedly link two of these new roots until only one remains.
    The only flexibility in the canonical framework is in the algorithm for linking roots in
delete-mins. The self-adjusting heaps we study determine which links to do by maintaining
each set of children as an ordered list. When discussing such a list, we shall use left and
right to mean “toward the front of the list” and “toward the back of the list,” respectively.
With the exception of certain links done during delete-min operations in smooth heaps (as
we discuss in the next section), each link makes the loser the new leftmost child of the
winner. We call such a link a one-sided link. If all links are one-sided, the children of a
node are in decreasing order by link time, the leftmost child being the latest.
    In a delete-min, deletion of the root makes its list of children into a list of roots. The
heaps we study link only adjacent roots on this list, removing the loser and leaving the
winner in its current position on the list. We call a link vw done during a delete-min a
left or right link, respectively, if the loser w is left or right of the winner v on the root list
before the link. Links done during insertions, melds, and decrease-keys are neither left nor
right.
    The canonical framework as we have presented it is the eager or tree framework. An
alternative is the lazy or forest framework, used for example in the original version of
Fibonacci heaps. In this framework, a heap is not a single tree but a set of trees, with
the roots stored in a circular list accessed via a root of minimum key, the min-root. An
insertion into a nonempty heap does not do a link but makes the new node into a one-node
tree and adds it to the root list. A meld of two nonempty trees catenates their root lists. A
decrease-key of a child w cuts w from its parent and adds w to the list of roots. In each case
the operation also updates the min-root. A delete-min deletes the min-root, catenates its
list of children with the root list remaining after deletion of the min-root, and repeatedly
links pairs of roots on the root list until only one remains.
    The versions of slim and smooth heaps analyzed in [11] use the lazy framework, but
we shall study the eager versions, since their implementation and analysis are simpler.
Our bounds for multipass pairing, slim, and smooth heaps also hold for the lazy versions,
as we discuss in Section 10. In general one can modify a heap implementation in the
lazy framework to produce one in the eager framework and vice-versa, although this may
require redefining how linking is done in a delete-min, and it affects the efficiency of the
heap operations. For example, there is an eager implementation of Fibonacci heaps [14],
but it requires doing “unbalanced” links as well as balanced ones. The lower bound models
of Fredman [7] and Iacono and Özkan [13] encompass both the eager and the lazy framework
but place constraints on the links that are allowed in delete-min operations.


3     Self-Adjusting Heaps
The heaps we study are all instances of the canonical framework, differing only in the
algorithm by which they do links during a delete-min, and in how the link operation is

                                                7
                  (a) Pairing Heap                                                                 (b) Multipass Pairing Heap
                   6       3       7           1               4           5           2            6   3       7       1           4       5           2

                  pairing pass                                                                     pairing pass
                           3                           1                   4           2                    3               1               4           2
                           6               7                   5                                        6           7               5

                  assembly pass                                                                    pairing pass
                                                                                                                                1                   2
                          3     1                                              2
                                                                                                                3       7                   4
                           6               7                       4
                                                                                                            6                       5
                                                       5
                                                                                           1
                                                       3                                           pairing pass
                                                                       2           7                                                            1
                                               6               4                                                        2       3       7
                                                           5
                                                                                           1                    4       6
                                                       3               2           7                        5
                                               6               4
                                                           5




                  (c) Slim Heap                                                                    (d) Smooth Heap
                   6           3   7               1           4           5           2            6   3       7       1           4           5       2


                               3                                                                        3
                                   7               1           4           5           2                        7       1           4           5       2
                   6                                                                                6

                                               1                                                                        1
                                                                               4       2                                                    4       2
                                   3                                                                        3
                                                                       5                                                            5
                       7       6                                                                   6                7

                                                                           1                                            1
                                           2                                                                                                        2
                                   4                           3                                            3                               4
                               5       7       6                                                   6                7               5


Figure 1: Linking during delete-min, after the original root is deleted, for the pairing heap (a),
multipass pairing heap (b), slim heap (c), and smooth heap (d). The circles represent nodes and
the numbers indicate their keys. In (c) and (d), the state of the heap is shown after every two or
three links. Smooth heaps do stable links (explained in this section), so the losers of links in (d)
are positioned on the left or the right of the winner, according to their relative order before the
link.


implemented. We specify this algorithm for each heap implementation. We include pairing
heaps for reference.
    The pairing heap links roots during a delete-min in two passes. The first pass, pairing,
links the roots on the root list in adjacent pairs, the first with the second, the third with
the fourth, and so on. If there is an odd number of roots, the rightmost root is not linked
during the pairing pass. The second pass, assembly, repeatedly links the rightmost root
with its left neighbor until only one root remains. See Figure 1(a).

                                                                                               8
    The multipass pairing heap links roots during a delete-min by doing repeated pairing
passes until only one root is left. See Figure 1(b).
    Slim and smooth heaps both link roots during a delete-min by doing leftmost locally
maximum linking: Find the leftmost three consecutive roots u, v, w on the root list such
that v.key ≥ max{u.key, w.key}, and link v with whichever of u and w has larger key.
Repeat until there is only one root. If u and w have the same key, break the tie by
linking v with u. As special cases, if v is the leftmost root, w is its right neighbor, and
v.key ≥ w.key, link v and w; if all the roots are in strictly increasing order by key, link the
rightmost two roots. The two special cases are equivalent to adding leftmost and rightmost
dummy roots, each with key −∞, and doing leftmost locally maximum linking until one
non-dummy root remains. See Figure 1(c) and (d).
    It is straightforward to do leftmost locally maximum linking in O(1) time and at most
two comparisons per link [15]: After deleting the original root, initialize the current root to
be the leftmost root on the root list. If the current root is not a local maximum, replace the
current root by its right neighbor; if it is, link it to its neighbor of larger key and replace
the current root by the winner of the link. Repeat until only one root remains.

Remark 3.1. One can generalize leftmost locally maximum linking to allow arbitrary lo-
cally maximum links: Given a root whose key is larger than those of its neighbors, link
it with whichever neighbor has larger key. This works as long as ties in keys are broken
consistently. See [11].

     The only difference between slim and smooth heaps is in how they maintain the order
of children when doing links during delete-min operations. Slim heaps do one-sided links,
defined in the previous section: The loser of a link during a delete-min becomes the new
leftmost child of the winner. Smooth heaps do stable links: The loser of a link during a
delete-min becomes the new leftmost or rightmost child of the winner if the loser was left
or right of the winner on the root list, respectively. See Figure 2. Pairing heaps, multipass
pairing heaps, Fibonacci heaps, and many other heap implementations do one-sided links
(although in Fibonacci heaps and similar “balanced” heap implementations, links are not
determined by order on the root list but by balance information, so the order of children
is irrelevant). In both slim and smooth heaps, each link done during an insertion, meld, or
decrease-key is one-sided.
                             Slim Heaps                                               Smooth Heaps


               more recent                                          more recent                           more recent
                                                                                         less recent
                                                  less recent




                intermixed left and right links                          left links                    right links


Figure 2: Linking in slim and smooth heaps. In a slim heap, the loser of a link becomes the
leftmost child of the winner. In a smooth heap, the loser becomes the leftmost or rightmost child
of the winner, depending on whether the link is left or right.




                                                                9
4    Terminology
Our presentation of the analysis of these data structures uses quite a bit of terminology,
much of which we introduce here. The following definitions apply to all the heaps we study,
except as noted. We shall repeat these definitions as we use them.

     A node is temporary if it is eventually deleted, permanent otherwise.

     A link is an insertion link if it is done during an insertion or meld, a decrease-key link
     if it is done during a decrease-key, a deletion link if it is done during a delete-min.

     A deletion link vw is a left link if w precedes v on the root list before the link, a right
     link otherwise. Insertion and decrease-key links are neither left nor right.

     A link is a d-link if it is cut by a delete-min, a k-link if it is cut by a decrease-key, an
     f-link if it is never cut. (The f stands for “final”.)

     A link is real if its winner and loser are both temporary and it is a d-link, phantom
     otherwise.

     A child node is a real child if it is connected to its parent by a real link, a phantom child
     otherwise. Every permanent child node is a phantom child. Each time a temporary
     node loses a link, it becomes a real or phantom child, depending on whether the link
     it lost is a d-link or a k-link: A temporary node cannot lose an f-link.

     A link done during pairing pass i of a delete-min in a multipass pairing heap is a
     pass-i link.

     A child node in a smooth heap is a left child if the link it lost to its parent is an
     insertion, decrease-key, or left link, a right child if the link it lost to its parent is a
     right link.

     If w is a temporary node, its real subtree is the partial subtree induced by the set of
     descendants of w (including w) that are connected to w by a path of real links.

     If w is a temporary node, its size w.s is the number of nodes in its real subtree.
     Permanent nodes have no size. The size of a temporary node changes only when it
     wins a real link.

     If w is a temporary node, it has a mass w.m. For multipass pairing heaps and slim
     heaps, we define w.m as follows: If w is a phantom child or a root not in the middle
     of a delete-min, w.m = w.s. If w is a real child of a temporary node v in a multipass
     pairing heap or a slim heap, w.m is the size of v just after link vw was done. If w
     is a root in the middle of a delete-min in a multipass pairing heap or a slim heap,

                                               10
       w.m is w.s plus the sum of the sizes of all the temporary roots to its right on the
       root list, with certain exceptions depending on the type of heap. We specify these
       exceptions in Sections 7 and 8. We define the mass of temporary nodes in a smooth
       heap in Section 9. Permanent nodes have no mass. The mass of a temporary node
       can change, but in a multipass pairing heap or a slim heap the mass of a node changes
       only when the node wins or loses a real link, or its parent is deleted by a delete-min.
       In smooth heaps, masses can change for other reasons, as we discuss in Section 9.

       If w is a temporary node, the rank w.r of w is lg lg(w.m/w.s).

       For multipass pairing heaps, if w is a temporary node and b a nonnegative integer,
       the b-reduced rank w.r(b) of w is max{w, r − b, 0} = lg(lg(w.m/w.s)/2b).

       If vw is a real link, then v.rw and v.rw′ and w.rv and w.rv′ are the rank of v before
       and after the link, and the rank of w before and after the link, respectively. This
       notation does not distinguish between the winner and the loser of the link, but the
       context will provide the distinction.

       Let vw be a real deletion link. The winner link of vw is the last link lost by v before
       it wins vw. This is the (unique) link uv cut by the delete-min that does vw. Since u
       and v are both temporary and uv is cut by a delete-min, uv is real.

       Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The link rank of vw is v.ru − u.rv′ ,
       the rank of v just before uv is done (which happened sometime before the deletion of
       u) minus the rank of u just after uv is done.2

       Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The w-shift of vw is v.rw′ − u.rw′ ,
       the change in the rank of the parent of w resulting from cutting uw and doing vw.

       Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The v-shift of vw is v.ru − v.rw′ ,
       the net decrease in the rank of v from just before link uv was done until just after
       vw was done.

       Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The u-shift of vw is u.rw′ − u.rv′ ,
       the rank of u just after uw was done minus the rank of u just after uv was done.

    Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The following equality, which we
call the link-rank equality, relates the link rank, the w-shift, the v-shift, and the u-shift of
vw:

                  v.ru − u.rv′ = (v.rw′ − u.rw′ ) + (v.ru − v.rw′ ) + (u.rw′ − u.rv′ )
   2
    This definition of link rank differs from the one in our conference papers [23, 24], as does the next
definition, of w-shift. The new definitions allow us to simplify the analysis a bit.


                                                   11
    That is, the rank of vw equals its w-shift plus its v-shift plus its u-shift. The equality
follows by canceling equal terms on the right-hand side.
    If f is a function of n, we use the terminology “f (n) per delete-min” to mean the sum
of f (ni ) over the delete-min operations, where ni the number of temporary nodes in the
heap just before the i-th delete-min. Similarly, “f (n) per decrease-key” is the sum of f (ni )
over all the decrease-key operations, where ni is the number of temporary nodes in the
heap during the i-th decrease-key, and “f (n) per k-link” is the sum of f (ni ) over all the
k-links, where ni is the number of temporary nodes in the heap at the time the i-th k-link
was done.


5    Overview of the Analysis
To bound the total time of a sequence of heap operations, it is enough to count the number
of links they do, since each link takes O(1) time, and the time spent per operation is O(1)
plus at most a constant times the number of links it does. The number of melds that
do a link is at most the number of insertions that do not do a link, since each link done
by a meld reduces the number of non-empty heaps by one, and the only way to create a
non-empty heap is to do an insertion that does not do a link. It follows that the number
of insertion links is at most the number of insertions. Thus the total number of links is at
most one per insertion plus one per decrease-key plus the total number of deletion links.
Hence it suffices to count the total number of deletion links. We denote this number by d.
    In stating bounds we denote by n the number of temporary nodes in the heap or heaps
undergoing an operation. A benefit of our analysis is that our bounds depend only on n,
not on the total number of nodes. That is, nodes that are inserted but never deleted do
not count in the bounds. To simplify the statement of certain bounds we assume n ≥ 8:
Any operation on a heap or heaps with fewer than 8 nodes takes O(1) time, and all sizes,
masses, and ranks in such a heap or heaps are bounded by a constant.
    In the rest of this section we outline the ideas in our analysis. The details differ for
each type of heap, but the high-level approach is the same. Our overview is necessarily
inaccurate, since each type of heap requires adaptations in the general approach.
    There are two parts. The first, simpler part is to show that it suffices to count real
deletion links, or in the case of multipass pairing heaps just a subset of these links. The
second, much more complicated part is to bound the number of such links. For this we use
node and link ranks. Ultimately we charge each real deletion link to some heap operation
or to some change or changes in the sum of node ranks. For this to work we need to bound
the sum of the magnitudes (absolute values) of the changes in node ranks. Obtaining this
bound is complicated. We shall state the bound when we need it but postpone its proof to
the end of the analysis.
    Central to our analysis are link ranks. We shall prove that every link rank is non-
negative and that the sum of all link ranks is at most our desired bound on real deletion
links. We do the latter indirectly, by bounding the sums of the w-shifts, v-shifts, and u-
shifts of the real deletion links and applying the link-rank equality. The bound on the sum
of link ranks implies that the number of real deletion links with large rank (at least 1) is
within our desired bound.


                                              12
   We shall also prove that each link of small rank corresponds either to a node of small
rank existing at a certain time, a number we can bound, or to a decrease of at least 1 in
a node rank. The number of such decreases is within our desired bound, by our bound on
the sum of the magnitudes of node-rank changes.
   We do these steps in the following order:

Step 1: We bound the sum of the w-shifts. This step does not depend on the type of heap.

Step 2: We show that it suffices to count real deletion links, or in the case of multipass
     pairing heaps to count a subset of these.

Step 3: We show that all link ranks are non-negative.

Step 4: We bound the number of real deletion links of small rank.

Step 5: We bound the sum of link ranks, by separately bounding the sum of the v-shifts
     and the sum of the u-shifts. This step uses our bound on the sum of the magnitudes
     of node-rank changes, or in the case of multipass pairing heaps a more general bound.

Step 6: We prove our bound on the sum of the magnitudes of node-rank changes, or in the
     case of multipass pairing heaps a more general bound.

    To do Step 6, we observe that node ranks, like link ranks, are always non-negative, and
the sum of node ranks is initially zero, since initially there are no nodes. It follows that
the sum of the node-rank increases is always at least as large as the sum of the node-rank
decreases, and hence that the sum of the magnitudes of the node-rank changes is at most
twice the sum of the node-rank increases. We bound the sum of these increases.
    We proceed with the details. We begin with two results having to do with time-shifting,
whose proofs do not depend on the type of heap. The rest of our analysis depends on the
type of heap. We analyze multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps, and smooth heaps in turn, in
Sections 7, 8, and 9 respectively. In our analysis of multipass pairing heaps, we generalize
the notion of node rank. This allows us to reduce the effect of the changes in node ranks
caused by pass-i links as i increases. In our analysis of slim heaps, we extend a different
notion, that of size. This allows us to bound the effect of phantom links. To analyze smooth
heaps, we split the treap formed during a delete-min into three parts: a left side, a right
side, and a central path. We apply the analysis of slim heaps separately to the left side
and to the right side, and we apply a new analysis to the central path.


6    Time-Shifting Lemmas
Our first time-shifting lemma allows us to shift the cost of each k-link from the time the
k-link is done to the later time when it is cut by a decrease-key:
Lemma 6.1. In any sequence of heap operations starting with no heaps, the quantity lg lg n
per k-link is at most lg lg n per decrease-key plus 3 per delete-min.

                                            13
Proof. We use a credit argument. We allocate lg lg n credits to each decrease-key and 3 to
each delete-min and show that the total number of credits is at least lg lg n per k-link.
    Let vw be a k-link. Let n′ and n be the number of nodes in the heap containing w just
after vw is done and when vw is cut, respectively. We use the lg lg n credits allocated to
the decrease-key that cuts vw to partially or fully cover the lg lg n′ credits needed by link
vw. This suffices unless n′ > n, in which case we need an additional lg lg n′ − lg lg n credits.
These we obtain from the credits allocated to the delete-min operations.
    A delete-min on a heap of size n′′ distributes its three credits equally among the nodes
in the heap after the delete-min, 3/(n′′ − 1) to each. From the time vw is done until the
                                      Pn′ −1
time vw is cut, w receives at least 3 i=n     1/i ≥ 2(lg n′ − lg n) ≥ lg lg n′ − lg lg n credits,
where the last inequality holds because the derivative of 2 lg x is at least that of lg lg x for
x ≥ 0. These credits cover the remainder of the credits needed by link vw.
    Our second time-shifting lemma bounds the sum of the w-shifts of the real deletion
links. Its proof uses the time-shifting idea in the proof of Lemma 6.1, an idea that we shall
also use later. Recall from Section 4 that if vw is a real deletion link with winner link uv,
its w-shift is v.rw′ − u.rw′ , the change in the rank of the parent of w resulting from cutting
uw and doing vw.

Lemma 6.2. In any sequence of operations on multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps, or
smooth heaps starting with no heaps, the sum of the w-shifts of all real deletion links is at
most lg lg n per decrease-key plus lg lg n + 3 per delete-min.

Proof. Let w be a temporary node. Consider an interval I from the time w is a root not in
the middle of a delete-min until it next becomes a root not in the middle of a delete-min.
We sum the w-shifts of the real deletion links lost by w during I, and then sum over all w,
I pairs.
     The first link vw lost by w during I is an insertion or k-link, which makes the rank of v
zero, since just after the link the size and mass of v are equal. During the rest of interval I,
node w can change parent, but only during a delete-min in which it loses a link. It remains
a real child, except temporarily in the middle of a delete-min, until it is the last remaining
root in a delete-min, ending I, or it loses a phantom deletion link. Once w loses a phantom
link vw, it does not change parent until vw is cut by a decrease-key. This ends I, since it
makes w a root not in the middle of a delete-min. Let uw, vw, and xw be three consecutive
links lost by w, with vw and xw real deletion links. Then uw is real and is the winner link
of vw and vw is the winner link of xw. The w-shifts of vw and xw are v.rw′ − u.rw′ and
x.rw′ − v.rw′ , respectively. Their sum telescopes to x.rw′ − u.rw′ . More generally, the sum of
the w-shifts of the real deletion links lost by w during I telescopes to a difference of two
node ranks, whose value is at most lg lg n′ , where n′ is the size of the heap containing w
when w loses its last real link during I.
     To finish the proof of the lemma we use the time-shifting idea in the proof of Lemma 6.1.
We allocate lg lg n credits to each decrease-key and lg lg n + 3 to each delete-min, and show
that the total number of credits is at least lg lg n′ per triple w, I, n′ , where n′ is the size of
the heap containing w when w loses its last real link during I.
     Given a triple w, I, n′ , let n be the size of the heap containing w when I ends. We use
lg lg n of the credits allocated to the heap operation that ends I to partially or fully cover

                                                14
the lg lg n′ credits needed by the triple. This suffices unless n′ > n, in which case we need
an additional lg lg n′ − lg lg n credits. These we obtain from the extra 3 credits allocated
to each delete-min operation.
     A delete-min on a heap of size n′′ distributes its extra three credits equally among the
nodes in the heap after the delete-min, 3/(n′′ − 1) to each. From the time w loses its last
                                                                P ′ −1
real link during I until the end of I, w receives at least 3 ni=n      1/i ≥ 2(lg n′ − lg n) ≥
lg lg n′ − lg lg n credits, which cover the remainder of the credits needed by the triple.


7     Analysis of Multipass Pairing Heaps
7.1    Basic results
Now we turn to the analysis of multipass pairing heaps. Recall that they do repeated pairing
passes to link the roots in a delete-min. We begin with three simple results. First, during
a delete-min, the number of links remaining to be done after pairing pass i is exponentially
small in i.

Lemma 7.1. Suppose a delete-min in a multipass pairing heap does a total of k links. Then
the number of links remaining to be done after the first i passes is at most k/2i .

Proof. Suppose there are j +1 roots at the beginning of pairing pass i. Then the delete-min
does a total of j more links. Pass i does ⌈j/2⌉ of these links, leaving ⌊j/2⌋ still to be done.
The lemma follows by induction on i.
    Second, it is enough to bound a subset of the real deletion links. We call a deletion
link primary if it is a real pass-2 link whose winner link is a pass-1, pass-2, or pass-3 link.
Let p be the number of primary links. Recall from Section 5 that we denote by d the total
number of deletion links.

Lemma 7.2. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
d is at most 8p plus 20 per insertion plus 16 per decrease-key.

Proof. Consider a delete-min that deletes root u. Removal of u makes its list of children
into a list of new roots, which are then linked in pairing passes. Group these new roots into
sets of four consecutive nodes, leaving at most three roots ungrouped. The first pairing
pass does two links of pairs of nodes within the group. The second pairing pass links the
winners of these two pass-1 links. Let vw and xy be the two pass-1 links (won by v and x,
respectively), and let vx be the pass-2 link (won by v). We associate these three links with
the group. If v is not the one root that remains at the end of the delete-min, it also loses
a link in a later pairing pass. We associate this link with the group also.
    We charge these three or four links to a particular event, as follows. Recall from Section 4
that link vx is real if v and x are both temporary (eventually deleted) and vx is a d-link
(cut by a delete-min); otherwise vx is phantom. Suppose vx is phantom. If v and x are
temporary, vx must be a k-link (cut by a decrease-key). In this case we charge the three
or four links to the decrease-key that cuts vx. The total charge incurred in this way is at
most four per decrease-key that cuts a link between two temporary nodes. Suppose v is

                                              15
permanent: The argument is symmetric if x is permanent. The link vw must be a k-link
or an f-link (never cut), since a permanent node cannot win a d-link. If vw is a k-link, we
charge the three or four links to the decrease-key that cuts it. The total charge incurred
is at most four per decrease-key that cuts a link won by a permanent node. If vw is an
f-link, then w must be permanent, and we charge the three or four links to the insertion of
w. The total charge incurred is at most four per insertion of a permanent node.
     The remaining possibility is that vx is real. Let uv be the winner link of vx. If uv is a
pass-1, pass-2, or pass-3 deletion link, then vx is primary and we charge the three or four
links to vx. The total charge incurred is at most 4 per primary link. Otherwise, we charge
the three or four links to uv, which is either an insertion link, a decrease-key link, or a
deletion link that occurs after pass 3 of a delete-min. Since v only wins one pass-2 link
(namely vx), uv is charged only once in this way. The total charge is at most 4 per insertion
of a temporary node plus 4 per decrease-key plus 4d/8, since the number of deletion links
occurring after pass 3 of a delete-min is at most d/8 by Lemma 7.1.
     In each delete-min, there are at most two links that are not associated with a group.
We charge such non-associated links to the insertion of the node deleted by the delete-min,
which is temporary. The total charge incurred in this way is at most two per insertion of
a temporary node.
     Adding our bounds on charges, we find that the total charge, which equals d, is at
most 10 per insertion plus 8 per decrease-key plus 4 per primary link plus d/2. The lemma
follows.
    Our bounds on primary links will include small additive terms in d, the total number
of deletion links. To handle such terms, we restate Lemma 7.2 as follows:
Corollary 7.3. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
d is at most (64/3) max{0, p − 3d/64} plus 80 per insertion plus 64 per decrease-key.
Proof. We consider two cases. If p < 3d/32, then by Lemma 7.2 d is at most 3d/4 plus 20
per insertion plus 16 per decrease-key, which implies that d is at most 80 per insertion plus
64 per decrease-key. If on the other hand p ≥ 3d/32, then (64/3)p ≥ 2d, which implies
d ≤ (64/3)(p − 3d/64). Adding the bounds for the two cases gives the corollary.
Remark 7.4. This proof and subsequent ones do not minimize the constant factors, they
only establish that appropriate constant factors exist.
    Our third and final result of this section is that link ranks are non-negative. Let us
recall the definitions from Section 4 that are relevant to this result, and in the process
provide the complete definition of masses in a multipass pairing heap.
    Let w be a temporary node. The real subtree of w is the partial subtree induced by the
set of descendants of w (including w) that are connected to w by a path of real links. The
size w.s of w is the number of nodes in its real subtree.
    The mass w.m of w depends on whether w is a child or a root, and if a root whether it
is a root in the middle of a deletion. If w is a phantom child or a root not in the middle of
a deletion, its mass is its size. If w is a real child of a node v, its mass is the size of v just
after link vw was done. This is the sum of the sizes of v and w just before the link was
done. If w is a root in the middle of a delete-min, its mass is the sum of its size and those

                                               16
of all the temporary roots to its right on the root list, with the following exception: Just
before a root w loses a real right link to the root v to its left on the root list, the mass of
w steps up to the mass of v (which is the same before and after the link).
    Finally, the rank w.r of w is lg lg(w.m/w.s).
    Let vw be a real deletion link done during the delete-min that deletes root u. This
delete-min cuts the winner link uv of vw. The link rank of vw is v.ru − u.rv′ , the rank of v
just before uv is done minus the rank of u just after uv is done. If uv is a right link, v.ru
is the rank of v after the step-up in the mass of v that occurs just before the link.
    Step-ups guarantee that link ranks are non-negative:
Lemma 7.5. In a multipass pairing heap, every link rank is non-negative.
Proof. Let vw be a real pairing link with winner link uv. The link rank of vw is v.ru − u.rv′ .
If uv is an insertion or decrease-key link, u has rank 0 after the link, so v.ru − u.rv′ ≥ 0.
Suppose uv is a deletion link. Let unprimed and primed sizes and masses denote values just
before and just after the link, respectively. If uv is a left link, v.m = u.m′ and v.s ≤ u.s′ ,
so v.ru − u.rv′ = lg lg(v.m/v.s) − lg lg(u.m′ /u.s′) ≥ 0. If uv is a right link, u.m = u.m′ and
u.s′ = u.s + v.s. The step-up just before the link makes the mass of v equal to u.m′ , so
v.ru − u.rv′ = lg lg(u.m′ /v.s) − lg lg(u.m′ /(u.s + v.s)) ≥ 0.

7.2    Small-rank links
The next step in our analysis is to bound the number of primary links of small rank. We
begin by deriving a bound on the number of roots of small rank at certain times.
Lemma 7.6. At the beginning of any pairing pass in a delete-min in a multipass pairing
heap, the number of roots with rank at most 1 is at most (5/2) lg n + 1.
Proof. Consider the beginning of some pairing pass, and let v and w be temporary roots
with w the next temporary root right of v. Then v.m − v.s = w.m. If v.r ≤ 1, v.m/v.s ≤ 4,
so v.s ≥ v.m/4, which implies v.m ≥ (4/3)w.m. It follows that if there are i roots on the
root list with rank at most 1, (4/3)i−1 ≤ n. Hence i ≤ (lg n)/ lg(4/3)+1 ≤ (5/2) lg n+1.
Corollary 7.7. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
for any fixed i the number of real pass-i links in which the winner or loser has rank at most
1 just before the link is at most (5/2) lg n + 1 per delete-min.
Proof. During a pairing pass, the rank of a node does not decrease until it participates in
a pairing link. Hence a node with rank at most one just before it wins or loses a pairing
link had rank at most one at the beginning of the pairing pass. The corollary is immediate
from Lemma 7.6.
   Next we give a condition that allows us to charge certain real deletion links of rank less
than 1 to decreases in node ranks.
Lemma 7.8. In a multipass pairing heap, let vw be a real deletion link with winner link
uv. Suppose the link rank of vw is less than 1. If both u and v have positive rank just after
uv is done, then v.r ′ ≤ v.r − 1, where unprimed and primed variables take their values just
before uv is done (after the step-up if there is one) and just after uv is done, respectively.

                                              17
Proof. Since u and v have positive ranks just after they are linked, uv is a deletion link.
Furthermore, since link uv (after the step-up in the mass of v if there is one) does not
increase the rank of v, we can replace lg by log2 in the formulas for u.r ′ , v.r, and v.r ′. Since
                     ′
v.r − u.r ′ < 1, 2u.r > 2v.r−1 = 2v.r /2. Suppose uv is a left link. Then
   ′                                                                                    ′
2v.r = log2 ((u.s + v.s)/v.s) = log2 (v.m/v.s) − log2 ((v.m/(u.s + v.s)) = 2v.r − 2u.r ≤ 2v.r /2

Hence v.r ′ ≤ v.r − 1. Suppose uv is a right link. Then
   ′                                                                                    ′
2v.r = log2 ((u.s + v.s)/v.s) = log2 (u.m′ /v.s) − log2 (u.m′ /(u.s + v.s)) = 2v.r − 2u.r ≤ 2v.r /2

Hence v.r ′ ≤ v.r − 1 in this case also.
   Corollary 7.7 and Lemma 7.8 combine to relate the number of primary links of rank less
than 1 to the sum of the magnitudes of all node rank decreases that occur during pairing
passes 1 through 3 of some delete-min.

Lemma 7.9. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
the number of primary links of rank less than 1 is at most the sum of the magnitudes of all
node-rank decreases plus (15/2) lg n + 3 per delete-min.

Proof. Let vw with winner link uv be a primary link with link rank less than 1. Since
v wins only one pass-2 pairing link during the deletion of u, namely vw, vw is uniquely
determined by uv. Since vw is primary, uv is a pass-1, pass-2, or pass-3 link. If either u or
v has rank less than 1 just before uv is done, we charge vw to uv. By Corollary 7.7, the
total of such charges is at most (5/2) lg n + 1 per delete-min for each of pairing passes 1
through 3, for a total of (15/2) lg n + 3 per delete-min.
   The remaining possibility is that both u and v have rank at least 1 just before uv is
done. In this case doing uv reduces the rank of v by at least 1, by Lemma 7.8. We charge
vw to this node rank decrease.
   Adding these bounds gives the lemma.
   To obtain an absolute bound on the number of primary links of rank less than 1, we
need a bound on the sum of the node-rank decreases. We state a bound on the sum of the
magnitudes of the node-rank changes. We shall give a more general bound in Section 7.3
and prove it in Section 7.4.

Theorem 7.10. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no
heaps, the sum of the magnitudes of all node-rank changes is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key
plus O(lg n) per delete-min plus at most d/64.

    Lemma 7.9 and Theorem 7.10 combine to give us a bound on the number of primary
links with rank less than 1:

Theorem 7.11. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no
heaps, the total number of primary links with rank less than 1 is O(1) per insertion plus
O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min plus at most d/64.


                                                18
7.3    Large-rank links
Now we turn to the task of bounding the number of primary links of large rank. To do
this we bound the sum of link ranks. We bound this sum indirectly, by using the link-rank
equality, which states that if vw is a real deletion link with winner link uv, then
                 v.ru − u.rv′ = (v.rw′ − u.rw′ ) + (v.ru − v.rw′ ) + (u.rw′ − u.rv′ )
    That is, the rank of vw equals the sum of its w-shift, its v-shift, and its u-shift. Summing
this equality over all real deletion links vw, we find that the sum of the link ranks equals
the sum of their w-shifts plus their v-shifts plus their u shifts. We already have a bound
on the sum of the w-shifts, Lemma 6.2. The proof of Lemma 6.2 relies on cancellation in
telescoping sums, and the proof fails if we only sum over the primary links, which are the
ones we need to count. Thus we are forced to estimate the sum of the v-shifts and the
u-shifts of all the real deletion links, not just those of the primary links.
    To bound the sum of these shifts, we observe that a given vertex v can win or lose at
most one pass-i link during a single delete-min. This allows us to bound the sum of shifts
over all real pass-i links separately for each i. Then we sum over i. To make the overall
bound small, we estimate the sum differently for each i. We use the fact that the number of
pass-i links is exponentially small in i (Lemma 7.1). To exploit this fact, we generalize the
definition of ranks. If w is a temporary node and b is a non-negative integer, the b-reduced
rank w.r(b) of w is max{w.r − b, 0} = lg(lg(w.m/w.s)/2b). In particular, the 0-reduced
rank of w is just its rank.
    The following lemma gives a simple inequality that allows us to relate differences in
node ranks to the corresponding differences in b-reduced node ranks:
Lemma 7.12. If x > y ≥ 0 and b ≥ 0, then x − y ≤ max{x − b, 0} − max{y − b, 0} + b.
Proof. If y ≥ b, the inequality becomes x − y ≤ x − y + b, which is true since b ≥ 0. If
x ≤ b, the inequality becomes x − y ≤ b, which is true since x ≤ b and y ≥ 0. Finally, if
y < b < x, the inequality becomes x − y ≤ x, which is true since y ≥ 0.
    To bound the sums of the v-shifts and the u-shifts, we need a generalization of Theo-
rem 7.10 that bounds the sum of the magnitudes of the changes in b-reduced ranks. We
state and use this theorem here and prove it in the next section.
Theorem 7.13. Let b and c be non-negative integers. In any sequence of multipass pairing
heap operations starting with no heaps, the sum of the magnitudes of the changes in b-
reduced node ranks is at most 4 lg((lg n)/2b ) per decrease-key plus (4(b + c + 2)/2b) lg n +
2 lg((lg n)/2b ) + 6/2b per delete-min plus 8d/2b+c .
   Choosing b = 0 and c = 9 in Theorem 7.13 gives Theorem 7.10, which was stated and
used in the previous section.
   Now we have the tools we need to bound the sums of v-shifts and u-shifts. We start
with the v-shifts.
Lemma 7.14. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
the sum of the v-shifts of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) per decrease-key plus
O(lg n) per delete-min plus at most d/64.

                                                 19
Proof. Let vw be a real pairing link with winner link uv. The v-shift of vw is v.ru − v.rw′ ,
the net decrease in the rank of v from the time t1 just before link uv is done (after the
step-up in the mass of v if it is a right link) until the time t2 just after vw is done. We call
[t1 , t2 ] the v-shift time interval of vw. If vw is a pass-i link, v cannot win another pass-i
link until after losing a link. It follows that for a given v and i, the v-shift time intervals of
the pass-i links vw won by v are disjoint. We can thus apply Theorem 7.13 to bound the
sum of the v-shifts of the pass-i links vw for any given i. Summing the resulting bounds
over all i gives us a bound on the sum of all v-shifts.
      In the sum of v shifts, we ignore all the non-positive terms. If vw is an pass-i link with
positive v-shift, its v shift v.ru − v.rw′ is at most v.ru (b) − v.rw′ (b) + b for any integer b ≥ 0
by Lemma 7.12, where v.ru (b) the b-reduced rank of v just before uv is done (after the
step-up in the mass of v if it is a right link), and v.rw′ (b) is the b-reduced rank of vw just
after vw is done. The number of pass-i links is at most 2d/2i by Lemma 7.1. Thus, for
any integers i and b, the sum of v-shifts over all real pass-i links is at most the bound of
Theorem 7.13 plus b · (2d/2i ). This bound depends on a non-negative integer parameter c,
whose value we choose at the end of this proof.
      For i = 1, . . . , c, this bound with b = 0 implies that the sum of the v-shifts over all real
deletion links done in the first c pairing passes is at most 4c lg lg n per decrease-key plus
4c(c + 2) lg n + 2c lg lg n + 6c per delete-min plus 8cd/2c .
      For i ≥ 1, we apply the same bound to the pass-(i + c) links, but with b a function of i,
specifically b = bi = 2⌈i/2⌉ . By this bound, the sum of the v-terms of the real pass-(i + c)
links is at most

                4 lg((lg n)/2bi ) per decrease-key
              +4((bi + c + 2)/2bi ) lg n + 2 lg((lg n)/2bi ) + 6/2bi per delete-min
              +8d/2bi +c + 2bi d/2i+c

We need to sum this bound from i = 1 to ∞. The sum of bi /2bi is a constant, as are the
sums of 1/2bi and bi /2i . Finally, if i > 2 lg lg lg n, the lg((lg n)/2bi ) terms are 0. It follows
that if we choose c to be a sufficiently large constant, the sum of the v-shifts of real deletion
links is within the bound of the lemma.
    The argument for the v-shifts applies to the u-shifts as well, but we must consider both
increases and decreases of node ranks over the u-shift time intervals.
Lemma 7.15. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
the sum of the u-shifts of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) per decrease-key plus
O(lg n) per delete-min plus at most d/64.
Proof. Let vw be a real pairing link with winner link uv. The u-shift of vw is u.rw′ − u.rv′ .
If vw is a right link, this is the decrease in the rank of u from the time t1 just after it wins
uw until the time t2 just after it wins uv. If vw is a left link, its u-shift is the increase
in the rank of u from the time t1 just after it wins uv until the time t2 just after it wins
uw. We call [t1 , t2 ] the u-shift time interval of vw. To cover both the left links and the
right links, we bound the sum of the magnitudes of the u-shifts. Since each pass-i link is
between adjacent roots on the root list, the u-shift time intervals of two pass-i links during

                                                20
the deletion of u are disjoint. These are the only u-shifts of pass-i links. Hence we can
apply the same analysis as in the proof of Lemma 7.14.
   Summing the link-rank equality over the real deletion links and adding the bounds in
Lemma 6.2, Lemma 7.14, and Lemma 7.15 gives us a bound of the sum of link ranks:

Theorem 7.16. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no
heaps, the sum of the link ranks of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) per decrease-
key plus O(lg n) per delete-min plus at most d/32.

    Since all link ranks are non-negative by Lemma 7.5, the bound in Theorem 7.16 is
also a bound on the number of primary links with rank at least 1. Adding this bound to
the bound in Theorem 7.11 on the number of such links that have rank less than 1 and
combining the resulting bound with the bound in Corollary 7.3 gives us our desired bound
on the total number of deletion links:

Theorem 7.17. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no
heaps, the total number of deletion links is O(1) per insertion plus O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) per
decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.

   Theorem 7.17 yields our bound on the efficiency of multipass pairing heaps:

Theorem 7.18. Any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps
takes O(lg lg n · lg lg lg n) amortized time per decrease-key, O(lg n) amortized time per dele-
tion, and O(1) amortized (and worst-case) time for each other heap operation.

7.4    Node-rank changes
Our analysis of multipass pairing heaps relies on the validity of Theorem 7.13, which bounds
the sum of the magnitudes of changes in b-reduced node ranks. Proving this theorem is the
final step in our analysis and is the topic of this section.
    Our calculations require the inequality stated in the following lemma:

Lemma 7.19. If x > y > 0, a ≥ 0, and b ≥ 0, lg(x/2b ) − lg(y/2b) ≤ (2/2a+b )(x − y) + a.

Proof. Define f (t) = lg(t/2b ). Observe that f ′ (t) = 0 for t < 2b and f ′ (t) = lg(e)/t ≤ 2/t
for t > 2b . In particular, if t > 2a+b then f ′ (t) ≤ lg(e)/2a+b ≤ 2/2a+b .
    If x ≥ y ≥ 2a+b , then
                                             Z x                2 
                             b           b
                                                   f ′ (t) dt ≤ a+b
                                                                             
                      lg(x/2 ) − lg(y/2 ) =                           x−y
                                               y                2

since f ′ is at most 2/2a+b on (2a+b , ∞).
    If 2a+b ≥ x ≥ y, then

                           lg(x/2b ) − lg(y/2b) ≤ lg(2a+b /2b ) − 0 = a




                                                21
   Finally, if x ≥ 2a+b ≥ y, then

           lg(x/2b ) ≤ lg(x/2b ) − lg(2a+b /2b ) + lg(2a+b /2b )
                       Z x            
                                ′
                     =         f (t) dt + a                                 (since lg(2a+b /2b ) = a)
                          2a+b
                        2 
                                  x − 2a+b + a               (since f ′ (t) ≤ 2/2a+b on (2a+b , ∞))
                                          
                     ≤ a+b
                        2
                        2            
                     ≤ a+b        x−y +a
                        2
    As observed in Section 5, the sum of the magnitudes of node-rank changes is at most
twice the sum of node-rank increases, since node ranks are always non-negative and their
sum is initially zero since initially there are no nodes. This is also true of b-reduced ranks.
Hence to bound the sum of the magnitudes of b-reduced rank changes it suffices to bound
the sum of b-reduced rank increases. This we proceed to do.
    Newly inserted temporary nodes and nodes deleted by delete-mins have b-reduced rank
zero, so their insertion or deletion changes no b-reduced rank. A cut of a phantom link,
which happens only during a decrease-key, changes no size or mass and hence changes no
b-reduced rank. Cuts of real links happen only during delete-mins. Deletion of the root
in a delete-min decreases by one the size of each child of the deleted root, which does not
increase its b-reduced rank, and makes the b-reduced rank of the deleted root equal to zero,
which does not increase it. A phantom insertion or decrease-key link changes no size or
mass and hence changes no b-reduced rank. A phantom deletion link changes no size and
increases no mass, so it increases no b-reduced rank. It remains to study the effect of real
links.

Lemma 7.20. In a multipass pairing heap, a real decrease-key link vw increases the b-
reduced rank only of w, by at most lg((lg n)/2b ).

Proof. The link changes the size only of v and changes the mass only of v and w. Before
and after the link, the mass of v equals its size, so the link leaves the b-reduced rank of v
unchanged at zero. The link increases the mass of w to at most n. The lemma follows.

Lemma 7.21. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no heaps,
the sum of increases in b-reduced ranks caused by real insertion links is at most lg((lg n)/2b )
per decrease-key plus lg((lg n)/2b ) + 3/2b per delete-min.

Proof. The proof uses the idea in the proofs of the lemmas in Section 6. We allocate
lg((lg n)/2b ) credits to each decrease-key and lg((lg n)/2b ) + 3/2b credits to each delete-
min, and show that the sum of increases in b-reduced ranks caused by real insertion links
is at most the sum of the allocated credits.
    A real insertion link vw increases the b-reduced rank only of w, by at most lg((lg n)/2b ).
Since w is temporary, it eventually becomes the only root in its heap, which must happen
before w can be deleted. Let n′ be the number of temporary nodes in the heap containing
w the first time after link vw that w becomes the only root in its heap. The operation that
causes w to become the only root in its heap is either a decrease-key or a delete-min.


                                                22
    We assign lg((lg n′ )/2b ) of the credits allocated to this decrease-key or delete-min to
partially cover the increase in the b-reduced rank of w caused by link vw. The credits
allocated to a decrease-key or delete-min are assigned to at most one such increase, since w
is the only root in the heap after the decrease-key or delete-min, and vw is the most recent
previous real insertion link lost by w.
    If n′ ≥ n, the assigned credits fully cover the increase in the b-rank of w. If not,
we need an additional lg((lg n)/2b ) − lg((lg n′ )/2b ) ≤ (2/2b )(lg n − lg n′ ) credits to fully
cover the increase. For these we use the additional 3/2b credits allocated to each delete-
min. Each delete-min distributes its extra credits equally among the n′′ − 1 temporary
nodes in the heap just after the deletion, (3/2b )/(n′′ − 1) to each. Between the time
v and P w are linked and w next becomes the only root in its heap, w receives at least
     b    n−1            b             ′
(3/2 ) i=n   ′ 1/i ≥ (2/2 )(lg n − lg n ) credits, which cover the remainder of the increase in

the b-rank of w.

Lemma 7.22. In a multipass pairing heap, a real deletion link vw increases a b-reduced
rank only if it is a right link. If it is a right link, it increases only the rank of w, and only
during the step-up in the mass of w. For any a ≥ 0, the amount of the increase is at most
(2/2a+b )(lg(v.m) − lg(w.m)) + a, where variables take their values just before the step-up.

Proof. The link changes the size, mass, and rank only of v and w. If the link is a left link,
it decreases w.m and does not change w.s, so the b-reduced rank of w does not increase.
The link increases v.s and v.m by w.s, so the b-reduced rank of v does not increase.
    Suppose the link is a right link. The link increases v.s but does not change v.m, so the
b-reduced rank of v does not increase. The step-up in the mass of w just before the link
increases w.r by

  lg(lg(v.m/w.s)/2b) − lg(lg(w.m/w.s)/2b) ≤ (2/2a+b )(lg(v.m/w.s) − lg(w.m/w.s)) + a
                                               = (2/2a+b )(lg(v.m) − lg(w.m)) + a

by Lemma 7.19 and v.m > w.m ≥ w.s. After the link, the rank of w is lg lg((v.s +
w.s)/w.s) ≤ lg lg(v.m/w.s), so the link itself does not increase the rank of w.

Lemma 7.23. In a multipass pairing heap, for any a ≥ 0, the sum of the b-reduced rank
increases caused by a pairing pass that does k real right links is at most (2/2a+b ) lg n + ak.

Proof. We sum the upper bound (2/2a+b )(lg(v.m) − lg(w.m)) + a on the increase in b-
reduced ranks given by Lemma 7.22 over the k real right links vw done during the pairing
pass. If vw and v ′ w ′ are two such links, with v ′ right of v on the root list, w.m > v ′ .m,
where masses are evaluated just before any of the links. Thus the sum of lg(v.m) − lg(w.m)
telescopes to at most lg n, giving the lemma.

Lemma 7.24. In a multipass pairing heap, for any c ≥ 0, the sum of the b-rank increases
caused by a delete-min that does k links is at most (2(b + c + 2)/2b ) lg n + 4k/2b+c .

Proof. We sum the upper bound in Lemma 7.23 over all pairing passes of the delete-min,
but we choose a as a function of the pairing pass. By Lemma 7.1, at most 2k/2i links are
done in pairing pass i.

                                               23
   Setting ai = max{i−⌈b+c⌉, 0} for pairing pass i and summing the bound in Lemma 7.23
over all pairing passes in the delete-min, we find that the sum of the b-rank increases is at
most
                                        ∞
                                        X
                (2⌈b + c⌉/2b ) lg n +         (2/2b )(1/2i ) lg n + (2k/2⌈b+c⌉ )(i/2i )
                                                                                          
                                        i=1

                 = (2(⌈b + c⌉ + 1)/2 ) lg n + 4k/2⌈b+c⌉
                                        b

                 ≤ (2(b + c + 2)/2b ) lg n + 4k/2b+c

    Combining Lemmas 7.20, 7.21, and 7.24 and using the fact that twice the sum of the
increases in b-reduced node ranks is an upper bound on the sum of the magnitudes of the
change is b-reduced node ranks gives us Theorem 7.13:
    For any non-negative integers b and c, in any sequence of multipass pairing heap oper-
ations starting with no heaps, the sum of the magnitudes of the changes in b-reduced node
ranks is at most 4 lg((lg n)/2b ) per decrease-key plus (4(b + c + 2)/2b ) lg n + 2 lg((lg n)/2b ) +
6/2b per delete-min plus 8d/2b+c.


8     Analysis of slim heaps
8.1    Basic properties of slim and smooth heaps
Now we turn to the analysis of slim and smooth heaps. We start with slim heaps, and then
adapt the analysis to smooth heaps. We begin by giving two basic properties of both slim
and smooth heaps. The first is that during a delete-min each node wins at most one left
link and one right link [11, 15]. For completeness we include a proof of this result.

Lemma 8.1. [11, 15] During a delete-min in a slim or smooth heap, each node wins at
most one left link and at most one right link.

Proof. Suppose a node v wins a right link with a node w. After the link, either v is
rightmost on the root list or its right neighbor has equal or smaller key. In the latter case,
during the rest of the delete-min the right neighbor of v can change, but the key of its right
neighbor cannot increase. Hence v can only lose, not win, a link with its right neighbor
during the rest of the delete-min. The argument for left links is symmetric, with minor
changes to account for the tie-breaking rule in leftmost locally maximum linking.
    By Lemma 8.1, the set of links done during a delete-min in a slim or smooth heap forms
a binary tree that is heap-ordered by key and symmetrically ordered by position on the
root list just after the original root is deleted. We call this tree the treap formed by the
delete-min. See Figure 3.
    Our second result bounds the number of deletion links d in terms of the number of real
deletion links. This is the first step in bounding the number of deletion links.

Lemma 8.2. In any sequence of operations on slim or smooth heaps starting with no heaps,
d is at most three per real deletion link plus three per insertion plus three per decrease-key.


                                                   24
Proof. Consider a delete-min that does k deletion links and in which j of the k + 1 new
roots are temporary. We consider two cases. If j < k/3, at least k −2j ≥ k/3 of the deletion
links must be won by a permanent node, since by Lemma 8.1 each of the j temporary roots
wins at most two of the k links. Each link won by a permanent node is either an f-link
(never cut) or a k-link (cut by a decrease-key). If it is an f-link, we charge 3 to the loser of
the link, which is a permanent node. If it is a k-link, we charge 3 to the decrease-key that
cuts the link. The total charge is at least k, the number of deletion links.
    If j ≥ k/3, at least j − 1 ≥ k/3 − 1 deletion links must be lost by temporary nodes.
Each such link is either a real deletion link or a k-link. In the former case we charge 3 to
the link; in the latter we charge 3 to the decrease-key that cuts the link. We also charge
1 to the insertion of the node deleted by the delete-min, which is a temporary node. The
total charge is at least k.
    Combining the cases gives the lemma.

8.2    The treap and its boundaries
In slim and smooth heaps, the links done during a delete-min do not occur in separate
passes, so the concept of b-reduced ranks is not helpful. Instead of partitioning the links
done during a delete-min into passes, we partition them in a way that depends on the treap
T whose edges are the links done during the delete-min. In this section we study some
properties of this treap and introduce some relevant terminology.
    We define a boundary of T to be a partition of the set of nodes in T into two nonempty
sides, such that every node on one side is smaller in symmetric order (with respect to T )
than every node on the other side. The former is the left side of the boundary; the latter
is the right side. Each node x in T except the largest in symmetric order defines a unique
boundary whose left side contains x and all smaller nodes in symmetric order and whose
right side contains all nodes larger than x in symmetric order. We call this the boundary
of x. A link vw done during the delete-min crosses a boundary if exactly one of v and w
is on each side of the boundary. See Figure 4.

                  12    6     9    5   11 14           2   13 16     8   19   7

                                                       2
                                   5                                          7
                        6              11                            8
                  12          9              14            13            19
                                                                16
Figure 3: An example of a treap formed by leftmost locally maximum linking. Original subtrees
of the roots linked are not shown. Symmetric order in the treap is left-to-right order on the root
list before any linking.


                                                  25
                                   y   v    w   x




                                                x
                                   y
                                        v
                                            w




Figure 4: Links crossing a boundary after a delete-min. The dashed links cross the dashed grey
boundary and alternate between left and right links. The boundary pictured is the boundary of
v.


Lemma 8.3. Let T be the treap formed by a delete-min in a slim or smooth heap. Given
the boundary of a node x in T , all the links in T that cross the boundary are on a single
path in T from the root of T down to either x, if x does not win a crossing link, or down
to the smallest node greater than x in symmetric order if x does win a crossing link. Along
this path, the links crossing the boundary alternate between left and right. If x wins a right
link in T , this link is the lowest link to cross the boundary.

Proof. Start at the root of T and follow the path P defined as follows: Let v be the current
node on the path, initially the root. If v is larger in symmetric order than x, replace v by
its left child in T ; otherwise, replace v by its right child in T . Repeat until v = x. If x
has a right child, replace v by its right child, and then repeatedly replace v by its left child
until v has no left child.
    If v is replaced by its right child, the link to its left child, as well as every link in the
left subtree of v, does not cross the boundary; if v is replaced by its left child, the link to
its right child, as well as every link in the right subtree of v, does not cross the boundary.
If v = x, the link to its left child, and all links in the subtree of this child, do not cross the
boundary; the link to the right child of v, if it exists, crosses the boundary, but no links in
the subtree of this right child cross the boundary. It follows by induction on the length of
P that every link crossing the boundary is on P . If vw is a link on P that does not cross
the boundary, both v and w are on the same side of the boundary. It follows by induction
on the length of P that if uw and yz are successive links on P that cross the boundary,
both w and y are on the same side of the boundary, which means that exactly one of uw
and yz is a left link. That is, the links crossing the boundary alternate between left and
right. If x has no right child, x is the bottom node on P . If x has a right child, say y, the
bottom node on P is the smallest node in symmetric order that is a descendant of y, which
is the node in T after x in symmetric order.

                                                26
                               ∗


                                                                       ∗
                                                             ∗



Figure 5: An example of the treap formed by a delete-min. Squares denote heavy nodes, circles
light nodes. Asterisks indicate anomalous links. Solid links are real, dashed links phantom. Each
maximal path of real right links is circled.


8.3    Link order
In our analysis of slim heaps, we shall make the simplifying assumption that if a temporary
root u wins both a left link uv and a right link uw during a delete-min, u wins the right link
first. Suppose that in fact u wins the left link first. After both links, w is the left neighbor
of v on the list of children of u, but if u wins the right link first, the order is reversed: w
is the right neighbor of v. In this case we restore the correct order when u is deleted, by
swapping the order of v and w on the root list before any links are done. This guarantees
that the set of links done in the actual algorithm is the same as the set of links we analyze.
In our analysis we shall need to account for the effect of such swaps.

8.4    Ranks in slim heaps
In slim heaps, the definitions of mass and rank depend on the future behavior of the
algorithm, not just on its present and past behavior. Specifically, masses and ranks during
a delete-min depend on the treap T formed by the delete-min, which is not completely
determined until the last link of the delete-min. We partition T into maximal paths of real
right links. Each node in T is on exactly one such path. Given such a path, if its top node
(the one nearest the root of T ) is the root itself or is the loser of a phantom link in T , we
define all nodes on the path to be heavy; otherwise all nodes on the path are light. Each
node of T retains its state (light or heavy) throughout the delete-min. Each permanent
node of T forms a one-node path and is heavy, since any link it wins or loses is a phantom
link. Each real right link is between a pair of heavy nodes or a pair of light nodes. Each
loser of a real left link is light. We define a real left link vw to be anomalous if v is heavy
and the subtree of T rooted at w contains at least one k-link. See Figure 5.
    We define sizes in a slim heap as in a multipass pairing heap: The size v.s of a temporary

                                               27
node v is the number of temporary nodes that are descendants of v and connected to v by
a path of real links. During a delete-min, each root v, temporary or permanent, also has
an extended size v.s̄. We define extended sizes operationally. Just after the original root is
deleted in a delete-min, each temporary root has extended size equal to its size, and each
permanent root has extended size 0. A link vw increases the extended size of v by that of
w, whether the link is real or phantom. (If the link is real, it also increases the size of v by
that of w.) Equivalently, the extended size of a root v during a delete-min is the number of
temporary nodes that are descendants of v and connected to it by a path of real links and
links done during the current delete-min (before the present moment). That is, phantom
links done before the current delete-min are excluded.
    We define the mass v.m of a temporary node v as follows: If v is a real child, its mass is
one plus its size plus the sizes of its siblings to its right on its list of siblings. Equivalently,
its mass is the size of its parent u just after v lost the link uv. If v is a phantom child or a
root not on the root list in the middle of a deletion, its mass is its size. In these cases the
definition of mass is the same as in multipass pairing heaps.
    If v is a temporary root on the root list in the middle of a deletion, its mass depends
on whether it is light or heavy. If v is heavy, its mass is its extended size plus the sum of
the extended sizes of the roots to its right on the root list. If v is light, its mass is its size
plus the sum of the extended sizes of the roots to its right on the root list. There are two
exceptions to this definition of mass:
  (i) Just before a temporary node w loses a real right link vw, its mass becomes v.m′ , the
      mass of v just after the link. After the link, the mass of w becomes v.s′ , the size of
      v just after the link.

 (ii) Just after a temporary node v wins an anomalous link, its mass temporarily decreases
      to its size, then increases to its extended size plus the extended sizes of the nodes to
      its right on the root list.
    We call the increase in the mass of w from w.m to v.m′ in exception (i) and of that of
v from v.s′ to v.m′ in exception (ii) a step-up in the mass of w or v, respectively. We call
the decrease in the mass of v in exception (ii) a step-down. We extend the terms “step-up”
and “step-down” to the changes in rank resulting from the changes in mass. Exception (i)
is the same exception we used in the analysis of multipass pairing heaps. The exceptions
guarantee that all link ranks are non-negative.
    A permanent node has no size, extended size, or mass, unless it is a root in the middle
of a delete-min, when it has an extended size. The extended size of a permanent node v is
zero at the beginning of a delete-min. It becomes non-zero if (and only if) it has at least
one descendant in T that is a temporary node: If so, it will win a link during the delete-min
that makes its extended size positive.
    The definitions of node ranks, link ranks, w-shifts, v-shifts, and u-shifts are the same
for slim heaps as for multipass pairing heaps. They are also stated in Section 4. In these
definitions, if vw is a real right link, w.rv is the rank of w after its step-up just before the
link, and if vw is an anomalous link, v.rw′ is the rank of v after its step-down just after the
link, but before its step-up.
    Now that we have the appropriate definitions, we can prove Lemma 7.5 for slim heaps.

                                                28
Lemma 8.4. In a slim heap, every link rank is non-negative.

Proof. Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The link rank of vw is v.ru −u.rv′ .
If uv is an insertion, decrease-key, or anomalous link, the mass of u just after link uv is
done is the size of u. Thus u.rv′ = 0, so v.ru − u.rv′ ≥ 0.
     Suppose uv is a right link or a non-anomalous left link. Let unprimed and primed sizes
and masses denote values just before and just after uv is done, respectively.
     If uv is a right link, v.ru = lg lg(u.m′ /v.s′ ) due to the step-up in the mass of v just
before the link. Also, u.rv′ = lg lg(u.m′ /u.s′ ). Since v.s′ = v.s and u.s′ = u.s + v.s,
u.m′ /v.s′ ≥ u.m′ /u.s′ , giving v.ru − u.rv′ ≥ 0.
     If uv is a left link, then v is light. Let M be the sum of the extended sizes of all roots
right of u on the root list just before uv is done. If u is light, then v.m = v.s + u.s̄ + M ≥
v.s + u.s + M = u.m′ . Since v.s ≤ u.s′ , u.m′ /u.s′ ≤ v.m/v.s, giving v.ru − u.rv′ ≥ 0.
     If u is heavy, v.s̄ = v.s, since uv is not anomalous. This implies v.m = v.s + u.s̄ + M =
v.s̄ + u.s̄ + M = u.m′ , so in this case also u.m′ /u.s′ ≤ v.m/v.s, giving v.ru − u.rv′ ≥ 0.
   We proceed as in the analysis of multipass pairing heaps.

8.5    Small-rank links in slim heaps
Our next step is to bound the number of real deletion links of small rank. First we prove
an analogue for slim heaps of Lemma 7.6 for multipass pairing heaps.

Lemma 8.5. In a slim heap just after the root swaps in a delete-min (if any), the number
of temporary roots on the root list with rank at most 1 is at most 2.5 lg n + 1.

Proof. Just after the swaps, there have been no links, so the size of each temporary root
equals its extended size, and the extended size of each permanent root is zero. The lemma
follows by the proof of Lemma 7.6.
   Second we observe that Lemma 7.8 holds for slim heaps:

Lemma 8.6. Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. Suppose vw has link rank
less than 1. If both u and v have positive rank just after uv is done, then v.r ′ ≤ v.r − 1,
where unprimed and primed variables take their values just before uv is done (after the
step-up in the mass of v if there is one) and just after uv is done, respectively.

Proof. Since u and v have positive rank just after uv is done, uv is not an anomalous link.
This makes the proof of Lemma 7.8 valid for slim heaps.
    Third we use Lemma 8.5 and Lemma 8.6 to obtain a bound on the number of real
deletion links of rank less than 1 in terms of the sum of the magnitudes of all node-rank
decreases.

Lemma 8.7. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the number
of real deletion links of rank less than 1 is at most six times the sum of the magnitudes of
all node-rank decreases plus two per insertion plus two per decrease-key plus 15 lg n + 6 per
delete-min.

                                              29
Proof. Let vw with winner link uv be a real deletion link with link rank less than 1. Since
v wins at most two links during a deletion, a given link uv is the winner link of at most
two such links vw. We shall charge vw to some event related to uv, doubling our estimate
to account for the possibility that uv is the winner link of two different links.
    If uv is an insertion or decrease-key link, we charge vw to uv. After doubling, the total
of such charges is at most two per insertion and two per decrease-key. If uv is a deletion
link and u or v has rank less than 1 just after the root swaps in the delete-min that does
uv, we charge vw to one of u and v that has rank less than 1 just after the swaps, choosing
either if both have rank less than 1. Since a given node can win at most two links and lose
at most one link during a delete-min, the total charge per node for the winner links done
during a given delete-min is at most six, including the doubling. By Lemma 8.5, the total
of such charges is at most 15 lg n + 6 per delete-min.
    The remaining possibility is that uv is a deletion link and both u and v have rank at
least 1 just after the swaps in the delete-min that does uv. We claim that in this case the
sum of the magnitudes of the rank decreases of at least one of u or v from just after the
root swaps in the delete-min that does uv until just after uv is done must be at least 1. If
this is not already true just before uv is done, then both u and v have positive rank just
before uv is done, but then by Lemma 8.6 doing uv decreases the rank of v by at least 1,
making it true. We charge vw to the sum of the magnitudes of the node-rank decreases of
one of u and v whose sum of node-rank decreases during the delete-min that does uv is at
least 1. The total of such charges is at most six per unit of node-rank decrease.
    Adding these bounds gives the lemma.
   To finish the task of bounding the number of real deletion links of small rank, we use
an analogue for slim heaps of Theorem 7.10. The bound for slim heaps is simpler in that
there is no additive term in d, the total number of deletion links. We state the bound here
and prove it in Section 8.7.

Theorem 8.8. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the sum
of the magnitudes of all node-rank changes is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per
delete-min.

   Since any link is the winner link of at most two real deletion links, Lemma 8.7 and
Theorem 8.8 combine to give us our desired bound on the number of real deletion links of
small rank:

Theorem 8.9. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the total
number of real deletion links with rank less than 1 is O(1) per insertion plus O(lg lg n) per
decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.

8.6    Large-rank links in slim heaps
Having bounded the number of real deletion links of small rank, we now bound the number
of such links of large rank. As in the case of multipass pairing heaps, we do this by bounding
the sum of link ranks using the link-rank equality, which states that if vw is a real deletion



                                             30
link with winner link uv, then

                 v.ru − u.rv′ = (v.rw′ − u.rw′ ) + (v.ru − v.rw′ ) + (u.rw′ − u.rv′ )

    That is, the rank of vw is the sum of its w-shift, its v-shift, and its u-shift. Summing
over all real deletion links, the sum of the ranks of the real deletion links equals the sum of
their w-shifts, v-shifts, and u-shifts. Lemma 6.2 is a bound on the sum of the w shifts. It
remains to bound the sum of the v-shifts and the sum of the u-shifts. Bounding the sum
of the v-shifts is easy, because during a single delete-min a node can win only two links.
Bounding the sum of the u-shifts uses the treap structure of the links done by a delete-min.
We rely on Theorem 8.8, which we stated in the previous section and will prove in the next
one.

Lemma 8.10. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the sum of
the v-shifts of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-
min.

Proof. Let vw be a real deletion link with winner link uv. The v-shift of vw is v.ru − v.rw′ ,
the net decrease in the rank of v from the time t1 just before link uv is done (after the
step-up in the mass of v if it is a right link) until the time t2 just after vw is done. We
call [t1 , t2 ] the v-shift time interval of vw. At most two links are won by v during a single
delete-min. If v wins two such links, arbitrarily label them 1 and 2. For different real
deletion links vw with the same label won by v, the corresponding v-shift time intervals
are disjoint. It follows that for a given v the sum of the v-shifts of all real deletion links vw
labeled 1 is at most the sum of the decreases in v.r over the sequence of heap operations,
as is the sum of the v-shifts of all real deletion links vw labeled 2. Summing over all v and
applying Theorem 8.8 gives the lemma.
    The u-shifts are far more challenging to bound, because an unbounded number of the
real links done when node u is deleted can have overlapping u-shift time intervals. For a
given u, we bound the sum of the u-shifts using the cancellation among these shifts that
occurs because of the treap structure of the links during the deletion of u.

Lemma 8.11. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the sum of
the u-shifts of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-
min.

Proof. Consider a delete-min that deletes u. Let T be the treap formed by the links done
during the delete-min. Let v1 , v2 , . . . , vk be the temporary nodes in T , in symmetric order
in T . This is their order on the root list just after the swaps done to correct for the linking
order: See Section 8.3. For 1 ≤ i ≤ k, let u.ri′ be the value of u.r just after u won the link
uvi cut by the delete-min. For 1 ≤ i < k, let ∆i = u.ri′ − u.ri+1  ′
                                                                     , and let Ii be the interval
of time between just after uvi+1 is done and just after uvi is done. The value of |∆i | is the
magnitude of the change in u.r from the beginning of Ii to the end of Ii , and is at most
the sum of the magnitudes of the changes in u.r during Ii .
    Before the swaps, the vi are in order on the root list by the time they were linked to u,
latest to earliest from left to right. This is not true after the swaps, but the swaps do not

                                                 31
change the order too much, as we now show. Any swaps are of node-disjoint pairs of adjacent
nodes on the root list. A swap that involves a permanent root has no effect on the order of
the temporary nodes, so we can ignore all such swaps. Consider vi and vi+1 . At most two
temporary nodes, vi−1 and vi+2 , are in between vi and vi+1 before the swaps. If both vi−1 and
vi+2 are in between vi and vi+1 , then |∆i | ≤ |u.ri′ −u.ri−1   ′         ′
                                                                    |+|u.ri−1       ′
                                                                              −u.ri+2        ′
                                                                                      |+|u.ri+2      ′
                                                                                                 −u.ri+1 |.
                                                             ′        ′         ′        ′
If vi−1 but not vi+2 is in between, then |∆i | ≤ |u.ri − u.ri−1 | + |u.ri−1 − u.ri+1 |. Similarly,
if vi+2 but not vi−1 is in between, then |∆i | ≤ |u.ri′ − u.ri+2        ′         ′
                                                                          | + |u.ri+2      ′
                                                                                      − u.ri+1 |. Finally,
if neither is in between, |∆i | ≤ |u.ri′ − u.ri+1 ′
                                                      |. In each case |∆i | is at most the sum of at
most three terms, each of which is the change or the negative of the change in u.r from
the time u won a link with one of vi−1 , vi , P     vi+1 , or vi+2 until it won its next link with one
                                                      k−1
of vi−1 , vi , vi+1 , or vi+2 . This implies that i=1      |∆i | is at most three times the sum of the
magnitudes of all the changes in u.r from the time u was inserted until it was deleted.
    Let vs vt be a real link donePs−1during the delete-min that deletes u. If t < s, the link is a
left link, and its u-shift is i=t ∆i . For P    t ≤ i < s, we call ∆i the i-term of vs vt . If t > s,
the link is a right link, and its u-shift is t−1    i=s −∆i . For s ≤ i < t, we call −∆i the i-term
of vs vt . We represent each u-shift as the sum of its i-terms and add them up. We add these
terms in groups, to maximize the cancellation of the plus and minus terms.
    Recall from Section 8.2 that a boundary of T is a partition of the nodes of T into two
nonempty parts, with all nodes in the left part less in symmetric order than all nodes in the
right part. The boundary of vi is the boundary whose largest left-part node in symmetric
order is vi . Consider a real link in T between vs and vt with s < t. This link crosses the
boundary of vi if and only if s ≤ i < t. If it does cross this boundary, its i-term contributes
∆i or −∆i to the sum of the u-shifts if it is a left or right link, respectively.
    By Lemma 8.3, all the links crossing the boundary of vi are on a single path in T from
the root to vi , or to its right child if it has a right child, and the links on this path that cross
the boundary alternate between left and right links. Given a real link vs vt that crosses the
boundary of vi , we charge the i-term of vs vt to vi if the path from vs to vi in T contains
only real links; if not, we charge the i-term of vs vt to the topmost (closest to vs ) temporary
node that loses a phantom link on the path from vs to vi in T . We call the i-terms charged
in the first way type-1 charges and those charged in the second way type-2 charges.
    Consider the type-1 charges to a node vi . Each is of a link on a path of real links
in T whose bottommost node is vi or its right child. Along this path, links crossing the
boundary of vi alternate left and right by Lemma 8.3. The number of crossing left links
is thus within one of the number of crossing right links. This implies that the sum of the
type-1 charges
           Pk−1 to vi is −∆i , 0, or ∆i . Summing over all vi , the sum of the type-1 charges is
at most i=1       |∆i |, which is at most three times the sum of the magnitudes of the changes
in u.r by the argument bounding the effect of the root swaps. Summing over all u, the sum
is within the bound of the lemma by Theorem 8.8(iii).
    It remains to bound the type-2 charges. Each of these is to a temporary node vj that
lost a k-link in T . We shall charge this k-link for all the type-2 charges to vj .
    Let va and vb be the descendants of vj in T with a smallest and b largest. If vs vt is a link
with an i-term that is a type-2 charge to vj , vt is a proper ancestor of vj in T . Furthermore
the i-terms of vs vt charged to vj , all of type 2, are exactly those such that a ≤ i < b.
Finally, all such i-terms count positively if the link is a left link or negatively if the link is
a right link. Thus the sum of these charges for vs vt is u.ra′ − u.rb′ , 0, or u.rb′ − u.ra′ . The

                                                    32
set of links with an i-term that is a type-2 charge to vj are on a single path of real links
in T , along which the links crossing the boundary of vj alternate left and right. Hence the
number of such links that are left is within one of the number that are right, and the sum
of the type-2 charges to vj is u.ra′ − u.rb′ , 0, or u.rb′ − u.ra′ . The magnitude of this sum is
at most max{u.ra′ , u.rb′ }. We charge this amount to the k-link lost by vj in the delete-min
that deletes u. By the argument in the proof of Lemma 6.1, the sum of the type-2 charges
over all delete-mins is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus 3 per delete-min. Multiplying by a
factor of three to account for the effect of root swaps, the sum is within the bound of the
lemma.
   Now we can prove the analogue of Theorem 7.16 for slim heaps:
Theorem 8.12. In any sequence of multipass pairing heap operations starting with no
heaps, the sum of the link ranks of the real deletion links is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus
O(lg n) per delete-min.
Proof. We sum the link-rank equality over all real deletion links and apply Lemmas 6.2, 8.10,
and 8.11.
   Since all link ranks are non-negative by Lemma 8.4, the bound in Theorem 8.12 is also
a bound on the number of real deletion links with rank at least 1. Adding this bound to the
bound in Theorem 8.9 on the number of such links that have rank less than 1 and applying
Lemma 8.2 gives us our desired bound on the total number of deletion links:
Theorem 8.13. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the total
number of deletion links is O(1) per insertion plus O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n)
per delete-min.
   Theorem 8.13 gives our bound on the efficiency of slim heaps:
Theorem 8.14. Any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps takes O(lg lg n)
amortized time per decrease-key, O(lg n) amortized time per deletion, and O(1) amortized
(and worst-case) time for each other heap operation.

8.7    Node-rank changes in slim heaps
Our remaining task is to prove Theorem 8.8. We proceed as in the proof of Theorem 7.10,
with the addition of a lemma that bounds the effect of root swaps at the beginning of a
delete-min.
    The sum of node ranks is initially 0. We need to bound increases in this sum. Creation
of a node does not increase the sum of node ranks, nor does a cut, nor does deletion of
the root at the beginning of a delete-min. The next lemma bounds the increase caused
by swapping node-disjoint pairs of adjacent roots on the root list during a delete-min, to
correct for changes in linking order as discussed in Section 8.3.
Lemma 8.15. In a slim heap, swapping node-disjoint pairs of adjacent roots on the root
list just after deleting the original root in a delete-min increases the sum of node ranks by
at most 2 lg n.

                                               33
Proof. Let variables take their values before any swaps. Let v and w be two adjacent roots
to be swapped, with v left of w. Since no links have been done, the extended size of each
temporary root is its size, and the extended size of each permanent root is 0. Hence if either
v or w is permanent, the swap has no effect on ranks. If v and w are both temporary, the
swap of v and w increases the mass of w to that of v and decreases the mass of v. We
ignore the decrease, which does not increase the rank of v. The increase in the rank of w
caused by the swap is lg lg(v.m/w.s) − lg lg(w.m/w.s) ≤ 2 lg(v.m/w.s) − 2 lg(w.m/w.s) =
2 lg v.m − 2 lg w.m. If v ′ , w ′ is another pair of temporary nodes to be swapped that are
right of pair v and w, then lg w.m > lg v ′ .m. If follows that the sum of the increases in
ranks caused by all the swaps is bounded above by a telescoping sum whose total is at most
2 lg n.
   Phantom decrease-key links and phantom insertion links change no node ranks. The
next two lemmas are the analogues for slim heaps of Lemma 7.20 and Lemma 7.21.
Lemma 8.16. In a slim heap, a real decrease-key link vw increases the node rank only of
w, by at most lg lg n.
Proof. The proof of Lemma 7.20 with b = 0 is valid for slim heaps as well.
Lemma 8.17. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with empty heaps, the sum
of node rank increases caused by real insertion links is at most lg lg n per decrease-key plus
at most lg lg n + 3 per delete-min.
Proof. The proof of Lemma 7.21 with b = 0 is valid for slim heaps as well.
    Now we come to the biggest challenge, bounding the increase in node ranks caused by
deletion links and the associated step-ups. Because of the introduction of extended sizes,
phantom links as well as real links can cause such increases.
Lemma 8.18. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with empty heaps, the sum
of increases in node ranks caused by phantom deletion links is at most lg lg n per decrease-
key plus at most 3 per delete-min.
Proof. Let vw be a phantom deletion link. The link increases the extended size of v by
that of w, which leaves the masses of all roots other than v and w unchanged, and leaves
their ranks unchanged as well. If w is temporary, it has rank 0 after the link, so the link
does not increase the rank of w. Suppose v is temporary. The link does not change the
size of v. If vw is a right link, it does not increase the mass of v, so it does not increase
the rank of v.
    If vw is a left link, it can increase the mass of v only if v is heavy, and then only if w has
positive extended size just before the link. For w to have positive extended size, it must
have a temporary descendant in the treap T formed by the delete-min that does vw. Let
y be the nearest temporary descendant of w in T . The link xy in T lost by y is a k-link:
If y = w, xy = vw is a k-link because it is phantom and both v and w are temporary; if
y 6= w, xy is a k-link because x is permanent and y is temporary. The increase in the rank
of v caused by vw is at most lg lg n, where n is the size of the heap containing v and w
when vw is done. Link vw is uniquely determined by xy, since w is the nearest temporary
ancestor of y in T . We charge the increase in the rank of v to xy and apply Lemma 6.1.

                                               34
Lemma 8.19. In a slim heap, a real deletion link vw increases no node rank (although its
associated step-up might).

Proof. Let vw be a real deletion link. The link increases the extended size of v by that
of w, which leaves the masses of all roots other than v and w unchanged, and leaves their
ranks unchanged as well.
     If vw is a real right link, v and w are both heavy or both light. In either case the link
increases the size of v but not its mass, which cannot increase its rank. The step-up just
before the link can increase the mass and hence the rank of w, but we consider step-ups
separately. The link itself does not increase the rank of w, since the mass of w after the
link is at most the mass of v after the link, and the link does not change the size of w.
     Suppose vw is a real left link. Then w is light. Whether vw is anomalous or not, the
link does not change the size of w, and it decreases the mass of w to the size of v, resulting
in no increase in the rank of w. Let variables take their values just before the link. If v
is light, the link increases both the size and mass of v by w.s. This does not increase the
rank of v. If v is heavy but vw is not anomalous, w.s = w.s̄, so again the link increases
the size and mass of v by w.s, resulting in no increase in the rank of v. Finally, if vw is
anomalous, the rank of v just after the link is 0 by exception (ii).
   It remains to bound the effect of step-ups.

Lemma 8.20. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with empty heaps, the sum
of increases in node ranks caused by step-ups during anomalous links is at most lg lg n per
decrease-key plus at most 3 per delete-min.

Proof. The proof is just like the proof of Lemma 8.18. Let vw be an anomalous link. We
charge the step-up in the rank of v to a k-link done during the delete-min that does vw.
Let T be the treap formed by this delete-min. Since vw is anomalous, there is a k-link in
the subtree of T rooted at w. Choose such a link xy such that there is no other such link
on the path in T from x to w. The path in T from x to w cannot contain an anomalous
link, since the winner of such a link would be on a path of real right links of heavy nodes
whose top node lost a k-link, which would also be on the path, contradicting the choice of
xy. It follows that vw is the anomalous link nearest x on the path in T from x to the root.
Hence vw is uniquely determined by xy. We charge the step-up in the rank of v to xy and
apply Lemma 6.1.

Lemma 8.21. During a single delete-min in a slim heap, the sum of increases in node
ranks caused by step-ups before real right links lost by heavy nodes is at most 2 lg n.

Proof. Let vw be a real right link between heavy nodes during a delete-min. By the
assumption on linking order (Section 8.3), v has not won or lost a link since it became a
root at the beginning of the delete-min, so its mass and size are unchanged since the root
swaps at the beginning of the delete-min (if any). Let u be the nearest temporary root right
of v just after the swaps. Node u is w or left of w just after the swaps. Node w is heavy, so
its mass just before the link vw is the mass of u just after the swaps, since all temporary
nodes between u and w became descendants of w before link vw. The step-up in the
mass of w thus increases its mass from u.m to v.m, where these variables take their values

                                             35
just after the swaps. This increases the rank of w by lg lg(v.m/w.s) − lg lg(u.m/w.s) ≤
2 lg(v.m) − 2 lg(u.m), where w.s is the size of w just before the link. Summing this bound
over all real right links between heavy nodes done during the delete-min, the sum is bounded
above by a telescoping sum that totals at most 2 lg n.
    We shall obtain the same bound as in Lemma 8.21 for increases in node ranks caused by
step-ups before right links between light nodes, but we need a more complicated argument.
Let P be a maximal path of real right links of light nodes in T . Let v be the topmost
node on this path. Since v is light, it is a real child in T . Let uv be its link to its parent.
This link is a left link, since otherwise P would not be maximal. We shall charge the rank
increases of the nodes on P to the future delete-min that deletes u.
Lemma 8.22. Let P be a maximal path of real right links of light nodes in the treap T
formed by some delete-min in a slim heap. Let v be the top node on P , and let uv be the
real left link lost by v during the delete-min. Then the sum of the increases in node ranks
caused by step-ups before links on P is at most 2 lg u.s′ − 2 lg u.s, where u.s and u.s′ are
the sizes of u just before and just after uv, respectively.
Proof. Let xy be a link on P . Just before the link, u is the next root right of y on the
root list. Let x.s and y.s be the sizes of x and y just before the link, respectively, and
let M = y.m − y.s. That is, M is the sum of the extended sizes of u and all the roots
to its right just before the link. The step-up before the link increases the rank of y by
lg lg((x.s + y.s + M)/y.s) − lg lg((y.s + M)/y.s) ≤ 2 lg((x.s + y.s + M)/(y.s + M)). Since
u.s ≤ M, the step-up in the rank of y increases it by at most 2 lg((x.s + y.s + u.s)/(y.s +
u.s)) = 2 lg(x.s + y.s + u.s) − 2 lg(y.s + u.s). This bound telescopes when summed over
the links on P . Let w be the bottom node on P . Node sizes do not decrease. It follows
that the sum of the bounds on the increases in node ranks over all links on P is at most
2 lg(v.s′ + u.s) − 2 lg(w.s + u.s) = 2 lg u.s′ − 2 lg(w.s + u.s) ≤ 2 lg u.s′ − 2 lg u.s , where v.s′
is the size of v just after link uv.
Lemma 8.23. In slim heaps, the sum of node rank increases caused by real right links of
light nodes is at most 2 lg n per delete-min.
Proof. We sum the bound in Lemma 8.22 over all real left links cut by a single delete-min.
Consider a delete-min that deletes node u. Let v0 , v1 , . . . , vk be the children of u in left-to-
right order whose real left links uvi are cut by the deletion of u. The sum of the bound
in Lemma 8.22 over the links uvi is the sum of 2 lg u.s′i − 2 lg u.si , where u.si and u.s′i are
the sizes of u just before and just after uvi , respectively. Since u.si ≥ u.s′i+1 , the sum is
bounded above by a telescoping sum that sums to at most 2 lg n.
   The results of this section combine to prove Theorem 8.8: In any sequence of slim heap
operations starting with no heaps, the sum of the magnitudes of all node-rank changes is
O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.


9     Analysis of smooth heaps
In this section we adapt the analysis of Section 8 to smooth heaps. The results of Sec-
tions 8.1 and 8.2 hold for both slim heaps and smooth heaps. Recall that the only difference

                                                36
between slim and smooth heaps is the position of the loser of a link on the list of children
of a winner: In a slim heap, the loser becomes the new leftmost child of the winner, but in
a smooth heap the winner of a deletion link becomes the new leftmost or rightmost child
of the winner if the link is a left or a right link, respectively. In both slim and smooth
heaps the winner of an insertion or decrease-key link becomes the new leftmost child of the
winner. We call a child a left or right child if when it is linked to its parent it becomes
the new leftmost or rightmost child of its parent, respectively. The left children of a node
are in decreasing order (latest to earliest) by link time, left to right on their list of siblings.
The right children are in increasing order by link time. We say a left (right, respectively)
child is interior to all its leftward (rightward) siblings.
     When a root is deleted in a delete-min, its list of children becomes a list of roots. We
call such a root a left or right root if it was a left or right child of its parent, respectively. A
left (right, respectively) root is interior to all roots to its left (right) in the list of roots. In
the treap T formed by a delete-min, the central boundary is the boundary whose left side
contains the left roots and whose right side contains the right roots. The links crossing the
central boundary are exactly those between a left root and a right root. We call these links
crossing links. We call a link between two left-side or two right-side roots a left-side or
right-side link, respectively. Let x be the largest left-side root in symmetric order in T and
let y be the smallest right-side root in symmetric order in T . By Lemma 8.3, the crossing
links are on a single path in the treap from the root to x, if x does not win a crossing link
in T , or to y, if x does win a crossing link in T . We call this path the central path. If there
are no crossing links at all, the central path contains only the root of T . In this case either
all the links in T are left-side links, or they are all right-side links. We call a link central
if it is on the central path, non-central otherwise. Each central link won by a left root is a
right link; each central link won by a right root is a left link.
     In our analysis, we shall assume in a delete-min that all the non-central links are done
before all the central links, and that every left (right, respectively) root that wins two
non-central links wins the right (left) link first. These assumptions are without loss of
generality, since in a smooth heap any bottom-up linking order during a delete-min that
produces the same treap produces the same order of children of each node. (This is not
true in a slim heap, since if a node wins both a left and a right link the order of the losers
on the list of children of the winner depends on which link occurs first.)
     We break the time during which links are done in a delete-min into two phases: the non-
central phase, during which the non-central links are done, and the central phase, during
which the central links are done. We define the masses of roots differently during the two
phases.
     The links done during the non-central phase build all of the treap except the central
path. The part of the treap built during this phase consists of one subtree rooted at each
vertex on the central path. The nodes in such a subtree are either all left roots or all right
roots. If the root of a subtree is a left root, the subtree consists either of just this root or
of a left link won by this root, plus the subtree of the treap rooted at the loser of this left
link. The situation is symmetric for subtrees rooted at right roots.
     During the non-central phase, we partition the subtrees of left (right, respectively) roots
built by this phase into maximal paths of real right (left) links. Each node on such a path
is heavy if its top node is a phantom child or is on the central path, light otherwise. A real

                                                 37
                                    left roots right roots


                                   ∗
                                                             ∗
                     ∗
                                   ∗                                             ∗


                                       ∗                                         ∗




Figure 6: An example of the treap formed by a delete-min in a smooth heap. Squares denote
heavy nodes, circles light nodes. Asterisks indicate anomalous links. Solid links are real, dashed
links phantom. Crossing links are gray, left-side and right-side links black. Each maximal path
of real right left-side links or real left right-side links is circled. During the non-central phase, all
nodes on the central path are heavy.


left left-side (right right-side, respectively) link is anomalous if its winner is heavy and the
subtree of the treap rooted at its loser contains a k-link. (Such links are non-central.) See
Figure 6.
    We apply the methods and results of Section 8 separately to non-central left-side links
and to non-central right-side links. We define sizes and extended sizes exactly as for slim
heaps: See Section 8.4. We define masses of left children with respect to left children only,
those of left roots with respect to left roots only, and symmetrically for right children and
right roots. Specifically, the mass of a temporary child is one plus the sum of the sizes of
it and its interior siblings.
    We define masses of roots similarly. The mass of a temporary root not in the middle of
a delete-min is its size. During the non-central linking phase of a delete-min, the mass of
a light temporary root is its size plus the sum of the extended sizes of the roots interior to
it on the root list. The mass of a heavy temporary root is its extended size plus the sum
of the extended sizes of the roots interior to it on the root list. There are two exceptions
to this definition of root mass, which are the same as in slim heaps.

  (i) Just before a temporary node w loses a real right (left, respectively) link vw to a left
      (right) root v, its mass becomes v.m′ , the mass of v just after the link. After the link,
      the mass of w becomes the value defined above for a real child.


                                                   38
 (ii) Just after a temporary node v wins an anomalous link, its mass temporarily decreases
      to its size, then increases to the value defined above for a heavy root.

     As in slim heaps, we call the increases in mass and rank in exceptions (i) and (ii)
step-ups, and the decreases in mass and rank in exception (ii) step-downs.
     Our main challenge in the analysis of smooth heaps is to bound the changes in node
ranks caused by central links. The problem is that a crossing link in effect moves the size
of the loser from one side of the central boundary to the other, and we need to bound
the effect of such back-and-forth movements. This requires some care, and some careful
definitions.
     At the beginning of the central linking phase, the only roots remaining are those on the
central path. During this phase, we define the masses of roots based on the real subpaths
of the central path. These are the maximal subpaths of the central path formed by the real
central links. Every permanent node on the central path constitutes its own real subpath,
since it does not win or lose a real link. Given a real subpath P with bottommost node
v, let ML (MR , respectively) be the sum of the sizes of all left (right) roots on the central
path that are proper descendants in T of v, where the sizes are evaluated at the start of
the central linking phase. We say P is left-light if ML ≤ MR , otherwise it is right-light.
Let M = min{ML , MR } and M = max{ML , MR }. Let P be a left-light path, and let v be
the topmost left node on P , if any. We call v and each node below v on P inner. We call
each node above v on P outer. Each outer node on a left-light path is a right root. The
symmetric definitions apply to right-light paths.
     A path P may or may not contain some outer nodes. If it does, these nodes are all at
the top of the path. If P is left-light, its outer nodes form a subpath of right links of right
roots, and symmetrically if P is right-light. We define masses slightly differently for inner
and outer nodes.
     At the start of the central linking phase, we redefine the masses of the nodes on the
central path, which are the remaining roots. Let v be a node on a maximal real subpath P
of the central path. Let M and M be as defined above. If v is inner (outer, respectively),
its mass becomes M (M ) plus its size plus the sum of the sizes of all roots on P that are
interior to v. When v wins a link during the central linking phase, its mass becomes M
(M ) plus its new size. (Just after v wins such a link, no remaining root is interior to it.)
     Exception (i) applies to all real central links: Just before losing a real central link vw,
the mass of w steps up to v.m′ , the mass of the winner after the link. No central link is
anomalous, so exception (ii) does not apply.
     We define node ranks and link ranks for real deletion links exactly as in slim heaps. In
particular, if vw is a real right left-side link, a real left right-side link, or a central link,
w.rv is the rank of w after its step-up just before the link, and if vw is an anomalous link,
v.rw′ is the rank of v after its step-down just after the link, but before its step-up.
     Now we check the various results for slim heaps to determine how they apply to smooth
heaps. We begin by verifying that link ranks are non-negative.
     The proof of Lemma 8.4 holds for each real deletion link vw whose winner link uv is
won by a left root u. This includes the case in which uv is a central link, since exception
(i) still applies. The symmetric argument holds for each real deletion link whose winner
link is won by a right root. We conclude that Lemma 8.4 holds for smooth heaps: All link

                                               39
ranks are non-negative.

9.1     Small-rank links in smooth heaps
Next, we verify that the analysis for links of small rank in slim heaps applies to smooth
heaps. Indeed it does, if we adjust some constant factors and account for central links.
    The proof of Lemma 8.5 applies separately to the left roots and to the right roots just
after the deletion of the original root in a delete-min. Thus the number of roots of rank
at most 1 is at most twice the bound in Lemma 8.5, specifically at most 5 lg n + 2. The
proof of Lemma 7.8 holds with one small change3 for each real deletion link in a smooth
heap whose winner link is a left-side non-central link, and holds symmetrically for each
real deletion link whose winner link is a right-side non-central link. An inspection of the
proof shows that it also holds for each real deletion link whose winner link is a central link,
even with the redefinition of mass at the beginning of the central linking phase. It follows
that Lemma 8.6 holds for smooth heaps. The proof of Lemma 8.7 holds for slim heaps
using twice the bound in Lemma 8.5, giving us a bound of at most six times the sum of
the magnitudes of all node-rank decreases plus two per insertion plus two per decrease-key
plus 30 lg n + 12 per delete-min on the number of real deletion links of rank less than 1 in
any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps.
    Suppose Theorem 8.8 holds for smooth heaps; that is, in any sequence of smooth heap
operations starting with no heaps, the sum of the magnitudes of all node-rank changes
is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min. Then we can conclude that
Theorem 8.9 holds for smooth heaps: In any sequence of slim heap operations starting
with no heaps, the total number of real deletion links with rank less than 1 is O(1) per
insertion plus O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.

9.2     Large-rank links in smooth heaps
Continuing, we verify that the analysis for links of large rank in slim heaps applies to
smooth heaps, assuming that Theorem 8.8 holds for smooth heaps.
    The proof of Lemma 8.10, the v-shift bound for slim heaps, holds without change for
smooth heaps. Thus the sum of the v-shifts of all real deletion links is O(lg lg n) per
decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.
    The u-shift bound for slim heaps in Lemma 8.11 also holds for smooth heaps, but the
proof requires some changes. There are no root swaps after deletion of the original root, so
the part of the proof concerning such swaps can be omitted. On the other hand, the roots
on the root list after deletion of the original root u at the beginning of a delete-min are
not in order by link time: The left roots are in decreasing order by link time and the right
roots are in increasing order by link time.
    Let v1 , v2 , . . . , vk be the temporary nodes in T , in symmetric order in T , and let vj be
the child that u acquired earliest. Root vj is either the rightmost left root or the leftmost
right root among the vi . For 1 ≤ i ≤ k let u.ri′ be the value of u.r just after u lost the link
                                     ′
   3
    The required change is that 2v.r is at most log2 ((u.s + v.s)/v.s), but not necessarily equal to it. This
does not affect the validity of the proof.



                                                     40
uvi cut by the delete-min. We redefine ∆i to flip the sign of ∆i for i ≥ j. Specifically, for
1 ≤ i < j, ∆i = u.ri′ − u.ri+1
                             ′                               ′
                                ; for j ≤ i < k, let ∆i = u.ri+1 − u.ri′ . For 1 ≤ i < k, let Ii
be the interval of time between just after uvi is done and just after uvi+1 is done. A given
instant of time is in at most one Ii for i < j and one Ii for i ≥ j. It follows that the sum
of |∆i | for 1 ≤ i < k is at most twice the sum of the changes in u.r over all such changes.
The rest of the proof remains the same, except that the multiplying factor for intervals
overlapping is two rather than three. We conclude that the sum of the u-shifts of all real
deletion links is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per delete-min.
    The proofs of Theorem 8.12, 8.13, and 8.14 hold without change for smooth heaps if
we replace each slim heap result with the corresponding result for smooth heaps. That
is, any sequence of smooth heap operations starting with no heaps takes takes O(lg lg n)
amortized time per decrease-key, O(lg n) amortized time per deletion, and O(1) amortized
(and worst-case) time for each other heap operation.

9.3    Node-rank changes in smooth heaps
The last step is to prove Theorem 8.8 for smooth heaps. The proofs of Lemmas 8.16
and 8.17 hold without change for smooth heaps. Thus the sum of node rank increases
caused by insertion and decrease-key links is at most 2 lg lg n per decrease-key plus at most
lg lg n + 3 per delete-min.
     The proof of Lemma 8.18 holds for non-central phantom left-side links. The symmetric
argument applies to non-central phantom right-side links. We conclude that the sum of
node rank increases caused by such links is at most 2 lg lg n per decrease-key plus at most
6 per delete-min.
     The proof of Lemma 8.19 holds for real non-central left-side links, with one change:
Such a link vw decreases the mass of w to at most the size of v. This does not affect the
validity of the proof. The symmetric argument applies to real non-central right-side links.
We conclude that real non-central left-side and right-side links do not increase any node
rank, although the associated step-ups might.
     The proof of Lemma 8.20 holds for anomalous left-side links, and the symmetric ar-
gument applies to anomalous right-side links. All anomalous links are non-central. We
conclude that the sum of the increases in node ranks caused by step-ups during anomalous
links is at most 2 lg lg n per decrease-key plus at most 6 per delete-min.
     The proof of Lemma 8.21 holds for real right non-central links between heavy left roots
with trivial changes: There are no node swaps at the start of the delete-min, and the sum
performed is just over the relevant left-side links. The symmetric argument applies to real
left non-central links between heavy right roots. We conclude that the sum of the increases
in node ranks caused by step-ups before real non-central links between heavy roots is at
most 4 lg n.
     The proofs of Lemmas 8.22 and 8.23 hold for real right links of light left roots, since the
link uv in the statement of Lemma 8.22 is lost by a light node and hence cannot be a central
link. The symmetric argument applies to real left links of light right roots. We conclude
that the sum of rank increases caused by real non-central links between light nodes is at
most 4 lg n per delete-min.
     It remains to bound the sum of increases in node ranks caused by central links.

                                              41
Lemma 9.1. In any sequence of slim heap operations starting with no heaps, the sum of
the increases in node ranks caused by central links is at most lg lg n per decrease-key plus
10 lg n + lg lg n + 3 per delete-min.

Proof. For a root v on the central path, let unprimed variables v.r, v.m, v.s take their
values at the start of the central linking phase, and let primed variables v.r ′ , v.m′ , v.s′ take
their values just after v wins its central link. If v is the bottommost node on the central
path, it does not win a central link and the primed and unprimed variables are equal.
    At the start of the central linking phase, the mass of a root (but not is size) can change,
but any such change is a decrease. Hence such changes can only decrease root ranks. A
phantom central link does not change the rank of the winner and the loser’s rank becomes
zero. Hence only real central links can cause rank increases.
    The winner of a real central link increases in mass, but its size increases by the same
amount, so its rank does not increase. The loser’s rank can increase due to the step-up.
Nothing else causes rank increases during the central linking phase. It remains to bound
the rank increases due to step-ups.
    Let vw be a real central link. Let M and M be with respect to the real subpath
containing v and w.
    If v and w are outer, then the mass of w steps up from w.m′ to v.m′ = w.m′ + v.s. The
corresponding rank increase is at most 2 lg v.m′ − 2 lg w.m′ . Observe that v.m′ − w.m′ =
v.m − w.m = v.s, and that v.m′ ≥ v.m and w.m′ ≥ w.m. Hence 2 lg v.m′ − 2 lg w.m′ ≤
2 lg v.m − 2 lg w.m. Since w is next to v and interior to it at the start of the central linking
phase, the sum of 2 lg v.m − 2 lg w.m over all central left-side links between outer roots is
at most 2 lg n. The same applies to the central right-side links between outer roots. Thus
the sum of rank increases due to central links between outer roots is at most 4 lg n.
    If v and w are inner, the mass of w steps up from w.m′ to v.m′ = w.m′ + v.s, yielding a
rank increase of at most 2 lg v.m′ − 2 lg w.m′ . Summing this bound over all links between
inner roots within a single real subpath, the sum of rank increases is at most 2 lg x.m′ −
2 lg M, where x is the highest inner root on the real subpath. We rewrite this quantity as
(2 lg x.m′ − 2 lg x.m) + (2 lg x.m − 2 lg M), and bound the two terms separately.
    We charge the first term, 2 lg x.m′ − 2 lg x.m, to the future deletion of x. Since x.m′ =
M + x.s′ and x.m ≥ M + x.s, 2 lg x.m′ − 2 lg x.m ≤ 2 lg(M + x.s′ ) − 2 lg(M + x.s) ≤
2 lg x.s′ − 2 lg x.s. The sum of 2 lg x.s′ − 2 lg x.s over all changes in the size of x is at most
2 lg n. The total charge is 2 lg n per delete-min.
    We charge the second term, 2 lg x.m − 2 lg M, to the current delete-min. Suppose the
real subpath containing x, say P , is left-light. If there is another left-light real subpath
P ′ above P on the central path, then x.m ≤ M ′ where M ′ is defined with respect to P ′ .
This inequality also holds for the topmost left-light real subpath if we set M ′ = n. Then
2 lg x.m − 2 lg M ≤ 2 lg M ′ − 2 lg M. The sum of this bound over all left-light real subpaths
P is at most 2 lg n. The symmetric argument yields the same bound for the right-light real
subpaths, giving a total bound of 4 lg n. Hence the sum of rank increases due to central
links between inner nodes is at most 6 lg n per delete-min.
    Finally, on each real subpath there is at most one link between an outer root and
an inner root. The step-up increases the rank of the inner root by at most lg lg n. We
charge this increase to the phantom k-link lost by the top node on the real subpath, or

                                                42
to the current delete-min if the top node is the root of T . The total cost is lg lg n per
decrease-key plus lg lg n + 3 per delete-min, by Lemma 6.1. This proves the lemma.
    Combining our bounds, we obtain Theorem 8.8 for smooth heaps, with somewhat larger
constants. That is, in any sequence of smooth heap operations starting with no heaps, the
sum of the magnitudes of node-rank changes is O(lg lg n) per decrease-key plus O(lg n) per
delete-min.


10      Lazy self-adjusting heaps
We have analyzed the eager (tree) versions of multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps, and
smooth heaps. The same bounds hold for the lazy (forest) versions of these data structures.
As described at the end of Section 2, these versions maintain a heap as a set of trees rather
than just a single tree, represented by a circular list of roots and accessed by a root of
minimum key, the min-root. Insertions, melds, and decrease-keys do not do links; instead,
an insert makes the new node into a one-node tree and adds it to the root list, a meld
catenates the root lists of the two heaps, and a decrease-key of a child node w cuts w from
its parent and adds w to the root list. In each case, the operation updates the min-root.
A delete-min deletes the min-root and catenates the list of its children with the root list,
making its children into new roots. The other roots, which were already roots before the
min-root was deleted, are old roots. It then proceeds to link the roots using the appropriate
linking method until one root remains.
     In discussing the lazy versions, we shall assume that the list of old roots in a delete-min
is added to the front of the list of new roots, so that all the old roots precede all the new
roots before any links occur. Equivalently, we maintain the min-root as the rightmost root
on the root list, and when a delete-min occurs the list of new roots replaces the deleted
min-root. In a smooth heap, we define each old root to be a left root.
     The only change we need to make in any of the analyses is to account for increases in
node ranks of the old roots after deletion of the min-root. Before the min-root is deleted,
each old root has rank 0. Deletion of the min-root causes the mass of each old temporary
root v to increase from its size to the sum of its size and those of all temporary roots to
its right on the root list. This increases its mass by at most lg lg n. Root v became an old
root by being inserted or by being cut from its parent in a decrease-key. We charge the
increase in the rank of v to the next operation that makes v a root not in the middle of a
delete-min. This operation is either a decrease-key or a delete-min. An adaptation of the
proof of Lemma 7.21 shows that the sum of the increases of the ranks of old roots at the
beginning of delete-mins is O(lg n) per delete-min plus O(lg lg n) per delete-min. It follows
that the bounds for the eager heap implementations hold for the lazy implementations as
well.
     Our bounds also hold if delete-min catenates the list of new roots to the front of the
list of old roots rather than to the back but (except for smooth heaps) the analysis is much
less straightforward. For smooth heaps, we merely define old roots to be right roots instead
of left roots. For multipass pairing heaps and slim heaps, we define new roots to be left
roots and old roots to be right roots, and analyze links between left and right roots in a
way similar to what we did in the analysis of smooth heaps.

                                              43
11     Remarks
Using powerful new techniques, we have significantly improved the amortized time bounds
for multipass pairing heaps, slim heaps, and smooth heaps. Slim and smooth heaps are
subject to the lower bounds of Iacono and Özkan, and our upper bounds match their
lower bounds. They are not subject to Fredman’s lower bounds, but they do match them.
Multipass pairing heaps are subject to both sets of lower bounds. Our bounds match them
except for that of decrease-key, which differs from the lower bound by a factor of lg lg lg n.
Our bounds hold for both the eager and the lazy versions of the data structures.
    By showing that slim and smooth heaps match the lower bounds of Fredman and of
Iacono and Özkan and are subject to Iacono and Özkan’s bounds (though not Fredman’s),
we have closed a chapter in the design and analysis of self-adjusting heaps. But this is
far from resolving all interesting questions. In particular, for decrease-key operations in
multipass pairing heaps there is still a Θ(lg lg lg n) gap between the upper and lower time
bounds. The known time-bound gap for decrease-key operations in classical pairing heaps
is significantly larger, as we discussed in the introduction. Whether our methods, or any
others, will suffice to close these gaps is a subject for future study. In particular, we are
optimistic that our methods can be extended to give a much tighter bound for decrease-key
in classical pairing heaps.
    What is it that makes a self-adjusting heap efficient? Our results suggest two require-
ments: The links in delete-min operations should respect link-time order, and each root
should win at most a constant number of links in each delete-min. We do not know whether
these conditions are necessary: pairing heaps and their variants satisfy the first but not
the second. On the other hand, the assembly pass in pairing heaps (see [22, 21]), during
which a root can win an arbitrary number of links, seems benign to us. We think classical
pairing heaps have the same amortized bounds as slim and smooth heaps, but we have no
proof yet.
    Another possible research direction is to apply our methods to splay trees or similar
binary search trees. A previous paper on multipass pairing heaps [3] connected their anal-
ysis to that of a variant of splay trees called path-balanced binary search trees. Perhaps our
techniques could improve the analysis of this data structure as well.


References
 [1] Gerth Stølting Brodal. A survey on priority queues. In Andrej Brodnik, Alejan-
     dro López-Ortiz, Venkatesh Raman, and Alfredo Viola, editors, Space-Efficient Data
     Structures, Streams, and Algorithms - Papers in Honor of J. Ian Munro on the Occa-
     sion of His 66th Birthday, volume 8066 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     150–163. Springer, 2013.

 [2] Erik D. Demaine, Dion Harmon, John Iacono, Daniel M. Kane, and Mihai Pǎtraşcu.
     The geometry of binary search trees. In SODA 2009, pages 496–505, 2009.

 [3] Dani Dorfman, Haim Kaplan, László Kozma, Seth Pettie, and Uri Zwick. Improved
     bounds for multipass pairing heaps and path-balanced binary search trees. In Yossi

                                             44
    Azar, Hannah Bast, and Grzegorz Herman, editors, 26th Annual European Sympo-
    sium on Algorithms, ESA 2018, August 20-22, 2018, Helsinki, Finland, volume 112 of
    LIPIcs, pages 24:1–24:13. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.

 [4] Amr Elmasry. Pairing heaps with O(log log n) decrease cost. In Proceedings of the twen-
     tieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 471–476. SIAM,
     2009.

 [5] Amr Elmasry. Toward optimal self-adjusting heaps.           ACM Trans. Algorithms,
     13(4):55:1–55:14, 2017.

 [6] Kyle Fox. Upper bounds for maximally greedy binary search trees. In Workshop on
     Algorithms and Data Structures, pages 411–422. Springer, 2011.

 [7] Michael L. Fredman. On the efficiency of pairing heaps and related data structures.
     J. ACM, 46(4):473–501, 1999.

 [8] Michael L. Fredman, Robert Sedgewick, Daniel Dominic Sleator, and Robert Endre
     Tarjan. The pairing heap: A new form of self-adjusting heap. Algorithmica, 1(1):111–
     129, 1986.

 [9] Michael L. Fredman and Robert Endre Tarjan. Fibonacci heaps and their uses in
     improved network optimization algorithms. J. ACM, 34(3):596–615, 1987.

[10] Thomas Dueholm Hansen, Haim Kaplan, Robert E. Tarjan, and Uri Zwick. Hollow
     heaps. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 13(3):42:1–42:27, 2017.

[11] Maria Hartmann, László Kozma, Corwin Sinnamon, and Robert E. Tarjan. Anal-
     ysis of Smooth Heaps and Slim Heaps. In Nikhil Bansal, Emanuela Merelli, and
     James Worrell, editors, 48th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
     Programming (ICALP 2021), volume 198 of Leibniz International Proceedings in In-
     formatics (LIPIcs), pages 79:1–79:20, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2021. Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.

[12] John Iacono. Improved upper bounds for pairing heaps. In Magnús M. Halldórsson,
     editor, Algorithm Theory - SWAT 2000, 7th Scandinavian Workshop on Algorithm
     Theory, Bergen, Norway, July 5-7, 2000, Proceedings, volume 1851 of Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, pages 32–45. Springer, 2000.

[13] John Iacono and Özgür Özkan. A tight lower bound for decrease-key in the pure heap
     model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.6665, 2014.

[14] Haim Kaplan, Robert Endre Tarjan, and Uri Zwick. Fibonacci heaps revisited. CoRR,
     abs/1407.5750, 2014.

[15] László Kozma and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Smooth heaps and a dual view of self-
     adjusting data structures. SIAM Journal on Computing, 49(5):STOC18–45–STOC18–
     93, 2020.


                                            45
[16] Daniel H. Larkin, Siddhartha Sen, and Robert Endre Tarjan. A back-to-basics empiri-
     cal study of priority queues. In Catherine C. McGeoch and Ulrich Meyer, editors, 2014
     Proceedings of the Sixteenth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments,
     ALENEX 2014, Portland, Oregon, USA, January 5, 2014, pages 61–72. SIAM, 2014.

[17] Joan M. Lucas. Canonical forms for competitive binary search tree algorithms. Tech.
     Rep. DCS-TR-250, Rutgers University, 1988.

[18] Kurt Mehlhorn and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Greedy is an almost optimal deque. In
     Algorithms and Data Structures: 14th International Symposium, WADS 2015, Vic-
     toria, BC, Canada, August 5-7, 2015. Proceedings, volume 9214, page 152. Springer,
     2015.

[19] J.Ian Munro. On the competitiveness of linear search. In Mike S. Paterson, editor,
     Algorithms - ESA 2000, volume 1879 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
     338–345. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000.

[20] Seth Pettie. Towards a final analysis of pairing heaps. In 46th Annual IEEE Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2005), 23-25 October 2005, Pittsburgh,
     PA, USA, Proceedings, pages 174–183. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.

[21] Corwin Sinnamon. Analysis of self-adjusting heaps. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
     2022.

[22] Corwin Sinnamon and Robert Tarjan. A simpler proof that pairing heaps take O(1)
     amortized time per insertion, 2022.

[23] Corwin Sinnamon and Robert E Tarjan. A nearly-tight analysis of multipass pair-
     ing heaps. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
     Algorithms (SODA), pages 535–548. SIAM, 2023.

[24] Corwin Sinnamon and Robert E Tarjan. A tight analysis of slim heaps and smooth
     heaps. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
     rithms (SODA), pages 549–567. SIAM, 2023.

[25] Robert Endre Tarjan. Data structures and network algorithms. SIAM, 1983.




                                           46
