                                                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS


                                         DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


                                                  Abstract. We define and develop two-level type theory (2LTT), a version of
                                                  Martin-Löf type theory which combines two different type theories. We refer
                                                  to them as the “inner” and the “outer” type theory. In our case of interest,
                                                  the inner theory is homotopy type theory (HoTT) which may include univalent
arXiv:1705.03307v5 [cs.LO] 26 May 2026




                                                  universes and higher inductive types. The outer theory is a traditional form of
                                                  type theory validating uniqueness of identity proofs (UIP). One point of view
                                                  on it is as internalised meta-theory of the inner type theory.
                                                      There are two motivations for 2LTT. Firstly, there are certain results about
                                                  HoTT which are of meta-theoretic nature, such as the statement that semisim-
                                                  plicial types up to level n can be constructed in HoTT for any externally fixed
                                                  natural number n. Such results cannot be expressed in HoTT itself, but they
                                                  can be formalised and proved in 2LTT, where n will be a variable in the outer
                                                  theory. This point of view is inspired by observations about conservativity of
                                                  presheaf models [Cap16].
                                                      Secondly, 2LTT is a framework which is suitable for formulating additional
                                                  axioms that one might want to add to HoTT. This idea is heavily inspired
                                                  by Voevodsky’s Homotopy Type System (HTS) [Voe13], which constitutes one
                                                  specific instance of a 2LTT. HTS has an axiom ensuring that the type of
                                                  natural numbers behaves like the external natural numbers, which allows the
                                                  construction of a universe of semisimplicial types. In 2LTT, this axiom can be
                                                  assumed by postulating that the inner and outer natural numbers types are
                                                  isomorphic.
                                                      After defining 2LTT, we set up a collection of tools with the goal of mak-
                                                  ing 2LTT a convenient language for future developments. As a first such
                                                  application, we develop the theory of Reedy fibrant diagrams in the style of
                                                  Shulman [Shu15b]. Continuing this line of thought, we suggest a definition of
                                                  (∞, 1)-category and give some examples.




                                                                                   Contents
                                            1. Introduction                                                                               2
                                            1.1. Context of this paper and related work                                                   5
                                            1.2. Outline                                                                                  6
                                            2. Two-level type theory                                                                      6
                                            2.1. Syntax                                                                                   7
                                            2.2. Semantics                                                                                9
                                            2.3. Preservation of type formers by conversion                                              11
                                            2.4. Strengthenings and extensions                                                           13
                                            2.5. Example models                                                                          15

                                             Funding notes: This work has been supported by
                                                 - the Royal Society, grant reference URF\R1\191055;
                                                 - the European Union, co-financed by the European Social Fund (EFOP-3.6.2-16-2017-00013,
                                                   Thematic Fundamental Research Collaborations, Grounding Innovation in Informatics and
                                                   Infocommunication)
                                                 - the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), grant reference
                                                   EP/M016994/1;
                                                 - USAF, Airforce office for scientific research, award FA9550-16-1-0029;
                                                 - and the HIPERFIT Research Centre, Danish Council for Strategic Research, contract number
                                                   10-092299.
                                         Authors’ affiliations: Concordium Blockchain Research Center, Aarhus University; Technische Univer-
                                         sität Darmstadt; University of Birmingham; University of Nottingham.
                                                                                         1
2   DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


    2.6. Conservativity                                                              22
    2.7. On the possibility of a fibrant replacement                                 23
    2.8. Notational conventions                                                      24
    3. Basic tools: categories, fibrations, and cofibrations                         24
    3.1. Preliminaries                                                               25
    3.2. Fibrant types                                                               26
    3.3. Fibrations                                                                  27
    3.4. Cofibrations                                                                28
    4. Reedy fibrant diagrams                                                        34
    4.1. Motivation                                                                  34
    4.2. Inverse categories                                                          35
    4.3. Reedy fibrations                                                            36
    4.4. Reedy fibrant factorisations                                                40
    4.5. Classifiers for Reedy fibrations                                            44
    4.6. Exponents of diagrams                                                       49
    4.7. Complete semi-Segal types                                                   51
    5. Conclusions                                                                   54
    Acknowledgments                                                                  55
    References                                                                       55




                                  1. Introduction
    The literature on homotopy type theory (HoTT), and type theory in general, of-
fers a great variety of results. Some developments are completely internal to a spe-
cific type theory, that is, they can be expressed in type-theoretic syntax and mecha-
nised using a proof assistant which itself is an implementation of a sufficiently good
approximation of the considered type theory. Examples include most of the material
in the homotopy type theory book [Uni13], many theorems of which have been for-
malised in the proof assistants Coq [BC10], Agda [Nor07], and Lean [dMKA+ 15].
A second kind of literature presents results of inherently meta-theoretic nature,
for example the development of models of type theory, or proofs that a system is
strongly normalising, and so on.
    What we are particularly interested in is a third kind of result. Some develop-
ments are partially internal to homotopy type theory, and often one would want
them to be completely internal and formalisable in a proof assistant, but unfortu-
nately, it is either unknown how this is doable or it is known to be impossible. The
most well-known and most frequently discussed example for this situation is the
definition of semisimplicial types [LU13]. An informal explanation of the problem
is the following. A semisimplicial type of level 1 is the same as a type A0 in a fixed
universe U. A semisimplicial type of level 2 is a pair (A0 , A1 ) of a type A0 ∶ U and
a family A1 ∶ A0 → A0 → U. A semisimplicial type of level 3 is a triple (A0 , A1 , A2 )
with A0 and A1 as before, and A2 of the type
                  A2 ∶ Π(x, y, z ∶ A0 ).A1 x y → A1 y z → A1 x z → U.
We think of A0 as a type of points, A1 x y as a type of lines from x to y, and
A2 x y z f g h as a type of “triangle fillers” for the triangle spanned by f , g, and h.
It is tedious but intuitively clear how to extend this definition to levels 4 or 5 (or
even 100) in this style. An open problem of HoTT asks: Is it possible to construct
a function S ∶ N → U1 such that, for every n, the type S(n) encodes the type of
semisimplicial types of level n? It is known that, for any externally fixed number k
(e.g. 4,5,100), we can construct a type Sk that encodes semisimplicial types of level
                      TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                     3


k. However, this is not enough to construct an internal function S. Two questions
arise naturally:
    (1) How can we formalise the construction of Sk for every external natural
         number k?
    (2) How can we extend the type theory such that S itself can be constructed?
In order to answer question 2, Voevodsky suggested a type theory called homotopy
type system (HTS) [Voe13]. This theory introduces a type of what they call exact
equalities. Exact equality is an internalised version of judgmental (a.k.a. defini-
tional) equality and co-exists with, but is very different from, the usual internal
equality type (a.k.a. identity type, identification type, path type). In HTS, exact
equality comes with some additional built-in assumptions.
   We can think of the type theory of HTS as divided into two levels, each of which
is a version of type theory on its own. The first is the actual object of study and
close to HoTT; HTS refers to it as the fibrant fragment, and its equality type is the
usual path type. In the second type theory, it is possible to reason about, rather
than in, HoTT; this is the “full” type theory of HTS with all types including not
necessarily fibrant ones, and its equality type is viewed as “internalised judgmental
equality”.
   We call a system of this form (and the study of such systems) two-level type
theory (2LTT). The two levels are respectively called inner and outer ; for this
paper and for HTS, the inner level is a version of HoTT.1
   We strive to keep the assumptions on 2LTT to a minimum. For example, while
HTS assumes that types of the inner level are (in some appropriate sense) a “subset”
of the outer level, we do not make this assumption. Instead, we only request that
there is a conversion function from the inner level to the outer. This is not as
drastic of a change as it may sound, and it allows for a larger class of models. Of
course, the HTS setup is the special case where the conversion function is simply
an inclusion, and a user of 2LTT is free to add this or other such assumptions to
the theory they consider, as least as long as these assumptions are justified by a
model. We discuss such variations in Subsection 2.4. However, most of the theory
in the later part of this paper is developed without such assumptions.
   One intuition for the two levels is as follows: from a type in HoTT, we can extract
a statement that can be phrased in the meta-theory. From a meta-theoretical
statement about HoTT, it is not always possible to construct a type. Thus, we can
convert inner types into outer one, but not always vice versa.
   The fact that HTS calls inner types fibrant suggests an interpretation in model
categories or similar models of abstract homotopy theory. We will adopt a similar
terminology, but choose to reserve the term fibrant for a slightly different notion:
an outer type is fibrant if it is isomorphic to an inner one. This makes mixing the
two levels more convenient when working internally.
   While HTS is an answer to question 2, it does not seem suitable as a tool to
address question 1: the theory of HTS has not been designed to be conservative
over HoTT. Thus, it is unclear what the relation is between statements provable in
the inner level of HTS and statements provable in HoTT. The version of 2LTT that
we study in this paper does have this conservativity property over HoTT [Cap16]
(see Subsection 2.6). That is, given a type in any context in HoTT, if the cor-
responding type in the inner level of 2LTT is inhabited, we obtain an inhabitant
of the original type in HoTT. This can be seen as a canonicity property of the
   1Alternative terminology: Some authors refer to outer types as pretypes [ACK16], strict types,
non-fibrant types or exotypes [ANST21]. Inner types are also simply referred to as types or fibrant
types. In this paper, the term fibrant is reserved for outer types that are isomorphic to inner
types.
4   DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


inner level with respect to the full system. It is unknown whether the same is the
case for HTS, but we do not expect it (see the discussion in Subsection 2.4). This
crucial difference between our version of 2LTT and HTS is however not due to the
differences mentioned so far. Instead, the reason is that HTS assumes that many
type formers (apart from equality), in particular empty, unit, and natural number
type are shared between the two levels. In our setting, this would correspond to
the assumption (A1) of Subsection 2.4 that the conversion function from the inner
to the outer level preserves these type formers, and such a strong assumption is
not covered by the mentioned conservativity result [Cap16]. In summary: the basic
version of 2LTT that we work with in this paper is suitable to address question 1,
and the framework makes it easy to add additional axioms, also weaker ones such
as (A2), which allows it to address question 2.
   The idea of semisimplicial types can be developed further as demonstrated by
Shulman, who considers diagrams over a larger class of categories [Shu15b]. For
clarity of what happens, we switch back to the setting of HoTT rather than 2LTT.
Shulman shows that, given externally a category C with a certain property (being
inverse), we have a well-behaved notion of type-valued diagrams over C (called
Reedy fibrant). For finite C, there will even be a type of such diagrams. Note that
C is not a variable that we can quantify over inside the type theory: it is assumed
to be given externally. In other words, if we choose a concrete instance for C, we
can take a proof assistant, implement the type of these diagrams, and work with
them internally. However, if C is an internal variable, this is not possible. 2LTT
offers a setting in which this situation can be developed and formalised: C becomes
a variable in the outer level, and we will demonstrate in this paper how this can be
done (see Section 4). Semisimplicial types restricted to level n are the special case
where C is taken to be the initial segment of length n of the semisimplex category.
   Without 2LTT, a standard approach to the development of such a theory of
diagrams over C is to fix a (possibly arbitrary) model of type theory and work in
the corresponding category, using categorical tools. This requires carefully mix-
ing internal notions with external ones, and there may not always be a clean
way to achieve that. In the mentioned work by Shulman, the role of the model
of HoTT is played by a type-theoretic fibration category (TTFC). Most results of
their paper are formulated at that level, that is, as categorical constructions within
a particular TTFC. This requires changing style of presentation compared to a
more “traditional” type-theoretic exposition, like for example that of the book on
HoTT [Uni13]. For instance, one has to work with morphisms rather than terms,
fibrations rather than families of types, talk about pullbacks rather than just per-
forming substitutions, and use “diagrammatic” instead of “equational” reasoning
techniques. Although these stylistic variations are not necessarily bad in them-
selves, the fact that one is essentially forced to apply them can lead to difficulties.
A testament to that is the fact that, on occasions, the discussed work [Shu15b] falls
back to the internal language to formulate certain definitions and properties, as
this is much easier than expressing them in a category-theoretic form. 2LTT offers
an alternative strategy: Type theory is the only language that is needed, meaning
that internal and external reasoning go hand in hand, and the mixing feels very
natural.
   There are three equally valid ways to think about 2LTT: We can start with the
type theory that we want to study (e.g. HoTT), take it as the inner level, and build
some of its meta-theory as an additional layer on top of it. Vice versa, we can
start with a theory that is suitable as the outer level (e.g. MLTT with function
extensionality and unique identity proofs), expose a type family declared as the
universe of inner types, and develop the inner level from there. As the middle
                       TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                         5


ground, we can think of the inner and outer theories as coexisting side-by-side,
with a shared notion of context, related only by a conversion function from the
inner to the outer level. We take this middle ground as our setup, but our point
of view, reflected in our choice of terminology, is the second: we consider the outer
level as the “default” type theory, and in particular, equality and equality type will
always mean the equality type of the outer level. When talking about constructions
that happen at the inner level, we will make this clear explicitly, and the equalities
of the inner level are referred to as inner equalities or path-equalities. We make this
choice for a number of reasons. First, it is reasonable when considering models,
since the equality of the outer level is much closer to actual “external equality”
than path-equality is (see Subsection 2.5). Second, our choice is also pragmatic
since, in practice, one works in the outer theory most of the time as the outer
theory is more expressive. For example, in the outer theory, a (small) diagram of
types always has a limit that can be calculated in the same way as in the category
of sets. In general of course this will not be fibrant, but the ability to talk about
it will be useful nevertheless. Finally, our choice also matches the way that 2LTT
can be implemented in existing proof assistants such as Coq, Agda, or Lean. We
have formalised some of the results in this paper in this style.2
1.1. Context of this paper and related work. The current paper significantly
reworks and extends the idea of 2LTT that Altenkirch and two of the current au-
thors have presented at the CSL’16 conference [ACK16]. As discussed, a main
inspiration for the development presented in the current paper is Voevodsky’s
HTS [Voe13], which itself was suggested as an answer to question 2. The other
aspect (question 1) is perhaps a bit closer to the motivation for Maietti’s mini-
malist two-level foundation for constructive mathematics [Mai09] (also cf. the work
with Sambin [MS05]). There, the reason for the split of the theory into two levels is
that it allows to have minimal type theory as (what we call) the inner level, a type
theory that is free of extensionality principles and implements a specific formula-
tion of the proofs-as-programs paradigm, while still having an (in our terminology)
outer level with powerful principles. Somewhat similarly, 2LTT has an inner level
that can be taken to be free from principles that are not part of HoTT, while
such principles can then be added via the outer level. Angiuli, Hou (Favonia), and
Harper [AHH18] present cartesian cubical type theory as a two-level system.
   2LTT as presented in the current paper (or, rather, a previous draft of it that had
been available for a while) has been used by and connected to several other lines of
work. One is the book The Univalence Principle by Ahrens, North, Shulman, and
Tsementzis [ANST21], using the setting to formulate and prove a very general result
stating that equivalent mathematical structures are indistinguishable.3 Going in a
different direction, Kovács uses 2LTT for staging with dependent types [Kov22]
and, in particular, shows that staging with stability and soundness corresponds to
conservativity over the inner level. Yet another application was given by Barras and
Maestracci [BM20], using a two-level type theory in Dedukti [ABC+ 16] to encode
cubical type theory. Finally, 2LTT provides a framework which may be expressive
enough to “eat” (model in a partially synthetic sense) HoTT [Kra21].
   Other suggestions to address question 2, i.e. systems that make it possible to
develop a theory of semisimplicial types and higher categories, have been made.
One is the type theory for synthetic ∞-categories by Riehl and Shulman [RS17], a
setting that uses additional context layers to express structure that, in 2LTT, would
be expressed via the outer equality type. A setting closer to standard HoTT, but
less expressive, was suggested by Finster, Allioux, and Sozeau: By equipping HoTT
  2The code is available at https://github.com/annenkov/two-level.
  3
      A shorter and earlier version of this work is also available [ANST20].
6   DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


with a universe of judgmentally associative and unital polynomial monads, they can
encode higher coherent algebraic structures including ∞-groupoids.
   Our formalisation approach of 2LTT mentioned above uses the type theory of
Lean as the outer level, and uses type classes to keep track of and automatically
propagate fibrancy constraints. We discuss this further in the conclusions (Sec-
tion 5). This strategy is similar to the one used by Boulier and Tabareau [BT17]
in Coq, although their development proceeds in a direction different from the one
pursued in the present paper. They define the fibrant equality type as a private
inductive type [Ber13]. Exposing a custom induction principle for such a private
inductive type allows one to retain computational behaviour while restricting the
user to explicitly provided eliminators. However, private inductive types are not
available in all proof assistants. Agda supports a version of 2LTT more directly via
a universe of “strict sets” SSet.4 Agda’s approach is somewhat different: instead
of starting in the outer level and encoding inner types from there, it treats Agda’s
types as fibrant by default and adds a new universe to simulate the outer level
instead. 2LTT in this setting has been explored by Uskuplu [Usk25].

1.2. Outline. The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we specify the
version of 2LTT that we consider in this paper. We intentionally include as few
assumptions on the theory as possible, but we also discuss a number of reasonable
additional assumption that one would like to make. The section also discusses the
semantics of 2LTT, with some minor differences to the development of [Cap16].
Indeed, we think of 2LTT as being defined via its category of models. We show
basic results and introduce the useful notions of fibrancy and cofibrancy in Sec-
tion 3. This section, we hope, turns 2LTT into a language which can be useful
for the study of concepts that are not completely internal to HoTT. A first such
application can be found in Section 4, where we develop the theory of Reedy fibrant
diagrams over inverse categories. We conclude in Section 5 with a short discussion
on formalisations.

                              2. Two-level type theory
    The basic idea of 2LTT is that it contains two separate levels of types:
       ● the outer level, which is a form of traditional Martin-Löf type theory with
         intensional equality types and the principle of uniqueness of identity proofs
         (UIP);
       ● the inner level, which is essentially homotopy type theory, and contains
         univalent universes and potentially higher inductive types [Uni13].
   In this section, we start by suggesting a syntax for 2LTT. We strive to be close
to the standard syntax of MLTT and HoTT as used in the book [Uni13]. In a
nutshell, we have two copies of each basic type or type former, one outer and one
inner. Inner types can be converted to outer types via a separate operation, and
contexts are shared between the two levels.
   Our suggested syntax should not be understood as a complete specification of
2LTT: such syntactical specifications require many more rules than we give, most
of which are obvious and standard but nevertheless important. Instead, we give a
precise specification of 2LTT with a semantic approach. We define what a model
of 2LTT is (essentially a combination of two categories with families [Dyb95] which
share a common category of contexts). From this definition, it is clear that the
suggested syntax can be used to perform constructions in any model of 2LTT.

    4A pull request to Agda’s repository is available at https://github.com/agda/agda/pull/4091.
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                             7


Remark 2.1 (Initiality of the syntax). We can view the syntax as notation which
works in any model, and this is how we understand the developments in later
sections of the paper. Our category of two-level models will be the category of
models of a generalised algebraic theory and thus be locally finitely presentable.
As such, there is in particular an initial model for two-level type theory, and of
course, all constructions will work in this initial model. If one were to make the
syntax precise (cf. [BA21, BAK21]), then one would expect this initial model to
coincide with the term model. However, it is known in the community that a
complete proof for this sort of statement requires a lot of work. For the calculus of
constructions, this was carefully worked out by Streicher [Str93a], and formalisation
projects for intensional Martin-Löf type theory were described by de Boer, Brunerie,
Lumsdaine, and Mörtberg [BdBLM19, LM18, BL18, BL20]. An Agda formalisation
is available as part of the licanciate thesis by de Boer [dB20]. It may be possible
to adapt these proofs to two-level type theory, but this is beyond the scope of the
paper. While the question is of course important for type theory in general, it is
orthogonal to the specific idea of having two levels.

   After specifying 2LTT via models, we observe some immediate consequences
from the definitions: for example, Π- and Σ-types are preserved up to isomorphism
when converting from outer to inner types. Other properties do not follow from
the definitions but could be added as assumptions, leading to systems such as
HTS, and we discuss these assumptions separately. We also discuss several specific
example models (or classes of example models), and prove a conservativity property
for 2LTT without further assumptions. Further, we examine the possibility of an
inner replacement (or fibrant replacement).


2.1. Syntax. We stay close to the presentation of type theory given in the appendix
in the homotopy type theory book [Uni13, App. A.2]. There is however one technical
difference that we want to make. The semantics of Russell-style universes (where
terms of the universe are types) is less elegant than the one of Tarski-style universes
(if A is a term of a universe, then El A is a type), and the former can be seen as
a special case of the latter. This is a general observation in type theory which has
little to do with the idea of having two levels; see also point (M2) in Subsection 2.4.
    We consider the judgments Γ ctx, Γ ⊢ a ∶ A, and Γ ⊢ a ≡ a′ ∶ A. In addition, we
consider the two judgments

                        Γ ⊢ A typej               Γ ⊢ A typeij

Here, j is a natural number, the size of A. The first means that A is an outer type,
the second that A is an inner type. Similar to the judgment Γ ⊢ a ≡ a′ ∶ A, we
consider equality judgments for types.
   For the outer level of the theory that we consider, we have the following basic
types and type formers:
      ● Π, the type former of dependent functions;
      ● Σ, the type former of dependent pairs;
      ● +, the coproduct type former;
      ● 1, the unit type;
      ● 0, the empty type;
      ● N, the type of natural numbers;
      ● =, the equality type;
      ● a cumulative hierarchy U0 , U1 , . . . of universes;
      ● inductive and quotient types (not used in this paper).
8   DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


The inner level of our 2LTT has the same basic types and type formers. We annotate
them to avoid confusion:5
       ● Πi , the type former of inner dependent functions;
       ● Σi , the type former of inner dependent pairs;
       ● +i , the inner coproduct type former;
       ● 1i , the inner unit type;
       ● 0i , the inner empty type;
       ● Ni , the inner type of natural numbers;
       ● =i , the inner equality (or path-equality) type (in the sense of HoTT);
       ● a cumulative hierarchy U0i , U1i , . . . of inner universes;
       ● possibly inductive and higher inductive types.
The basic rules for Π, +, 1, 0, N, as well as Πi , +i , 1i , 0i , Ni are the standard
ones and match those given in the HoTT book [Uni13, Appendix A.2], modulo
the difference between Russell and Tarski universes. For Σ and Σi , we assume in
addition the judgmental η-law x ≡ (π1 (x), π2 (x)).6 Note that all inference rules
in the cited appendix are stated in terms of universes, and in our situation, all
occurrences of A ∶ Uj are replaced by A typej and A ∶ Uji by A typeij ; this keeps
the two levels separate. For example, for the formation of coproducts, we have the
rules

                           Γ ⊢ A typej         Γ ⊢ B typej
                                                                  form-+
                                    Γ ⊢ A + B typej

                           Γ ⊢ A typeij        Γ ⊢ B typeij
                                                                  form-+i
                                    Γ ⊢ A+i B typeij
To emphasise, these rules do not allow us to form a coproduct of an inner and
an outer type! The outer equality type = and inner equality (path-equality) type
=i have the usual rules as well. Since equality is the central aspect of 2LTT, we
state the rules for the outer equality type explicitly, although they are completely
standard:
Γ ⊢ A typej          Γ ⊢ a, b ∶ A                                    Γ⊢a∶A
                                     form-=                                              intro-=
        Γ ⊢ a = b typej                                           Γ ⊢ refla ∶ a = a


      Γ⊢a∶A           Γ.(b ∶ A).(p ∶ a = b) ⊢ P typej            Γ ⊢ d ∶ P [a, refla ]
                                                                                          elim-=,
                          Γ.(b ∶ A).(p ∶ a = b) ⊢ JP (d) ∶ P
together with the usual computation rule:
                                        JP (d)[a, refla ] ≡ d.
The rules of the inner type are the same, with typej replaced by typeij , = by =i ,
and refla by reflia . The El operator is assumed to be an isomorphism between terms

    5In a previous version of this article, inner components were annotated with o (e.g. Σo ) instead
of i (Σi ). Other authors don’t annotate the inner components at all and annotate outer type
formers instead, e.g. Σs (s for strict) [ACK16] or Σe (e for exo) [ANST21].
    6Not all authors assume the judgmental η-law for Σ-types, with the possibly most prominent
example in the current context being the HoTT book [Uni13]. This law simplifies our theory
somewhat: see (2.2) of Lemma 2.11 and the discussion in Remark 2.12. In its absence, we would
work with telescopes of inner types as a substitute for inner dependent sums.
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                              9


of Uj (or Uji ) and (inner/outer) types at level i. For the outer equality type, we
furthermore assume the principles of UIP and function extensionality:
                       Γ ⊢ a1 , a2 ∶ A     Γ ⊢ p, q ∶ a1 = a2
                                                                uip
                                 Γ ⊢ K(p, q) ∶ p = q

          Γ ⊢ f, g ∶ Πa∶A B(a)       Γ.(a ∶ A) ⊢ p(a) ∶ f (a) = g(a)
                                                                       funext
                            Γ ⊢ funext(p) ∶ f = g
Instead of UIP, we could add the slightly stronger principle called Axiom K [Str93b].
This is a version of (2.1) (with its computation rule) for inducting on loops with a
fixed base point. It does not make a difference in our treatment.
   All inner universes Uji are assumed to be univalent in the sense of homotopy type
theory.
   Context extension also follows the rules of [Uni13, Appendix A.2], but note that
there is only one judgment of the form Γ ⊢ ctx and there are two hierarchies of
types. Since context extension works for every type, we have:
     Γ ctx      Γ ⊢ A typej                      Γ ctx      Γ ⊢ A typeij
                                 ctx-ext                                   ctxi -ext
             Γ.A ctx                                     Γ.A ctx
This means that contexts are shared between the two levels.
   Finally, we have a conversion operation c which turns inner types into outer
types: Whenever we have Γ ⊢ A typeij , we have a type c(A) such that Γ ⊢
c(A) typej and this operation preserves context extension, in the sense that Γ.A
and Γ.c(A) are the same context. This operation is natural in Γ, and the detailed
specification is given in the next subsection. Preservation of context extension in
particular means that the set of terms of A and c(A) are isomorphic. For the
“forwards-direction” we again write c, that is, for Γ ⊢ a ∶ A, we have Γ ⊢ c(a) ∶ c(A).
2.2. Semantics. We define what it means to be a model of two-level type theory.
For this, we use the language of categories with families (cwfs) [Dyb95]. We have a
choice of how to handle universe hierarchies. In this work, we aim for concreteness
and fix a cumulative hierarchy indexed by natural numbers, with no notion of top-
level type.
   Given a presheaf F over a category E, we denote by E/F its category of elements.
Recall the following notion.
Definition 2.2 ([Dyb95]). A category with families (cwf) is a category E with:
     ● a presheaf Ty over E (types),
     ● a presheaf Tm over E/Ty (terms),
     ● a terminal object 1 ∈ E (global or empty context),
     ● for all Γ ∈ E and A ∈ Ty(Γ), a terminal object (Γ.A, pA , qA ) in the category
       of triples (∆, σ, t) where ∆ ∈ E, σ ∶ ∆ → Γ, and t ∈ Tm(∆, A[σ]) (context
       extension).
   In the above, [σ] denotes the action of Ty on the morphism σ. The action of Tm
on morphisms is written similarly. These operations are referred to as substitutions
of types and terms, respectively.
   We treat Definition 2.2 as having algebraic character, immediately giving rise to
a category of cwfs. This applies to all the definitions in this subsection. They are
to be read as not just introducing a certain concept (algebraic in character), but
also the corresponding notion of morphism for it, part of a category structure.
Lemma 2.3. Naturally in the cwf E, Γ ∈ E, and A ∈ Ty(Γ), the set Tm(Γ, A) is
isomorphic to the set of sections of pA , with the isomorphism given by terminality
of (Γ.A, pA , qA ) and substitution of qA .                                      □
10 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   In the usual fashion, one has notions of cwfs with type formers and axioms
such as Π-types, identity types, and function extensionality. In the following, we
abbreviate a generic selection of such type formers and axioms by T and speak of
cwfs having type formers T .
   Given a cwf E, we also speak of a cwf structure on the category E. We abbreviate
such a cwf structure just by its presheaf of types. By restriction, we obtain a
category of cwf structures with type formers T on a fixed category E. Note that the
action of its morphisms on terms is an isomorphism (this follows from preservation
of extension).
Definition 2.4. A cwf hierarchy Ty with type formers T on a category E is a
sequential diagram
                          Ty0      / Ty1     / ...
of cwf structures with type formers T on E.
   We can regard a cwf hierarchy as a multi-sorted cwf indexed over the poset
ω. This makes it a cumulative hierarchy. Note that the natural transformation
Tyj → Tyj+1 preserve the type formers T . We will omit the subscript index into the
hierarchy when it is inferable or we are only interested at a fixed index.
Definition 2.5. A model of Martin-Löf type theory with type formers T on a cat-
egory E is a cwf hierarchy Ty with type formers T on E together with, for each j, a
global section Uj of Tyj+1 with an isomorphism Elj ∶ Tmj+1 (Γ, Uj ) ≃ Tyj (Γ) natural
in Γ ∈ E.
   We refer to such a model by just its cwf hierarchy Ty. We call Uj the j-th
universe. If unambiguous, we will omit the universe index j. Note that the above
definition models a cumulative hierarchy of universes (closed under type formers),
with no top-level notion of type.
   We consider two important kinds of models of Martin-Löf type theory.
Definition 2.6. A model of set type theory is a model of Martin-Löf type theory
with the following formers:
     (i) 1/Σ/Π-types, all with η-laws (i.e. satisfying universal properties);
    (ii) identity types, empty types, (binary) coproduct types, and natural number
         types;
   (iii) uniqueness of identity proofs and function extensionality.
Definition 2.7. A model of homotopy type theory is a model of Martin-Löf type
theory with the type formers (i) and (ii) of Definition 2.6 that is univalent, i.e.
(Uj , Elj ) is univalent in Tyj+1 for each j.
   In applications, one can add more type formers to these notions as desired, for
example higher inductive types to Definition 2.7 or quotient types to Definition 2.6.
All our example models of set type theory are in fact models of extensional type
theory, i.e. have equality reflection. For our developments here, the given type
formers will suffice.
Definition 2.8. A two-level model (of Martin-Löf type theory) with inner type
formers T i and outer type formers T consists of:
     ● a category E (contexts),
     ● the inner level, a model Tyi with type formers T i on E,
     ● the outer level, a model Ty with type formers T on E,
     ● a conversion morphism c∶Tyi → Ty of cwf hierarchies (with no type formers)
       on E, converting inner types to outer types.
                      TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                    11


   Ignoring type formers, a two-level model can be seen as a multi-sorted cwf in-
dexed over the poset {0 → 1} × ω. With type formers, we have two separate multi-
sorted cwfs (with inner and outer type formers, respectively) indexed over ω. The
conversion morphism c can be described as a morphism of multi-sorted cwfs that
is the identity on the category of contexts. Consequently, context extension is au-
tomatically preserved: if we have Γ ⊢ A typeij , then Γ.A and Γ.c(A) are the same
object of E.7 Note that we assume no interaction between inner and outer type
formers under the conversion morphism.
   Finally, we can make precise two-level type theory.
Definition 2.9. A model of two-level type theory is a two-level model of Martin-Löf
type theory where:
      ● the inner level is a model of homotopy type theory,
      ● the outer level is a model of set type theory.
2.3. Preservation of type formers by conversion. For this subsection, we fix a
model E of two-level type theory. We have assumed very little about the conversion
morphism c ∶ Tyi → Ty, but in this subsection, we see that it being a morphism of
cwf hierarchies allows us to derive important properties.
Lemma 2.10. For Γ ⊢ A typeij , the conversion operator c from the set of terms of
A to the set of terms of c(A) is an isomorphism.
Proof. This follows from Lemma 2.3 since c preserves context extesion.                          □
   Further, we can use that many types are characterised by universal properties
(the syntactical equivalent of which are elimination rules). The consequences are
summarised in the following statement.
Lemma 2.11. Let Γ ∈ E, A ∈ Tyi (Γ), and B ∈ Tyi (Γ.A). We have the following
morphisms natural in Γ. All morphisms live in the slice over Γ (and (2.7) lives in
the slice over Γ.A.A):
                                                     ∼
               Γ.c(1i )                              Ð
                                                     →    Γ.1                                (2.1)
                                                     ∼
               Γ.c(ΣiA B)                            Ð
                                                     →    Γ.Σc(A) c(B)                       (2.2)
                                                     ∼
               Γ.c(ΠiA B)                            Ð
                                                     →    Γ.Πc(A) c(B)                       (2.3)
                                                                     i
               Γ.(c(A) + c(B))                       →    Γ.c(A + B)                         (2.4)
                                                                 i
               Γ.0                                   →    Γ.c(0 )                            (2.5)
                                                                 i
               Γ.N                                   →    Γ.c(N )                            (2.6)
               Γ.(u, v ∶ A). (c(u) =c(A) c(v))       →    Γ.(u, v ∶ A).c(u =iA v)            (2.7)
               Γ.c(Uji )                             →    Γ.Uj                               (2.8)
Moreover, the three annotated morphisms are natural isomorphisms.
   Before constructing the morphisms, let us make some remarks. Via the ad-
junction with Π, the above morphisms give rise to internal functions at the outer
level. This way, isomorphisms become judgmental internal isomorphisms, i.e. the
functions in both directions compose judgmentally to the identity.

   7Of course, the notion of a two-level model could be weakened to let c only preserve the
universal property of context extension, not the context extension operation itself; i.e. one could
require Γ.A ≃ Γ.c(A) instead of an equality. Similarly, one could consider two separated multi-
sorted cwfs with a morphism that induces an equivalence on the categories of contexts. However,
all our models in Subsection 2.5 satisfy the rather strict requirements of Definitions 2.8 and 2.9.
12 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   It is also worth emphasising the asymmetry that the conversion function c intro-
duces: In general, the rules of the system mean that it is usually easier to eliminate
from outer types into inner types than vice versa. While Π, Σ, and 1 at the outer
level are “the same” as at the inner level, in the sense made precise in the lemma
above, the same is not automatically the case for the remaining types and type
formers. For the case of equality types however, this assumption would destroy
our motivation for two-level type theory altogether. Although invertibility of (2.4)
to (2.6), discussed in Subsection 2.4 under (A1), does hold in some of the intended
models, it is not valid with the point of view of the outer level as internalized meta-
theory of the object theory given by the inner level, made precise by the presheaf
model of two-level type theory in Subsection 2.5.3. From that point of view, some
of the maps and the absence of their invertibility can be understood as follows:
       ● Coproducts A + B: given a term of A or a term of B in the meta-theory, we
          get an element of A+i B, but not vice versa. For example, the context might
          not allow us to normalise an element of a coproduct type to a coprojection.
       ● Empty type 0: from a contradiction in the meta-theory, one can get a
          contradiction in the object theory, but not vice versa.
       ● Natural numbers N: we think of an external natural number as a numeral.
          From a numeral, one can get an internal natural number, but from an
          element of the inner natural numbers type, we do not always get a numeral.
       ● Equality x = y: two meta-theoretically (e.g. syntactically) equal expressions
          are provably equal via reflexivity, but provably equal expressions might not
          be equal meta-theoretically (syntactically).
The last morphism (2.8) says that inner types are (up to c) outer types, but we
would not expect the reverse since not every meta-theoretic statement can be in-
ternalised.
Proof of Lemma 2.11. We start with the three isomorphisms. Recall that inner
and outer 1/Σ-types come with η-laws. Since c preserves context extensions, it
easily follows that c preserves these type formers up to canonical isomorphism. In
fact, this is true for cwf morphisms in general, without the requirement that the
underlying functor is an identity. In detail, the isomorphism (2.1) is given by
                                    Γ.c(1i ) = Γ.1i
                                            ≃Γ
                                            ≃ Γ.1
and the isomorphism (2.2) is given by
                             Γ.c(ΣiA B) = Γ.ΣiA B
                                         ≃ Γ.A.B
                                         = Γ.c(A).c(B)
                                         ≃ Γ.Σc(A) c(B).
Since Π-types in the inner and outer level come with the η-law, their terms are
uniquely characterised as terms of the codomain type. We have, naturally in σ ∶∆ →
Γ:
             E/Γ (∆, Γ.c(ΠiA B)) = E/Γ (∆, Γ.ΠiA B)
                                  ≃ E/Γ.A (∆.A[σ], Γ.A.B)
                                  = E/Γ.c(A) (∆.c(A[σ]), Γ.c(A).c(B))
                                  = E/Γ.c(A) (∆.c(A)[σ], Γ.c(A).c(B))
                                  ≃ E/Γ (∆, Γ.Πc(A) c(B)) ,
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                             13


from which (2.3) follows by Yoneda. The morphism (2.4) is given by the usual
properties of outer and inner coproduct. We have Γ.A → Γ.c(A +i B) and Γ.B →
Γ.c(A +i B) due to the inner coproduct, and the outer coproduct lets us construct
(2.4). The morphism (2.5) comes from the outer empty type 0; no property of the
inner empty type is used.
    The usual morphism Γ.c(1i +i Ni ) → Γ.c(Ni ), by composition with (2.1) and
(2.4), gives rise to a morphism Γ.(1 + c(Ni )) → Γ.c(Ni ). By the universal property
of N, we get the morphism (2.6).
    Outer equality implies inner equality in the sense of (2.7) by the J-eliminator of
the outer equality and Lemma 2.10. Finally, (2.8) uses the isomorphisms Elj and
Elij .                                                                              □
Remark 2.12. For “positive” type formers such as empty types, coproduct types,
natural number types, or identity types, we cannot hope for preservation up to
isomorphism by c, even if we add η-laws to both the inner and outer type former.
This is because their universal property talks about maps out of the type in question
into another type of the same level, rather than an arbitrary object of the slice.
For example, for empty types with η-law in both inner and outer level, we have
natural isomorphisms E/Γ(Γ.0i , Γ.C) ≃ 1 for C ∈ Tyi (Γ) and E/Γ(Γ.0, Γ.C) ≃ 1 for
C ∈ Ty(Γ). To be able to conclude that Γ.0i ≃ Γ.0 over Γ, we would have to apply
the universal property of 0i to an outer type C.
   Our proof of the isomorphism (2.2) uses the judgmental η-law for Σ-types, a rule
that is not assumed by all authors. If we only assume the induction principle with
which the HoTT book [Uni13, Chp 1.6] characterises Σ-types, without a judgmental
η-law, then Σ becomes a positive type former, not generally preserved by c.
   In some of the models we discuss in Subsection 2.5, the comparison maps (2.4)
to (2.8) are indeed not isomorphisms.
2.4. Strengthenings and extensions. In Subsection 2.2, we have defined two-
level type theory in a minimalistic fashion, eschewing properties that one might
argue are reasonable to ask for. Indeed, other two-level type theories such as HTS
are much more rigid.
    We separate possible strengthenings into three groups. The first group has noth-
ing to do with two-level type theory proper, concerning only the basic structure of
models of Martin-Löf type theory as per Definition 2.5. In a model of two-level
type theory, this applies to both inner and outer levels separately.
  (M1) We can ask that the step maps Tyj → Tyj+1 in the cwf hierarchy are mono.
         In a set-theoretic metatheory, we could go further and demand the step
         maps are subpresheaf inclusions.
  (M2) We can ask that the natural isomorphism El ∶ Tm(Γ, Uj ) ≃ Tyj (Γ) is an
         equality on the nose, i.e. that Tm(Γ, Uj ) = Tyj (Γ) and El = id. This has the
         effect of modelling Russell-style universes.
Implementing both of these points makes it possible to forgo the distinction between
types and terms (with types just being terms of universes), treating the typing
relation as going between terms. Together with univalence, this yields a type theory
as in the homotopy type theory book [Uni13, App. A.2] (but note that the η-law
for Σ-types is not included there).
    The second group concerns strictness properties of the conversion morphism c
relating the inner to the outer level in a model of two-level type theory as per
Definition 2.9.
   (T1) We can ask that the conversion morphism c ∶ Tyi → Ty is mono on types, i.e.
         that c ∶ Tyi (Γ) → Ty(Γ) is injective for Γ ∈ E. In a set-theoretic metatheory,
         we could demand this is on the nose, i.e. that c is a subpresheaf inclusion
14 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


       on types (and that the action on terms is not just an isomorphism, but an
       equality).
  (T2) We can ask that the isomorphisms of Lemma 2.11 witnessing preservation
       of 1/Σ/Π-types under the conversion morphism c are equalities on the nose.
       For Π-types, this means the following: given A ∈ Tyi (Γ) and B ∈ Tyi (Γ.A),
       we have c(ΠiA B) = Πc(A) c(B); given further f ∈ Tmi (Γ, Πi (A, B)) and
       a ∈ Tmi (Γ, A), we have appi (f, a) = app(f, a) (preservation of abstraction is
       implied by this).
          If we ask for any other type formers to be preserved by c up to canon-
       ical isomorphism (such as in (A1) below), we can similarly ask that these
       isomorphisms are equalities on the nose.
  (T3) We can ask that inner types are replete within outer types, i.e. that any
       outer type with extension isomorphic to that of an inner type is itself the
       image of an inner type under conversion. In detail, given A ∈ Ty(Γ) and
       B ∈ Tyi (Γ) with Γ.A ≃ Γ.B over Γ, we have A′ ∈ Tyi (Γ) with A = c(A′ ),
       naturally in Γ.
Implementing (T1) and (T2) essentially yields an (outer) type theory with a predi-
cate of “being inner” on types that some type formers are closed under. With inner
types named “fibrant”, this is the perspective taken in HTS.
   The third group concerns more semantical extensions or axioms that will differ
depending on what kinds of models one is interested in.
  (A1) We can ask that conversion preserves certain “positive” type formers (mi-
       nus identity types) up to canonical isomorphism, making for example the
       following canonical comparison maps over Γ ∈ E invertible:

          Γ.0 → Γ.0i                                                cf. (2.5)
                                     i                     i
          Γ.(c(A) + c(B)) → Γ.(A+ B)          for A, B ∈ Ty (Γ)     cf. (2.4)
                       i
          Γ.N → Γ.N                                                 cf. (2.6)

       We can weaken this by asking for an inverse only up to the outer iden-
       tity type. Then these properties become axioms internal to two-level type
       theory.
  (A2) The following is a weakening of the assertion of (A1) for natural numbers
       that still allows for the construction of inner types of Reedy fibrant semisim-
       plicial types (see Lemma 4.38 and afterwards). We can ask that countably
       infinite towers of (trivial) fibrations have (trivially) fibrant limits. The no-
       tion of fibration used here will be defined in Subsection 3.2 in terms of inner
       types. This is an internalization (to the outer level) of the corresponding
       axiom considered for (co)fibration categories [RB06, Definition 1.6.1] (see
       also [Shu15b, Lemma 11.8]).
  (A3) Weakening (A2) further, we can ask that the outer natural number type is
       cofibrant. The notion of cofibrant type will be defined in Subsection 3.4,
       essentially meaning that exponentiation with it preserves inner types up to
       isomorphism. This axiom has been suggested by Shulman.
  (A4) We can ask that the outer universes are “fibrant”, i.e. that there is u ∈ Tyi (Γ)
       such that Γ.U ≃ Γ.u over Γ (or even U = c(u)), naturally in Γ ∈ E. Again, we
       can weaken this to an isomorphism up to the outer identity type, making
       it an axiom internal to two-level type theory concerning universes.
  (A5) We can ask that the outer level validates the equality reflection rule, i.e.
       forms a model of extensional type theory. This is the case in all the example
       models we are interested in.
                     TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                  15


             We phrase this as an extension so that the base systems retains good
         metatheoretical properties such as decidability of type checking. This is rel-
         evant for faithful implementation by current proof assistants (note though
         that some systems such as Andromeda [BGH+ ] model equality reflection).
             As a compromise, one may add features to the outer level that are par-
         tially extensional while retaining decidability of type checking. An example
         is the recent addition of universes of strict propositions (with judgmental
         uniqueness of elements) to Agda and Coq [GCST19].
  (A6) We may add more type formers to the inner or outer level as desired. For
         example, since the inner level is simply a version of homotopy type theory,
         it is natural to add inner higher inductive types. We can even add higher
         inductive-inductive types (see e.g. [Uni13] for examples, and [KK19a] for a
         specification). Similarly, we can add quotient types or quotient inductive-
         inductive types [ACD+ 18, AK16, ADK17] to the outer level (note that the
         presence of uniqueness of identity proofs makes higher equalities moot).
Note that one may identify HTS as two-level type theory in our sense extended
with the axioms (A1), (A4), (A5), (T1), and (T2), in their strongest form. In
the following subsection, we will discuss which of the above strengthenings and
extensions hold in each of several example models. This will provide justification
for not including most of the above conditions as blanket assumptions. It will also
serve as a guide to the reader on which assumption to include in their two-level
type theory when they have a certain class of models in mind.

2.5. Example models. We discuss some key models of two-level type theory. All
have in common that the underlying category is presheaves Ĉ over a category C
and that the outer level is given by the standard presheaf model of extensional
type theory (in particular, (A5) is validated) where types are (small) presheaves
over the category of elements of their context. The only exception to this is in
Proposition 2.16, where the outer level is different.
   We briefly recall key details of this presheaf model in a set-theoretic metathe-
ory. Fix a sequence of Grothendieck universes M0 ∈ M1 ∈ . . . such that C lives in
M0 . Given Γ ∈ C,̂ then Tyj (Γ) consists of presheaves over C/Γ valued in Mj and
Tmj (Γ, A) is the set of global sections of such a presheaf A. Then Tyj is represented
by Uj ∈ Ĉ where Uj (X) is the set of presheaves over C/X valued in Mj , which itself
lives in Mj+1 . This defines the universe Uj ∈ Tyj+1 (1). With types presented in this
displayed form, the standard definition of type formers is substitution-stable and
preserved under size change.
   The above definition of types and universes is essentially that of Hofmann and
Streicher [HS97]. Other constructions are possible, for example following Voevod-
sky [KL18, Subsection 2.1] or Shulman [Shu15a] (the latter construction works
equally in the non-univalent setting of classifying all maps, not fibrations), but
necessitate further work to split type formers.

2.5.1. Simplicial sets. The first model of homotopy type theory was in simplicial
sets [KL18]. As already remarked in that paper, simplicial sets, being a presheaf
category, exhibit two separate, but related, structures of models of type theory: the
one constructed in the paper itself, and the one that every presheaf category has,
modelling extensional type theory. This idea can be expanded by making simplicial
sets a model of two-level type theory. We suspect that an observation along these
lines motivated Voevodsky’s HTS.8

   8The introduction of Voevodsky’s note [Voe13] states: We call this system and its further
extensions HTS for ”homotopy type system”. It is an extension of the Martin-Lof type system with
16 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   Letting C = ∆ be the simplex category, the outer level is the presheaf model of
simplicial sets as explained above. The inner types over Γ ∈ ∆   ̂ are interpreted as
the subset of those outer types whose corresponding “display map” with target Γ is
a Kan fibration, making (T1) hold. Kan fibrations are closed under isomorphism,
hence (T3) holds (in fact, this can be strengthened to closure under retracts).
   Outer 1/Σ/Π-types preserve fibrancy, giving their inner interpretation and en-
forcing (T2). This applies also to empty types, coproduct types, and natural num-
ber types, giving (A1) to (A3). Pullback and pushforward along a monomorphism
form a coreflection, giving trivial fibrancy of outer universes (A4).
   The inner identity type is modelled by the cotensor with ∆1 . Recall that its
elimination operation has a splitting issue. We follow the splitting strategy intro-
duced by [KL18], interpreting the offending operation in the universal context that
captures its inputs. For this, one might try to use the representing object Uj for
i-small types. However, the size change map Tyij → Tyij+1 would then not preserve
the operation.9 Instead, as in [KL18], we introduce yet another Grothendieck uni-
verse Mω containing M0 , M1 , . . ., define a presheaf Uω as above, and use it to build
the universal context.
   Since generating trivial cofibrations in the form of horn inclusions have repre-
sentable codomain, the presheaves of inner types are representable, yielding the
inner universes. They are fibrant and univalent as in [KL18].
   Following the setup of [PO18], a more internal development of the simplicial set
model in line of the above choices is described in [CHS19, Appendix D]. It also
describes (following a suggestion by Andrew Swan) how the higher inductive types
constructed in the cubical setting in [CHM18] interpret in the simplicial model (A6).

2.5.2. Cubical sets. A similar class of models of two-level type theory is given by
cubical sets for various choices of a cubical site and notion of fibrations [BCH14,
CCHM17]. In contrast to [KL18], these models of homotopy type theory have been
developed from the start with Hofmann-Streicher universes in mind and all type
formers split by construction. Thus, they immediately fit our setup and we can
simply declare them to form the inner level.
   The development of cubical models of [PO18, LOPS18] can be interpreted as
defining the inner level internally to the outer level. Note that this requires extend-
ing the outer level to crisp type theory [LOPS18, Shu18].
   A major difference to the simplicial model is that cubical Kan lifts are part of the
structure of inner types. That is, an inner type is not just an outer type satisfying
a lifting property, but has an additional datum in its Kan composition operation.
This invalidates (T1). Other strengthenings (T2) and (T3) and (A1) to (A6) hold
in the same manner as discussed above for simplicial sets.
   The reason that simplicial and cubical sets model validate (A1) is, in both cases,
that fibrant objects (in slices) are closed under small coproducts.

2.5.3. Presheaves over models of homotopy type theory. The material in the first
half of this subsubsection follows [Cap16, Chapter 3.2]. The resulting models have
guided the design choices of our two-level type theory.

some additional constructs which reflect the structures which exist in the target of the canonical
univalent model of the Martin-Lof system.
   9This can be rectified by reinterpreting the inner types as Tyi =
                                                                 j   ∐j≤i Tyij .   Type forming
                i
operations in Tyj are interpreted by lifting all input types to their maximum size index. Fibrancy
of universes follows from closure of Kan complexes under finite coproducts. In this way, one can
avoid the additional Grothendieck universe Mω introduced below. It also enforces (M1). The
same technique can be applied to the outer level.
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                17


   We will first establish some preliminaries. A weak morphism F ∶ C → D of cwfs
is a functor between underlying categories with natural transformations on types
and terms that preserves the global context and extension only up to canonical iso-
morphism. Given interpretations of type formers T in C and D, it still makes sense
to ask that F preserves the operations of T , transporting along these preservation
isomorphisms when required. Indeed, by expressing the type formers T in a cwf
E as operations internal to its presheaf category E,̂ one may completely avoid the
dependency of T on extension as an algebraic operation [Cap16, Uem19]. Thus we
obtain a notion of weak morphism of cwfs with type formers T .
   There is an evident notion of 2-morphism between weak cwf morphisms F, G∶C →
D, a natural transformation u∶F → G such that F A = (GA)[uΓ ] for A ∈ TyC (Γ) and
F t = (Gt)[uΓ ] for additionally t ∈ TmC (Γ, A). Note that this implies commutativity
of
                                          ≃ /
                               F (Γ.A)        F Γ.F A
                                     uΓ.A            uΓ .GA
                                                    
                                G(Γ.A)
                                            ≃   / GΓ.GA
for Γ ∈ C and A ∈ TyC . This extends to a notion of 2-morphism for cwfs with
type formers T by requiring that substitution along the components of u preserves
the operations of T . With this, we obtain a (strict) 2-category of cwfs (with type
formers T ) and weak morphisms. It has the 1-category of cwfs (with type formers
T ) as a wide sub-2-category.
   Importantly, the initial object C of the 1-category of cwfs (with type formers
T ) becomes biinitial in the 2-category of cwfs (with type formers T ) and weak
morphisms. That is, given an object D with a weak morphism H ∶ C → D, there
is an isomorphism H ≅ F between weak morphisms where F ∶ C → D is the unique
morphism. This may be derived from making the strict pseudolimit of H (seen as
a diagram indexed by the walking arrow) into a cwf E (with type formers T ):
       ● objects are triples (X, X ′ , f ) where X ∈ C, X ′ ∈ D, and f ∶ H(X) ≃ X ′ ,
       ● types over such an object are pairs (A, A′ ) with A ∈ TyC (X) and A′ ∈
         TyD (X ′ ) such that H(A) and A′ correspond over f ,
       ● terms of such a type are pairs (t, t′ ) with t ∈ TmC (X, A) and t′ ∈ TmD (X ′ , A′ )
         such that H(t) and t′ correspond over f .
Note that A′ and t′ in the above description are redundant. We have projection
morphisms pC ∶ E → C and pD ∶ E → D. By initiality of C, we have G ∶ C → E such
that pC ○ G = idC and pD ○ G = F . The isomorphism H ≅ F is read off from it.
   Everything we have said above extends analogously to cwf hierarchies (with
type formers T ), models of Martin-Löf type theory (with type formers T ), models
of homotopy type theory, and models of two-level type theory.
   Recall from [Hof97] that for any category C, the category Ĉ of presheaves over
C forms a model of extensional type theory. Here, the types and terms are defined
as follows. Given a presheaf P , which we think of as a context, we define Ty(P ) to
consists of (small) presheaves over the category C/P of elements of P (specifically,
for Tyj (P ), we require these presheaves to be valued in the Grothendieck universe
Mj ). Given such a type A ∈ Tyi (P ) over P , the set Tm(A) of terms is the set of
global sections of the corresponding presheaf over C/P .
   In the special case where C is itself a cwf, we can define an additional, inner
cwf structure Tyi on presheaves Ĉ with a morphism c ∶ Tyi → Ty to the presheaf
cwf structure Ty. This works as follows. We can single out a special context
(in other words, a type in the empty context), namely TyC itself. This context
can play the role of a universe in the presheaf cwf C.      ̂ In fact, we have a type
18 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


TmC ∈ Ty(TyC ), acting as the universal family of this universe. The cwf structure
induced by this universe forms the inner cwf structure Tyi of C.̂ In detail, we define
   i                 i       ̂                                i
Ty = y(TyC ), i.e. Ty (P ) = C(P, TyC ), and let c send A ∈ Ty (P ) to the restriction
of TmC along the functor C/P → C/TyC induced by A, i.e. to c(A) ∈ C/P    ̂ sending
                                                           i
(Γ, x) to TmC (Γ, A(x)). We are then forced to define Tm (P, A) as the set of global
sections of c(A).
    The Yoneda embedding yC ∶ C → Ĉ becomes a weak morphism of cwfs
                                             ̂ Tyi ),
                                   yC ∶ C → (C,                                  (2.9)
whose actions on types and terms are bijective by construction of Tyi .
   Let C now support a selection of type formers T . We can lift the rules in T to
corresponding operations and laws on the “universe” TyC in (C,   ̂ Ty), and thereby
to interpretations of the type formers T in the inner cwf (C,  ̂ Tyi ). Furthermore,
the weak morphism (2.9) preserves these, i.e. yC becomes a weak morphism of cwfs
with type formers T . This process and its properties are explained in [Hof97] for a
specific set of type formers, and in [Cap16] for a generic notion of type former.
   We illustrate the above process for the formation operation for dependent prod-
ucts. We desire the following judgment in the presheaf cwf:
                    A ∶ TyC , B ∶ TmC (A) → TyC ⊢ Π(A, B) ∶ TyC .              (2.10)
Naturally in Γ ∈ C, we are given:
     (1) A ∈ TyC (Γ),
     (2) naturally in (∆, σ ∶ ∆ → Γ) ∈ C/Γ, a map Bσ ∶ TmC (∆, A[σ]) → TyC (∆),
and have to produce an element Π(A, B) ∈ TyC (Γ). By the universal property
of context extension in C, data in (2) is uniquely induced by just the element
BpA ∈ Ty(Γ.A). Thus, our obligation precisely corresponds to the formation rule
for Π in C. Furthermore, after lifting to the cwf (C,  ̂ Tyi ), we can check that the
weak morphism (2.9) preserves the formation rule.
    The above example makes it reasonable to expect that every type former can be
lifted, rule by rule, from C, producing judgements that replicate each rule internally
in the theory of Ĉ when expressed using the “universe” TyC , and that hence one can
interpret each rule in the inner presheaf cwf.
    The above construction is functorial in the cwf structure TyC (with type formers
T ) on C and 2-functorial in C as an object of the 2-category of cwfs (with type
formers T ) and weak morphisms. From this, we obtain the following.
Proposition 2.13. Let C be a model of Martin-Löf type theory with type formers
T . Assume that (TmC )j is valued in the Grothendieck universe Mj for every i.
Then Ĉ forms a two-level model of Martin-Löf type theory with inner type formers
T and outer types formers from extensional type theory. The Yoneda embedding
extends to a weak morphism y ∶ C → (C,    ̂ Tyi ) of models of Martin-Löf type theory
that acts bijectively on types and terms.
   Furthermore, this operation is 2-functorial in C as an object of the 2-category of
models of Martin-Löf type theory with type formers T and weak morphisms. The
action on a weak morphism F ∶C → D is as follows. The left Kan extension F! ∶ Ĉ → D ̂
extends to a weak morphism of two-level models as above. The natural isomorphism
F! ○yC ≃ yD ○F of functors lifts to the 2-category of models of Martin-Löf type theory
with type formers T and weak morphisms.
Proof. Applying the above discussion to the sequence of cwf structures (TyC )j with
type formers T on C, we obtain a corresponding sequence of cwf structures

                              Tyi0      / Tyi      / ...
                                            1
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                               19


with type formers T on C. ̂ Yoneda preserves terminal objects, so sends the global
section Uj of (TyC )j+1 to a global section Uji of Tyij+1 . Naturally in Γ ∈ C, we have

     Tmi (y(Γ), Uji ) = Tmi (y(Γ), y(Uj )) ≃ TmC (Γ, Uj ) ≃ (TyC )j (Γ) ≃ Tyij (y(Γ)),
using that the action of (2.9) on types and terms is bijective. By cocontinuous
extension, we thus have Tmi (X, Uji ) ≃ Tyij (X) naturally in X ∈ C.
                                                                  ̂ By the smallness
                        i                       i
assumption, the map Tyj → Ty restricts to Tyj → Tyj .                             □

  Seeing univalence as just another type former, the universes Uji in the above
model are univalent if the original universes Uj in C are.
Corollary 2.14. Let C be a model of homotopy type theory. Assume that (TmC )j
is valued in the Grothendieck universe Mj for every i. Then Ĉ forms a model of
two-level type theory. The Yoneda embedding extends to a weak morphism y ∶ C →
  ̂ Tyi ) of models of homotopy type theory that acts bijectively on types and terms.
(C,
Furthermore, this operation is 2-functorial in C as in Proposition 2.13.           □
   We call this the presheaf model Ĉ of two-level type theory over the given model
C of homotopy type theory. It will be key for proving conservativity of two-level
type theory over homotopy type theory in Subsection 2.6.
   Let us discuss strictness properties of conversion satisfies by the presheaf model.
Depending on the specifics of the implementation of the outer types, c may or may
not have a chance to be mono. With our choice of presheaves over categories of
elements, (T1) holds as long as the action of the presheaf TmC on objects is injec-
tive. Note that this can always be achieved by passing through the Grothendieck
construction. None of the other strictness properties (T2) and (T3) are satisfied.
Remark 2.15. Concerning (T2), some effort is expended in [Cap16, Chapter 3.2] to
achieve strict preservation of 1/Σ/Π-types under what we here call conversion from
the inner to outer level. This is achieved by defining the inner types more cleverly
as certain free expressions involving the types of C and formal 1/Σ/Π-type forming
operations. Unfortunately, this only works for “top-level” 1/Σ/Π-types and breaks
whenever the kind of type in question has a classifier that is itself a type (of higher
size). Thus, this technique is not applicable here.
    The presheaf model does not preserve (up to isomorphism) “positive” type form-
ers as in (A1). Note that the interpretation of empty types, coproducts, and natural
numbers in the outer level is levelwise. Were (A1) to hold, then in an arbitrary
context Γ in C, there would be no terms of empty type, every term of coproduct
type would be a constructor application, and every natural number term would be
a canonical numeral. Even the weaker versions (A2) and (A3) do not hold in gen-
eral. Note that (A2) holds if C supports dependent sums of “arity” ω (also known
as record types with countably infinitely many fields). Axiom (A4) is also generally
not satisfied.
    As for the other example models, the outer level models extensional type theory,
i.e. (A5) holds. Extension (A6) holds as far as permitted by the given model C of
homotopy type theory.
   We end this subsection by giving a modified version of the presheaf model
where (T1) and (T2) hold. This is achieved by modifying the interpretation of
the outer level. The technique is inspired by Shulman’s modification [Shu19, Ap-
pendix A] of the local universe splitting technique in the presence of universes (recall
though that we do not make use of the local universe splitting technique).
20 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


Proposition 2.16. Denote by (Tyi , Ty, c) the presheaf model of two-level type the-
ory on Ĉ as established by Corollary 2.14. There is a factorisation
                                                                 ′
                                                c′
                                                      6 Ty

                                     Tyi                     r

                                                c     ( 
                                                       Ty

in the category of cwf hierarchies such that (Tyi , Ty′ , c′ ) forms a model of two-level
type theory satisfying (T1) and (T2).
   Furthermore, this operation is 2-functorial in C in the same sense as Corol-
lary 2.14.

Proof. The following is to be understood as happening for every size index i, which
we omit. By a small set, we mean an element of the Grothendieck universe Mj .
   Let U ∈ Ĉ denote the representing object of Ty, with universal element El ∈ Ty(U).
Define Ty′ as the presheaf represented by TyC +U. We have a map [c, idU ]∶TyC +U →
U. Applying Yoneda, this induces the map r ∶ Ty′ → Ty. The cwf structure of Ty′ is
inherited from Ty via r. Applying Yoneda to the coprojections inl ∶ TyC → TyC + U
and inr ∶ U → TyC + U, we obtain respective cwf structure morphisms c′ ∶ Tyi → Ty′
and s ∶ Ty → Ty′ . These fit into a commuting diagram as follows:

                                       c′            / Ty′
                           Tyi                               `
                                                r                    s
                                 c
                                            ~
                                      Ty                                 / Ty.
                                                       id

                                                      ̂ an element of Ty′ (X) consists
   Unfolding the definition, we find that, given X ∈ C,
of a partition X = X0 ⊔ X1 of X into subpresheaves X0 and X1 together with
A0 ∈ Tyi (X0 ), i.e. A0 ∶ X0 → TyC , and A1 ∈ Ty(X1 ), i.e. a small presheaf A1 over
C/X1 .
   The interpretation of type formers in Ty′ other than 1/Σ/Π-types is as for Ty and
is defined such that it is preserved by r. For the type forming operations, we first
transport the given types in Ty′ to Ty via r, use the corresponding type forming
operation there, and apply s to the result. Since r ○ s = id, this makes r preserve
the type forming operation, meaning the remainder of the operations dealing with
terms can be copied from Ty to Ty′ .
   It remains to interpret 1/Σ/Π-types in Ty′ . Since the terms of these type formers
are characterised by universal properties, it will suffice to define their type forming
operations such that r preserves 1/Σ/Π-types up to isomorphism. The remainder
of their operations dealing with terms is then uniquely induced. In order to ensure
that c′ preserves 1/Σ/Π-types, we only have to check that c′ preserves the type
forming operations and that the isomorphisms used in the penultimate sentence
are the ones of Lemma 2.11 whenever the input types come from Tyi via c′ .
   The case of 1-types is trivial: given X ∈ C,̂ we imply take 1′ = inl(1i ) ∈ Ty′ (X)
        i    i
using 1 ∈ Ty . Since it has no inputs, there is nothing to show. The type forming
operations for Σ-types and Π-types are of the same form. To save space, we only
show the case of Π-types.
   Recall how the Π-type forming operation of Tyi was inherited from the one of
TyC via the operation (2.10). The cwf structure of Ty′ is induced by El[c, idU ] ∈
Ty(TyC + U) rather than TmC ∈ Ty(TyC ) as for (2.10). Here, we have to interpret
                     TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                         21


the analogous operation
         A ∶ TyC + U, B ∶ El([c, idU ](A)) → (TyC + U) ⊢ Π′ (A, B) ∶ TyC + U
together with
                El([c, idU ](Π′ (A, B))) ≃ El(Π([c, idU ](A), [c, idU ] ○ B))
in the same context.
   To define the action at level Γ ∈ C, we take
                          A ∈ TyC (Γ) + U(Γ),
                              ̂
                          B ∈ C/Γ(El([c, idU (Γ) ](A)), TyC + U)                (2.11)
(omitting restriction in the target of B) and must define Π (A, B) ∈ TyC (Γ) + U(Γ)
                                                                  ′

with an isomorphism
                El([c, idU ](Π′ (A, B))) ≃ El(Π([c, idU ](A), [c, idU ] ○ B))   (2.12)
of presheaves over C/Γ. We perform a case distinction on A.
     (i) Suppose A = inr(A1 ) with A1 ∈ U(Γ). Then we take
                         Π′ (A, B)(Γ) = inr(Π(A1 , [c, idU ] ○ B)),
        using the type forming operation of Ty, and let (2.12) be the identity.
   (ii) Suppose A = inl(A0 ) with A0 ∈ TyC (Γ). Then El([c, idU (Γ) ](A) = El(c(A))
        is the presheaf over C/Γ sending σ ∶ ∆ → Γ to Tm(∆, A[σ]). Since C has
        extension, this presheaf is representable (represented by Γ.A). In particular,
        mapping out of it as in (2.11) preserves coproducts. We can thus make a
        further case distinction on B.
                                        ̂
         (a) If B = inr ○ B1 with B1 ∈ C/Γ(El(c(A)),   U), we take
                           Π′ (A, B)(Γ) = inr(Π(c(A0 ), B1 )),
            again using the type forming operation of Ty, and let (2.12) be the
            identity.
                                      ̂
        (b) If B = inl ○ B0 with B0 ∈ C/Γ(El(c(A)), TyC ), we take
                             Π′ (A, B)(Γ) = inl(Πi (A0 , B0 )),
              using the type forming operation of Tyi , and let (2.12) be the isomor-
              phism given by Lemma 2.11.
One checks that this definition is natural in Γ. Recalling that c′ is given by the
action of Yoneda on inl ∶ TyC → TyC + U, we find that c′ preserves Π-type formation
by construction (case (ii.b)) with the required coherence isomorphism.
   This finishes the verification that Ty′ forms a cwf hierarchy with the type formers
of the outer level of a model of two-level type theory. Note that uniqueness of iden-
tity proofs and function extensionality are inherited from Ty (this is immediate for
the former; for the latter, use that the outer identity type respects the isomorphism
relating Π′ and Π).
   To obtain the universes in Ty′ , we must encode the representing object (TyC )j +
                                                  ̂ for some U ′ ∈ Ty′ (1). We have
(U)j as El(r(Uj′ )) (under the isomorphism Ĉ ≃ C/1)              j
Vj ∈ Ty (1) such that (Ty )j + (U)j is El(Vj ) (under the isomorphism Ĉ ≃ C/1).  ̂
       j+1                     C
So we simply take Uj′ = s(Vj ).
  2-Functoriality in C is a straightforward calculation.                            □
   Note that the cwf hierarchy morphism s in the above proof preserves almost
all type formers: the only one not preserved is the unit type. Note also that the
technique of Proposition 2.16 is constructive only for finitary type formers: were
we to add product types of infinite arity or dependent sums of “arity” ω (ω op -Reedy
22 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


limits) to homotopy type theory, then to make c′ preserve these using the above
approach, we would have to perform an infinite number of case distinctions before
deciding on the result of the corresponding type forming operation in Ty′ on given
inputs, which requires classical logic.
   In Subsection 2.6, we will use this modified presheaf model to strengthen conser-
vativity of two-level type theory over homotopy type theory to additionally include
conservativity of (T1) and (T2).
   None of the other properties (A1) and (T3) to (A6) are generally impacted by
the model construction of Proposition 2.16.

2.6. Conservativity. Two-level type theory is an extension of homotopy type the-
ory, which forms its inner level. As such, it makes sense to ask if two-level type
theory is conservative over homotopy type theory.
    Here, we take the perspective regarding homotopy type theory and two-level type
theory simply as the initial models in their respective categories of models, which
are the primary notion. Syntax is treated as notation, that is, merely as a device
for working within such models. Expressions of our syntax denoting types and
terms are just stand-ins denoting certain derivations. We do not analyse them as
raw syntactic objects independently from the associated derivation, although such
considerations are of course important for the implementation of proof assistants.
    What does conservativity mean under this perspective? We have a forgetful
            i
functor (−) from the category of models of two-level type theory to the category of
models of homotopy type theory. Letting 0HoTT and 02LTT denote their respective
initial objects, we have a unique morphism 0HoTT → 02LTT i . This expresses that any
derivation in homotopy type theory can also be performed in two-level type theory.
For conservativity, we wish to know reversely that any construction of a type or
term, or equality of such, in 02LTT i , with given context (and type, in the case of
constructions for terms) coming from 0HoTT , can be lifted to 0HoTT .
    We will employ the following definition of conservativity for a cwf morphism
F ∶ C → D, which is, in some sense, the weakest possible. It essentially states that F
reflects inhabitation of terms. This formalises the idea that we can use the language
of D to prove statements in C.
Definition 2.17. A cwf morphism F ∶C → D is called conservative if for all contexts
Γ ∈ C and types A ∈ TyC (Γ) with an element of TmD (F Γ, F A), we have an element
of TmC (Γ, A).
   Note that is definition is unrelated to the underlying functor F being conser-
vative, i.e. reflecting isomorphisms. Stronger definitions are of course possible, for
example requiring that F acts (split) surjectively or bijectively on terms and types,
perhaps up to internal notions of equality in D.
Proposition 2.18. Two-level type theory is conservative over homotopy type the-
                                             i
ory. That is, the morphism !∶0HoTT → (02LTT ) is conservative. This stays true when
the outer level is extended with any type former validated by the standard presheaf
model, such as equality reflection (A5).
Proof. We apply the construction of Corollary 2.14 to 0HoTT and 02LTT i , obtaining
a diagram
                                             y(0HoTT )
                               0HoTT                     / 0̂      i
                                                            8 HoTT
                                 !
                                                  !i
                                         i
                              (02LTT )
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                           23


commuting up to isomorphism in the 2-category of models of homotopy type theory
and weak morphisms. Conservativity of the vertical map now follows immediately
from the fact that the Yoneda embedding acts bijectively on terms.           □
   Using Proposition 2.16, we may strengthen the above statement to two-level type
theory with injective conversion morphisms that strictly preserve 1/Σ/Π-types.
Proposition 2.19. Two-level type theory with (T1) and (T2) is conservative over
homotopy type theory. This stays true when the outer level is extended with any type
former validated by the outer level of the modified presheaf model, such as equality
reflection (A5).
Proof. This is a copy of the proof of Proposition 2.18, with the presheaf model of
Corollary 2.14 replaced by the modified presheaf model of Proposition 2.16.     □
   We conjecture a stronger conservativity result: if equality reflection (A5) holds
                                                                                i
in the outer level, then the actions of the cwf morphism ! ∶ 0HoTT → (02LTT ) on
types and terms are bijective (and hence the underlying functor is fully faithful).
We believe this result can be obtained using the technique of categorical glueing.
A concrete argument has been given by Kovács [Kov22, Corollary 5.5], seen there
as “soundness and stability of staging”.
2.7. On the possibility of a fibrant replacement. In homotopical models of
two-level type theory, outer types in context Γ correspond to arbitrary maps into
Γ, whereas inner types correspond to fibrations with base Γ. From this viewpoint,
it is natural to ask whether we could extend our theory with a fibrant replacement
operation, allowing us to replace any outer type by its “closest” inner approximation.
A syntactic presentation of rules for such a fibrant replacement type former might
look as follows:
    Γ ⊢ A typej                                 Γ⊢a∶A
                i
                    form-R                                      intro-R
   Γ ⊢ RA typej                               Γ ⊢ r(a) ∶ RA

       Γ.RA ⊢ P typeij      Γ.(a ∶ A) ⊢ d ∶ P [r(a)]
                                                       elim-R
                 Γ.RA ⊢ elimP
                            R (d) ∶ c(P )


             Γ.RA ⊢ P typeij      Γ.(a ∶ A) ⊢ d ∶ c(P [r(a)])
                                                                comp-R
                       Γ.(a ∶ A) ⊢ elimP
                                       R (r(a)) ≡ d
Phrased internally, given an outer type A, we get an inner type RA together with a
function r ∶ A → c(RA) with the universal property that, for any inner type X, to
define a function RA → X is to give a function A → c(X). Note the similarity of the
above rules to those of the propositional truncation modality; the only difference
is, of course, that R makes types fibrant rather than propositional.
    A type former along these lines is considered in [BT17], where the authors con-
struct a model structure on a universe of outer types using fibrant replacement.
    Unfortunately, the fibrant replacement operation cannot actually be internalised
in the above form while still retaining interesting homotopical models. This is
shown by the following theorem.
Theorem 2.20. Assume a fibrant replacement type former R as defined by the
rules form-R to comp-R. Then the inner level satisfies uniqueness of identity
proofs.
Proof. For an inner type A with u, v ∶ A, the internalisation of (2.7) gives us a
canonical map
                        i ∶ (c(u) =c(A) c(v)) → c(u =iA v).
24 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


We claim the following:
                  Πu,v∶A,p∶u=iA v R(Πh∶c(u)=c(A) c(v) c(c−1 (i(h)) =i p)).     (2.13)

By inner path induction, we can assume p ≡ refliu . Using intro-R it remains to
show that, for h ∶ c(u) = c(u), we have
                                  c(c−1 (i(h)) =i refliu ).                    (2.14)
Because of UIP, we can replace h by reflc(u) , and by observing that i maps the
trivial outer equality to the trivial inner equality we get (2.14).
   Our goal is to show that A satisfies UIP. Assume now u ∶ A and p ∶ u =i u. It
suffices to show p =i refliu . This follows from (2.13), choosing h to be reflc(u) . □

   While homotopical models do have fibrant replacement operations coming from
weak factorisation systems, they are usually not stable under base change. This
prevents internalisation of this operation in the form of the above rules. That is,
we may replace an inner type by an outer type, but this operation is not natural
in the context. If one still wishes to expose this operation, one option is to make
two-level type theory into a modal type theory extended with a notion of crisp
types as in [LOPS18]. Then one can state the above replacement operation crisply.

2.8. Notational conventions. The rest of the paper does not concern the meta-
properties of 2LTT. Instead, we develop some theory internally to 2LTT. As de-
scribed above, we use the syntax suggested in Subsection 2.1. For notational con-
venience, we omit applications of El and pretend that we work with Russell-style
universes. As it is fairly standard, we also omit universe indices in the style of
typical ambiguity. Similarly, we will keep the conversion operation c between inner
and outer types implicit.
   Note that we did not assume a built-in universe of propositions in either level
(but cf. (A5)). Instead, we define
                          Propi ∶≡ Σ (X ∶ U i ) . Πx,y∶X (x =i y)              (2.15)
                          Prop ∶≡ Σ (X ∶ U) . Πx,y∶X (x = y).                  (2.16)
   Most of the time, we work with the outer level, which is why we treat that level
as the default; note how the inner type formers are annotated with the symbol i ,
while the outer do not carry annotations. This also means that, when when we say
that a diagram commutes, it commutes up to the outer equality type.
   For outer types A and B, we can form the type of isomorphisms, written A ≃ B.
Note that, because of UIP, asking for maps in both directions such that both
compositions are pointwise equal to the identity is well-behaved. For inner types A
and B, the inner type A ≃i B is the usual type of equivalences.

        3. Basic tools: categories, fibrations, and cofibrations
   Before we can start working inside two-level type theory, it is helpful to develop
some basic theory. As the outer level of the theory is simply a version of MLTT
with UIP, we have access to a vast pool of results that are already known. In
particular, finite types and the basics of category theory work in the expected way.
We will summarise some of that here.
   Later on, we will need several notions more specific to two-level type theory.
Namely, we are going to define what it means for a function to be a fibration or
a cofibration, and for types to be fibrant or cofibrant. These notions will allow us
to use the outer level to obtain results that are really about the inner one, without
having to explicitly coerce from inner types to outer.
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                           25


3.1. Preliminaries. Although somewhat trivial, the importance of finite types
for our development justifies that we introduce them explicitly. Recall that, in
usual type-theoretic terminology, Finn is the finite type with n elements. In our
development, we will use this notation exclusively to refer to finite types in the
outer level. One explicit definition is as the type of natural numbers smaller than
n, where the order on natural numbers is defined as usual.
   We will say that a type X is finite if it is isomorphic to Finn , for some n, i.e.
if we have Σ (n ∶ N) . X ≅ Finn . The type Finn is not to be confused with its inner
counterpart Finin , which exists for n ∶ Ni . Of course, we have a canonical function
Finn → Finin , where the application of the function N → Ni is kept implicit. In a
two-level theory satisfying (A1), this would be an isomorphism, but in general, we
do not even assume a function in the other direction.
   In the following, will make heavy use of category-theoretic notions. Categories
are defined in the usual way, within the outer level of the theory.
Definition 3.1 (category). A category C is given by
     ● a type ∣C∣ ∶ U of objects;
     ● for all pairs x, y ∶ ∣C∣, a type C(x, y) ∶ U of arrows or morphisms;
     ● an identity arrow id ∶ C(x, x) for every object x;
     ● and a composition function ○ ∶ C(y, z) → C(x, y) → C(x, z) for all objects
       x, y, z;
     ● such that the usual categorical laws holds, that is, we have f ○ id = f and
       id ○ f = f , as well as h ○ (g ○ f ) = (h ○ g) ○ f ).
   Given objects x and y of a category C, we also write f ∶ x → y for a morphism
from x to y, that is, an element of the type C(x, y). It will always be clear from the
context if x and y are types or objects of a category, so that there is no confusion
with the function type former. (In the case of a category of types, the two notions
agree.)
   Readers familiar with the chapter on category theory in the HoTT book [Uni13]
(and [AKS15]) will note that our definition is exactly the same as that of precate-
gories there. Of course, since our outer theory validates UIP, and therefore every
type is a set, we do not need to explicitly add a truncation condition on homsets.
   A canonical example of a category is the category of types, whose objects are
the types in a given universe U, and whose morphisms are functions. By a slight
abuse of notation, we will simply write U to denote this category. Analogously, if
C is a category, we allow ourselves to denote the type of objects by C itself.
   The usual theory of categories can be reproduced in the context of our categories
(as long as we stay constructive). We write [C, D] for the functor category of
categories C and D, with the type of natural transformations from a functor F to
a functor G also written Nat(C, D). Functors and natural transformations form
the objects and morphisms of a (larger) category of categories. We have the usual
concepts such as limits and adjunctions and can prove all their usual properties,
for example that limits (if they exist) are unique up to isomorphism.
Remark 3.2. We will not indulge in the exercise of replicating the whole of category
theory in our outer level, and simply assume, on the empirical evidence provided by
several existing developments in the major implementations of type theory, like the
aforementioned Agda, Coq and Lean, that doing so is simply a matter of diligence
and patience, and it ultimately should present no mathematical difficulties.
Remark 3.3. Despite the above remark, it is perhaps appropriate to add a small
explanation of how one might reasonably deal with “size” issues in a formal devel-
opment of category theory within the outer theory.
26 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   When translating category-theoretical statements originally formulated in the
metalanguage of set theory, one is posed with the question of what precise type-
theoretic meaning to give to the term “small”.
   As most incarnations of type theory, including our outer level, provide the user
with an infinite tower of universes, it feels unnecessarily restrictive to constrain a
general term like “small” to a predetermined choice of a universe level.
   For this reason, we will not make such a choice, and simply continue the tradition
of writing “small” for a type that resides in a universe which is one step below a
“default” unspecified universe level. This makes it clear that the absolute level that
certain constructions happen to end in is not particularly important, rather what
we have to pay attention to are the differences in relative size.
   Note that the universe U i of inner types also forms a category, although it is not
as well behaved as U. For example, it does not have pullbacks (but see part (i) of
Lemma 3.10).

3.2. Fibrant types.
Definition 3.4 ((trivially) fibrant type). A type A ∶ U is fibrant if it is isomorphic
to an inner type A′ ∶ U i . It is trivially fibrant if the inner type A′ is furthermore
contractible.
   Note that fibrancy (and similarly trivial fibrancy) is a proof-relevant notion, in
that being fibrant is not a proposition (in the sense of having at most one element).
A fibrant type A carries with it a choice of an inner type A′ and an isomorphism
f ∶ A ≅ A′ relating its coercion to a type to the original type A (and a trivially
fibrant type furthermore carries an element witnessing inner contractibility of A′ ).
This should be kept in mind in our use of language when we use being fibrant as
an adjective. For example, when we say that A is fibrant exactly if B is fibrant,
what we mean is functions back and forth between the types witnessing fibrancy of
A and B.
   Generally speaking, our use of informal language in the outer level follows the
mantra of “propositions as types”. Thus, similar conventions as established in the
previous paragraph apply to notions such as fibrations and cofibrations defined
below (and their Reedy variants considered later).
   We write Ufib for the type of fibrant types in U. Note that it is itself not generally
fibrant (although it is in some of the intended models such as simplicial sets). We
let Ufib inherit the category structure of U. Note that the functor Ufib → U is the
replacement of the coercion functor U i → U by an isofibration. In particular, fibrant
types are closed under isomorphism. We allow ourselves to implicitly coerce from
Ufib to U.
Lemma 3.5. Fibrant types enjoy the following closure properties.
    (i) The unit type is trivially fibrant.
   (ii) Given A ∶ Ufib and B ∶ A → Ufib , then ΣA B is fibrant. It is trivially fibrant
        if A and B are valued in trivially fibrant types.
  (iii) Given A ∶ Ufib and B ∶ A → Ufib , then ΠA B is fibrant. It is trivially fibrant
        if B is valued in trivially fibrant types.
Proof. Recall from Lemma 2.11 that the coercion map U i → U preserves unit type,
dependent sums, and dependent products up to canonical isomorphism.
   We do the case of dependent products in detail. Note that we can internalise
the inner dependent product as an operation Πi ∶ (Σ (A ∶ U i ) . (A → U i )) → U i and
that given A ∶ U i and B ∶ A → U i , we have a comparison isomorphism Πi (A, B) ≅
Πa∶A B(a). This shows that the (outer) dependent product of A ∶ U i and B ∶ A → U i
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                              27


is fibrant. Isomorphic families have isomorphic dependent product, generalising the
statement to B ∶ A → Ufib . Finally, reindexing a family along an isomorphism gives
isomorphic dependent product, generalising the statement to A ∶ Ufib .           □
Definition 3.6 (equivalence). A function f ∶ A → B between fibrant types with
underlying inner types A′ and B ′ is an equivalence if the corresponding inner func-
tion A′ →i B ′ is an equivalence (in the sense of homotopy type theory and using the
inner identity type).
   Note that the notion of f being an equivalence in the above definition formally
depends on the witnesses of fibrancy of A and B. Different witnesses yield non-
isomorphic types of f being an equivalence. However, they will still be logically
equivalent (in the sense of maps back and forth) and are in fact propositionally
fibrant (meaning that their underlying inner type is a proposition in the sense of
homotopy type theory). As per our convention, we can thus say that the notion of
equivalence is invariant under isomorphism.
   Properties of equivalences are directly lifted from the inner level. For example,
equivalences satisfy 2-out-of-6.
3.3. Fibrations. Recall that the fibre p−1 (x) of a function p ∶ Y → X over x ∶ X
is given by the type Σ (y ∶ Y ) . p(e) = b. This is not to be confused with the notion
of homotopy fibre, which is only available for inner types (using the inner identity
type). More generally, we say that a type A is the fibre of p over x if A arises as a
pullback of p along 1 → X, in which case it is isomorphic to p−1 (x).
Definition 3.7 ((trivial) fibration). A function p ∶ Y → X is a (trivial) fibration if
its fibres are (trivially) fibrant.
  In the running text and diagrams, a fibration Y → X is denoted Y ↠ X.
Remark 3.8.
    (i) Note that A → 1 is a (trivial) fibration exactly if A is (trivially) fibrant. This
        matches the terminology in abstract homotopy theory, where the notion of
        fibration is taken as primitive and fibrant objects are the special case of
        maps into the terminal object. Note also that every trivial fibration is a
        fibration.
   (ii) In the models of simplicial sets and cubical sets, our fibration coincide with
        the fibrations in the sense of the model. The reader should be aware that
        our internal pointwise definition of fibration, talking just about the fibres of
        a map, does not correspond to an external pointwise or fibrewise property.
        For example, a map Y → X in simplicial sets is not necessarily a Kan
        fibration if the fibre Yx of every point x ∈ X0 is a Kan complex. Rather, the
        internal quantification over elements of the base type X externally becomes
        a quantification over [n] ∶ ∆ with x ∈ Xn . The witness of fibrancy is given by
        a family of elements σ([n], x) ∈ Un , natural in [n], where U is the universe
        of Kan fibrations.
    Since isomorphic maps have isomorphic fibres and the notion of (trivial) fibrancy
is invariant under isomorphism, the notion of (trivial) fibration is invariant under
isomorphism as well. From this, the following lemma is an immediate consequence
of the definitions.
Lemma 3.9. The following are equivalent for a function p ∶ Y → X:
    (i) p is a fibration,
   (ii) p is isomorphic over X to ΣX Y ′ → X for some Y ′ ∶ X → Ufib ,
  (iii) p is isomorphic over X to ΣX Y ′ → X for some Y ′ ∶ X → U i ,
28 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


and if X is fibrant with underlying inner type X ′ ∶ U i :
   (iv) p is isomorphic to the map ΣiX ′ Y ′ → X ′ corresponding to the inner depen-
        dent projection ΣiX ′ Y ′ →i X ′ for some Y ′ ∶ X ′ → U i .
We have analogous equivalences for trivial fibrations with U i replaced by the type of
inner contractible types and Ufib replaced by the type of trivially fibrant types.  □
   Fibrations and trivial fibrations enjoy a number of closure properties. We start
with the following easy collection.
Lemma 3.10. (Trivial) fibrations are closed under:
    (i) pullbacks,
   (ii) finite compositions.
  (iii) finite products,
Proof. For part (i), note that the fibres of a pullback of a map f are also fibres of
f.
   For part (ii), the nullary and binary case reduce to parts (i) and (ii) of Lemma 3.5,
respectively. The general case follows by induction.
   Part (iii) is a consequence of (i) and (ii).                                       □
Lemma 3.11. Every trivial fibration has a section.
Proof. By Lemma 3.9, we can assume that the given trivial fibration is of the form
Σ (b ∶ B) . X(b) → B for a type B and a family X ∶ B → U i of contractible fibrant
types over B. We obtain a section Πb∶B X(b) by extracting the centre of contraction
from the contractibility proof of X(b).                                           □
Lemma 3.12. Let p ∶ E → B be a map between fibrant types. Then p is a trivial
fibration if and only if it is both a fibration and an equivalence.
Proof. Let p be a fibration. By invariance under isomorphism and Lemma 3.9, we
can assume that p is of the form Σ (b ∶ B) . X(b) → B for an inner type B ∶ U i and
a family X ∶ B → U i of inner types over B, with identity isomorphisms witnessing
fibrancy of B and E. Then p is a trivial fibration exactly if X(b) is contractible for
all b ∶ B. Note that dependent projection Σ (b ∶ B) . X(b) → B corresponds to the
inner dependent projection Σi (b ∶ B) . X(b) →i B under the isomorphisms relating
inner and outer dependent sums and function types. Thus, p is an equivalence
exactly if this inner dependent projection is an equivalence in the inner level, which
from homotopy type theory we know to be equivalent to its fibres X(b) being
contractible for all b ∶ B.                                                         □
3.4. Cofibrations. Cofibrations and cofibrant types are further technical concepts
which help us to study the actual objects of interest, i.e. fibrant types. We will see
their usefulness later in this article, but let us in addition try to give some motivation
here. If B is a fibrant type, then so are B × B and B × B × B. More generally,
if we work in HoTT and fix any natural number n in the meta-theory, we can
consider the n-fold product of B. In our setting, this corresponds to the function
type Finn → B. It is important to note that, while (Fin2 → B) is isomorphic to
B × B, this and analogous isomorphisms do in general not hold if we use the inner
version Fini2 instead; we will only get the weaker notion of an inner equivalence.
While Finn → B is fibrant, this is not directly given by the rules of 2LTT and instead
requires a proof (see Lemma 3.25). This, we hope, makes it plausible that it is useful
to have a notion of cofibrant types, which we want to be those that exponentiation
with preserves fibrancy; and it is not too far-fetched that we also want an analogous
notion for functions. In fact, one might expect that any setting which allows to
reason about HoTT externally in such a way benefits from a notion of cofibration.
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                             29


For example, it is worth comparing the characterisation in Remark 3.14(i) with the
extension types by Riehl and Shulman [RS17].
   To define and reason about cofibrations (as well as Reedy cofibrations later on),
we make use of the theory of Leibniz constructions established in [RV14]. Given a
bifunctor F ∶ C × D → E, the Leibniz action F̂(f, g) of F on maps f ∶ A → B in C
and g ∶ C → D in D is the induced map from the pushout corner in the square
                               F (A, C)        / F (A, D)


                                                    
                               F (B, C)        / F (B, D),

i.e. the map
                                                   F
                                                   ̂(f,g)
                      F (A, D) +F (A,C) F (B, C)            / F (B, D),
assuming that this pushout exists. If E has all pushouts, this gives rise to a bifunctor
F̂ ∶ C → × D→ → E → , the Leibniz construction of F .
    In a category C with finite products, the Leibniz action of the product functor
(−) × (−) ∶ C × C → C in a category C is called the pushout product. For C Cartesian
closed, the Leibniz action of the exponential functor expop ∶ C × C op → C op is called
the pullback exponential. Note the dualised functor signature we have given exp
here (as opposed to exp ∶ C op × C → C). This causes the pushout (in C op ) of the
Leibniz construction to become a pullback in C, explaining the naming.
    The category U of types is Cartesian closed and has pullbacks, thus we have
the pullback exponential bifunctor ê   xp ∶ (U op )→ × U → → U → , sending functions
f ∶ A → B and p ∶ Y → X to the function
                               ê
                                xp(f,p)
                   (B → Y )                / (B → X) ×A→X (A → Y ).

Definition 3.13. A function f ∶ A → B between types is:
     ● a cofibration if êxp(f, −) preserves fibrations and trivial fibrations,
     ● a trivial cofibration if ê
                                 xp(f, −) sends fibrations to trivial fibrations.
A type B is (trivially) cofibrant if the function 0 → B is a (trivial) cofibration.
   We thank Mike Shulman for pointing out that we were missing the condition on
trivial fibrations for cofibration in an earlier version of this definition.
Remark 3.14.
   (i) Unfolding the above definition, we obtain the following phrasing. A function
       f ∶ A → B is a cofibration exactly if for all fibrations p ∶ Y ↠ X and
       commuting squares
                                    A       /Y
                                            ?
                                     f             p
                                                 
                                      B        / X,
         the type of diagonal fillers (indicated by the dotted arrow) is fibrant, and
         trivially fibrant whenever p is a trivial fibration.
    (ii) Analogously to (i), f is a trivial cofibration exactly if, for all fibrations p
         as above, the type of diagonal fillers is trivially fibrant.
   (iii) The notions of (trivial) cofibration and (trivially) cofibrant type are invari-
         ant under isomorphism.
   (iv) Since trivial fibrations are fibrations, trivial cofibrations are cofibrations.
    (v) A type B is cofibrant exactly if the representable functor U(B, −) preserves
         fibrations and trivial fibrations.
30 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


Remark 3.15. The conditions for (trivial) cofibrations given by Definition 3.13 are
reminiscent of the pushout product axiom of Cartesian closed model categories. In
fact, they correspond exactly to the dual phrasing of this axiom in terms of pullback
exponentials. This is the intuition behind our naming scheme.
   In the simplicial set model, our notion of (trivial) cofibration (interpreted in the
empty context) coincides with the (trivial) cofibrations of the Kan model structure.
This can be seen as follows. The Kan model structure is Cartesian closed, hence
a (trivial) cofibration of the model structure is a (trivial) cofibration in our sense.
Reversely, let f ∶ A → B be a cofibration in our sense. In particular, Leibniz ex-
ponential with f preserves trivial fibrations. Then f lifts against trivial fibrations
by Lemma 3.11, i.e. is a cofibration of the model structure. A similar argument
applies to trivial cofibrations, and our reasoning is not specific to simplicial sets
but applies to any cartesian closed model structure.
   One can ask for a local version of this correspondence. Given a simplicial set
Γ, the above argument in the slice over Γ shows that the (trivial) cofibrations
of the model structure over Γ include all of our (trivial) cofibrations in context Γ.
However, the reverse inclusions fails as the slices of the Kan model structure are not
Cartesian closed. For example, taking Γ = ∆1 , the map {0} → ∆1 (sitting over ∆1
via the identity) is an example of a trivial cofibration of the model structure that is
not even a cofibration in context Γ in our sense. For if it were, pullback exponentials
over ∆1 with {0} → ∆1 would preserve fibrations, which, by the adjunction between
product and exponential, would imply that pushout product over ∆1 with {0} → ∆1
preserves trivial cofibrations. However, the pushout product over ∆1 of {0} → ∆1
and {1} → ∆1 is simply their union ∂∆1 → ∆1 , which is not a trivial cofibration.
Remark 3.16. Our notions of (trivial) cofibrations and (trivial) fibrations do not
form weak factorisation systems. One may be tempted to consider the collection of
maps with the left lifting property with respect to (trivial) fibrations. This notion
does not capture the intuition described at the beginning of Subsection 3.4, and we
instead call such maps anodyne (cf. Definition 4.11).
   Within fibrant types, trivial cofibrations can be characterised as cofibrations that
are equivalences.
Lemma 3.17. Let f ∶ A → B be a function between fibrant types. Then f is a
trivial cofibration if and only if it is both a cofibration and an equivalence.
Proof. By part (iv) of Remark 3.14, we can assume that f is a cofibration and prove
that it is a trivial cofibration if and only if it is an equivalence.
   If f is a trivial cofibration, then, for all fibrant types X, the restriction map
(B → X) → (A → X) is an equivalence. A Yoneda-like argument implies that f
is an equivalence in this case. In detail, the characterisation (ii) of Remark 3.14
implies that the type of dotted diagonal fillers is trivially fibrant in each of the
following two diagrams:

                            A
                                id       /A           A
                                                          f
                                                                 /B
                                         ?                       >
                        f                         f
                                     g
                                                            f ○g
                         B                         B
As indicated, we call g the unique morphism B → A that makes the left triangle
commute. In the right triangle, observe that f ○ g and id both make the triangle
commute, and the desired result follows by uniqueness.
  Conversely, let p ∶ Y → X be a fibration. Then the corresponding pullback-
exponential fibration
                       (B → Y ) → (B → X) ×(A→X) (A → Y )
                       TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                   31


is an equivalence by preservation of equivalences under exponentiation with a fixed
base and 2-out-of-3, hence a trivial fibration by Lemma 3.12. Thus, f is a trivial
cofibration.                                                                      □
   The following key lemma helps us characterise cofibrations.
Lemma 3.18. For any function f ∶ A → B:
   (i) f is a cofibration exactly if for any family Y ′ ∶ B → Ufib of (trivially) fibrant
       types, the induced map
                                        ΠB Y ′ → ΠA (Y ′ ○ f )
         is a (trivial) fibration.
    (ii) f is a trivial cofibration exactly if for any family Y ′ ∶ B → Ufib of fibrant
         types, the induced map
                                        ΠB Y ′ → ΠA (Y ′ ○ f )
         is a trivial fibration.
   Before giving its proof, let us recall the following characterisation of dependent
functions in terms of non-dependent functions into a type of pairs where the first
component is fixed.
Lemma 3.19. For a function f ∶ A → B and a family X ∶ B → U, the following
diagram is a pullback:
                                          g↦(λa. (f (a),g(a)))
                       ΠA (X ○ f )                               / (A → ΣB X)

                                                                           π1 ○−
                                                                           
                               1
                                                 f
                                                                      / (A → B)

Proof. By direct calculation, the pullback is Σ (g ∶ A → ΣB X) . (π1 ○ g = f ), which
is indeed isomorphic to ΠA (X ○ f ).                                               □
Proof of Lemma 3.18. Let p ∶ Y → X be a fibration. It is isomorphic to ΣX Y ′ → X
for some family Y ′ ∶ X → Ufib of fibrant types. Given v ∶ B → X, we have the
following diagram:
            ΠB (Y ′ ○ v)                         / (B → Y )

                                                           ê
                                                            xp(f,p)
                                                      
           ΠA (Y ′ ○ v ○ f )            / (B → X) ×(A→X) (A → Y )                  / (A → Y )

                                                                                         p○−
                                                                                       
                  1
                                    v            / (B → X)              −○f
                                                                                   / (A → X).

The right bottom square is a pullback by construction. The composite bottom
square and the composite left square are pullbacks by Lemma 3.19. By pullback
pasting, the top left square is a pullback.
   Note that a map over a type Z is a (trivial) fibration exactly if all its pullbacks
along maps 1 → Z are (trivial) fibrations. It follows that ê          xp(f, p) is a (trivial)
fibration exactly if ΠB (Y ′ ○ v) → ΠA (Y ′ ○ v ○ f ) is a (trivial) fibration for all v. This
shows the desired equivalences: going forward, we put X = B and v = idB ; going
backward, we use the given condition for the family Y ′ ○ v for all v.                      □
   By setting A = 0 in Lemma 3.18, we obtain the following important special case.
Corollary 3.20. For any type B:
32 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


    (i) B is cofibrant exactly if for any family Y ′ ∶ B → Ufib of (trivially) fibrant
        types, the type ΠB Y ′ is (trivially) fibrant,
   (ii) B is trivially cofibrant exactly if for any family Y ′ ∶ B → Ufib of fibrant
        types, the type ΠB Y ′ is trivially fibrant.                                □
   In the following, we make use of standard properties of the Leibniz calculus
(most of which are established at a general level in [RV14]). They allow us to infer
closure properties of (trivial) cofibrations from corresponding closure properties of
(trivial) fibrations established in Lemma 3.10.
Lemma 3.21. (Trivial) cofibrations are closed under:
    (i) pushouts (whenever they exist),
   (ii) finite compositions,
  (iii) finite coproducts.
   Recall that U does not possess pushouts in general. Part (i) does not establish the
existence of pushouts, but merely asserts that any pushout of a (trivial) cofibration
is also one.
Proof of Lemma 3.21. For part (i), recall from [RV14] that the functorial action of
the pullback exponential in its first argument sends morphisms of arrows that are
pushouts to morphisms of arrows that are pullbacks. Thus, the claim follows from
part (i) of Lemma 3.10.
   In detail, consider a pushout
                                         A      /C

                                     f               g
                                                  
                                      B         / D.
Assuming that f is a cofibration, we wish to show that g is a cofibration (the case
of trivial cofibrations is analogous). Let Y ↠ X be a (trivial) fibration. From the
universal property of the pushout and pullback pasting, we get that the square
                     (D → Y )                                 / (B → Y )


                                                             
            (C → Y ) ×(C→X) (D → X)             / (A → Y ) ×(A→X) (B → X)

is a pullback. Since f ∶ A → B is a cofibration, the right vertical map is a (trivial)
fibration, hence so is the left vertical map by part (i) of Lemma 3.10. This makes g
a cofibration. An alternative argument uses Lemma 3.18 and the dependent version
of the universal property of pushouts.
   For part (ii), recall from [RV14] that the pullback exponential of a map p with
a finite composition is a finite composition of pullbacks of pullback exponentials
of p with the individual factors. Thus, the claim follows from parts (i) and (ii) of
Lemma 3.10.
   For an alternative proof, we can make use of the characterisation of (trivial)
cofibrations given by Lemma 3.18. Let us only deal with the case of a binary
composition
                                A      /Bf
                                                 /C
                                                 g


of cofibrations. Given a family X ∶ C → Ufib of (trivially) fibrant types, we have to
show that ΠC X → ΠA (X ○g○f ) is a (trivial) fibration. This writes as the composite

                   ΠC X
                           −○g
                                 / ΠB (X ○ g)   −○f
                                                         / ΠA (X ○ g ○ f ), ,
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                             33


whose factors are (trivial) fibrations by assumption. The statements then follows
from closure of fibrations under composition, i.e. part (ii) of Lemma 3.10.
    For part (iii), recall that the exponential bifunctor sends colimits in its exponent
to limits. By [RV14], this property transfers to the pullback exponential bifunctor.
In particular, for a fixed function p, the operation ê  xp(−, p) sends coproducts (in
U → ) to products. The claim then reduces to part (iii) of Lemma 3.10. Alternatively,
it is a consequence of (i) and (ii) in the same fashion as for Lemma 3.10.            □
Corollary 3.22. For any type A and cofibrant type B, the inclusion A → A + B is
a cofibration.
Proof. Since U has binary coproducts, it has pushouts along 0 → A. Instantiating
part (i) of Lemma 3.21 to the pushout of the cofibration 0 → B along 0 → A, we
obtain the claim.
   Alternatively, we could instantiate part (iii) of Lemma 3.21 to the cofibrations
idA (using the nullary case of part (ii) of Lemma 3.21) and 0 → B.               □
   Note that the map 0 → 1 is the unit for the pushout product. Thus, the pullback
exponential with 0 → 1 is equivalent to the identity functor. Thus, 1 is the simplest
example a cofibrant type. This can be seen as the nullary version of the following
statement.
Lemma 3.23. Any pushout product f ̂       ×g (if it exists) of a cofibration f with a
cofibration g is again a cofibration. Furthermore, f ̂×g is a trivial cofibration if one
of f and g is a trivial cofibration.
Proof. Recall that binary product and exponential form a two-variable adjunction.
As explained in [RV14], this lifts to Leibniz constructions. In particular, given a
function p, we have isomorphisms
                 ê
                  xp(f ̂
                       ×g, p) ≅ ê
                                 xp(g, ê
                                        xp(f, p)) ≅ ê
                                                     xp(f, ê
                                                            xp(g, p)).
With this, the claim reduces to the definition of (trivial) cofibrations.             □
Corollary 3.24. Cofibrations are closed under products with cofibrant types.          □
  We are now able to characterise a large class of cofibrant types.
Lemma 3.25.
    (i) Fibrant types are cofibrant.
   (ii) Cofibrant types are closed under finite coproducts.
  (iii) Finite types are cofibrant.
  (iv) Given a cofibrant type A and a family B ∶ A → U of cofibrant types, then
        ΣA B is cofibrant.
   (v) Cofibrant types are closed under finite products.
Proof. Part (i) is immediate from Corollary 3.20 since (trivially) fibrant types are
closed under exponentiating with fibrant types by part (iii) of Lemma 3.5.
   Part (ii) is an instance of part (iii) of Lemma 3.21.
   Part (iii) is a corollary of (ii) and cofibrancy of 1.
   For part (iv), we work with the characterisation of cofibrancy given by Corol-
lary 3.20. Let X ∶ (ΣA B) → Ufib be a (trivially) fibrant family. We have to show that
ΠΣAB X is (trivially) fibrant. This type is strictly isomorphic to Πa∶A Πb∶B(a) X(a, b)
and (trivially) fibrant by two applications of Corollary 3.20.
   For part (v), the nullary case is given by cofibrancy of 1. With this, the general
situation reduces to the case of binary products. This is the non-dependent instance
of (iv). Alternatively, it is the instance of Lemma 3.23 for maps 0 → A and 0 → B
(whose pushout product is 0 → A × B).                                                □
34 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   We note that part (iv) of Lemma 3.25 has a relative generalization: given cofi-
brant A and a family fa ∶ Ca → Da of cofibrations indexed over a ∶ A, the functorial
action ΣA C → ΣA D of ΣA on f is a cofibration. This is proved using Lemma 3.19
instead of Lemma 3.18. In principle, one could generalize further to a “Leibniz
dependent sum” of a cofibration A → B with a family of cofibrations indexed over
B, but we have no need for that here.

                            4. Reedy fibrant diagrams
4.1. Motivation. The connection between dependency structures of types and
type families and what is known as Reedy fibrancy [Ree74] is well-known in the
type theory community, although people have used different names for this con-
cept; for example, Makkai’s FOLDS [Mak95] builds on the same insights. Let us
explain the idea with the help of a very concrete example. The category ∆<3      +  is
the category with three objects [0], [1], [2] (“vertices”, “edges”, “triangles”), and
morphisms generated by s, t ∶ [0] → [1] (“source”, “target”) and u, v, w ∶ [1] → [2],
subject to the following three equations:
                                 u /
                                                        u○s=v○s
                       s /
                 [0]                 /
                           / [1] v / [2]                u○t=w○s
                       t         w
                                                        v○t=w○t
                               op
The type of functors F ∶ (∆<3
                           + )     → U is defined in the usual way, and is isomorphic
to the type of 9-tuples (X0 , X1 , X2 , fs , ft , fu , fv , fw , e0 , e1 , e2 ) where:
         X0 ∶ U               fs ∶ X1 → X0                e0 ∶ fs ○ fu = fs ○ fv
         X1 ∶ U               ft ∶ X1 → X0                e1 ∶ ft ○ fu = fs ○ fw
         X2 ∶ U               fu ∶ X2 → X1                e2 ∶ ft ○ fv = ft ○ fw
                              fv ∶ X2 → X1
                              fw ∶ X2 → X1
While this type of 9-tuples is unfortunately not fibrant, we can identify a class of
diagrams — the Reedy fibrant ones (Definition 4.6) — whose type will turn out
to be fibrant, and such that every functor is equivalent a Reedy fibrant one for a
suitably weak notion of equivalence.
   We will illustrate the idea using (∆+<3 )op . We will regard this category as a
presentation of a dependency structure of types and type families. That is, instead
of asking for source and target map from the type of edges to the type of vertices,
we let the type of edges be indexed twice over the type of vertices, and similarly for
triangles over edges. This leads to a type of triples (A0 , A1 , A2 ) with the following
components:
                   A0 ∶ U
                   A1 ∶ A0 → A0 → U
                   A2 ∶ Π(a, b, c ∶ A0 ).A1 a b → A1 b c → A1 a c → U
The type of triples (A0 , A1 , A2 ) encodes the so-called Reedy fibrant functors from
       op
(∆<3
   + )    to U and can be formulated in homotopy type theory without the notion of
strict equality, or in other words, it can be formulated in our inner theory without
using equality from the outer theory.
   Every triple (A0 , A1 , A2 ) determines a functor, but, unfortunately, it is not the
case that the latter type of triples is isomorphic (as a type) to the former type of
tuples that used strict equality. Instead, we will show later that for every functor
there exists a Reedy fibrant one that is equivalent to it in a weaker sense (Corol-
lary 4.27) — its Reedy fibrant replacement.
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                              35


   Before this, we introduce the basic required categorical infrastructure within the
language of 2LTT. This is a first demonstration of results which can be expressed
in full in 2LTT although they would require meta-theoretic reasoning in more tra-
ditional approaches. We define the notion of Reedy fibration, and show that Reedy
fibrant diagrams C → U have limits in U for a finite inverse category C. This is
an internalised version of Shulman’s results which can be found in [Shu15b]. In
the second half of this section, we describe how to construct Reedy fibrant replace-
ments, discuss classifiers for Reedy fibrations (a special case of which would be the
type of semisimplicial types restricted to level n), and finally, we develop the theory
of exponentials of diagrams.

4.2. Inverse categories. In the following, when considering categories of dia-
grams, we will mostly focus on diagrams over inverse categories. In contrast
with the setup leading, for instance, to the Reedy model structure on simplicial
presheaves over a Reedy category, in our setting it is necessary to impose the fur-
ther restriction on the index category to be “one-way”. We can either express this
in terms of direct categories and contravariant functors, or inverse categories and
covariant functors. We have arbitrarily picked the second representation. For read-
ers familiar with Reedy categories, inverse categories are simply the special case
of those obtained by requiring that there be no non-trivial positive arrows. For
the sake of illustrating how to encode the details of the definition in two-level type
theory, however, we choose to give an explicit definition.
   Consider the category ω. Its objects are the natural numbers N and its mor-
phisms are given by
                                  ω(n, m) ∶≡ m ≤ n,
with ≤ ∶ N → N → Prop defined in the usual way. This category is in fact a poset.
In general, Reedy categories can be defined in terms of arbitrary ordinals, but ω is
enough for our purposes. This lets us evade the question of how to encode more
general ordinals in the theory.
Definition 4.1 (inverse category). We say that a category C is inverse if there is
a functor φ ∶ C op → ω reflecting identities; i.e. given f ∶ x → y with φ(x) = φ(y), then
f is an identity, i.e. (x, y, f ) = (x, x, idx ) as elements of the type of arrows of C. We
call φ the rank functor, and say x ∶ ∣C∣ has rank φ(x). We write C <n for the full
subcategory of C consisting of objects of rank less than n.
    Given category C and a functor F ∶ C → U, the category of elements F , de-
noted F /C in analogy with the notation for coslices, is defined as usual via the
Grothendieck construction. In particular, objects are pairs (a, x) where a ∶ ∣C∣ and
x ∶ F (a) and morphisms from (a, x) to (b, y) are maps f ∶ a → b such that F f (x) = y.
We have a forgetful functor F /C → C that is discrete Grothendieck opfibration. This
is a cosieve exactly if F is valued in propositions.
    Let C now be an inverse category. Then the forgetful functor F /C → C induces a
rank functor also on F /C. This makes F /C into an inverse category.
    Given a category C, recall that the coslice x/C over an object x ∶ C has as objects
pairs (y, f ) of y ∶ C and a map f ∶ x → y. Morphisms between (y, f ) and (y ′ , f ′ ) are
given maps h ∶ y → y ′ with h ○ f = f ′ in C. The evident forgetful functor x/C is a
discrete Grothendieck opfibration.
    The formulation of Reedy fibrancy for diagrams over inverse categories makes
use of the notion of matching object. The following definition can be used (see
Definition 4.4) to give a formulation of matching objects in terms of limits.
Definition 4.2 (reduced coslice). Given a category C and an object x ∶ C, the
reduced coslice x C is the full subcategory of the coslice x/C on objects (y, f ) that
36 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


are not equal to (x, idx ), i.e. come with a proof p ∶ (y, f ) ≠ (x, idx ) in the type of
objects of x/C (equivalently, (x, y, f ) ≠ (x, x, idx ) in the type of morphisms of C).
We write such an object as a triple (y, f, p).
   By definition, we have a fully faithful forgetful functor x C → x/C. Composing
it with the forgetful functor to C, we obtain forget ∶ x C → C, sending an object
(y, f, p) to y.
   Definition 4.2 may seem slightly unnatural from a category-theory point of view.
There is, however, a different perspective that can perhaps help to shed some light
on the above definition, motivated by thinking of inverse categories as generalisa-
tions of ∆op+ .
   For a given inverse C with an object x ∶ C, we have the representable diagram
C[x] defined by C[x]y ∶≡ C(y, x) (with evident functorial action). Note that the
coslice x/C is the category of elements of C[x]. Now, the representable diagram
C[x] has a maximal non-trivial subfunctor consisting of all the elements of C[x]
except the identity arrow idx ∶ x → x. We detail its construction below.
   Recall that subfunctors of representable functors correspond to cosieves, i.e.
families of propositions:
                              φ ∶ Πi∶C (C(x, i) → Prop),
such that, for maps f ∶ x → y and g ∶ y → z, we have
                                  φy (f ) → φz (g ○ f ).                           (4.1)
The functor Φ ∶ C → U corresponding to such a cosieve φ is then given by
                             Φ(y) ∶≡ Σ (f ∶ C(x, y)) . φy (f )
on objects, and rule (4.1) ensures that the functor can act on morphisms by function
composition, thereby giving a subfunctor of C[x].
   Now, if δ is defined by
                                  δ(y, f ) ∶≡ (y ≠ x),
the condition on C being inverse guarantees that δ is a well-defined cosieve. The
corresponding subfunctor of C[x] is denoted by ∂C[x], and referred to as the ab-
stract boundary of x. In the following, we will denote by ix ∶ ∂C[x] → C[x] the
obvious inclusion map.
   The following result is an immediate consequence of the definitions.
Lemma 4.3. For any inverse category C and object x ∶ C, the reduced coslice x C
is (up to isomorphism) the category of elements of the abstract boundary ∂C[x].
Extending this, the category of elements functor sends the natural transformation
∂C[x] → C[x] (up to isomorphism) to the inclusion x C → x/C.                    □
4.3. Reedy fibrations. Part (i) of Lemma 3.10 makes it possible to construct
fibrant limits of certain “well-behaved” functors from inverse categories. We follow
Shulman [Shu15b], but our setup allows a slightly more general development. We
will give a short analysis after the proof of Theorem 4.8.
   In the following, we always assume that C is an inverse category.
Definition 4.4 (matching object; see [Shu15b, Chapter. 11]). Let X ∶ C → U be a
functor. For any z ∶ C, we define the matching object MzX to be the limit of the
                    forget   X
composition z    C ÐÐÐ→ C Ð→ U.
  Using the universal property of the limit defining the matching object, we obtain
a map Xz → MzX . Abstracting over X, this gives a natural transformation (−)z →
Mz between functors from [C, U] to U.
  Alternatively, we can formulate matching objects in terms of abstract boundaries:
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                               37


Lemma 4.5. Given a diagram X over C, and an object z ∶ C, the matching object
MzX is isomorphic to Nat(∂C[z], X), naturally in X. Under this and the Yoneda
isomorphism Xz ≅ Nat(C[z], X), the map Xz → MzX corresponds to Nat(iz , X).
Proof. This is straightforward to verify directly. Alternatively, one can observe that
weighted limits of X with weight W can be implemented by taking the limit over
the restriction of X to category of elements of W , and this is natural in W .      □
Definition 4.6 (Reedy (trivial) fibration; see [Shu15b, Def. 11.3]). Let X, Y ∶C → U
be two diagrams. Further, let p ∶ Y → X be a natural transformation. We say that
p is a Reedy (trivial) fibration if, for all z ∶ C, the canonical map
                                   Yz → MzY ×MzX Xz ,
induced by the universal property of the pullback, is a (trivial) fibration.
   A diagram X is said to be Reedy (trivially) fibrant if the canonical map X → 1
is a Reedy (trivial) fibration, where here 1 denotes the diagram that is constantly
the unit type.
   In terms of the natural transformation (−)z → Mz , we can express that p is a
Reedy fibration by saying that the pullback application of (−)z → Mz to p is a
fibration for all z ∶ C. Here, we have applied the Leibniz calculus to the bifunctor
[[C, U], U] × [C, U] → U.
   We can use abstract boundaries to improve on this. The pullback hom Nat̂ in the
category of diagrams on C is the Leibniz construction of the natural transformation
bifunctor Nat. Concretely, given natural transformations f ∶ A → B and p ∶ Y → X
between diagram on C, their pullback hom is the induced map
                             Nat(f,p)
                             ̂
             Nat(B, Y )                 / Nat(B, X) ×Nat(A,X) Nat(A, Y ).

With this, we can give an alternative characterisation of Definition 4.6 that is
occasionally useful.
Lemma 4.7. A natural transformation p∶Y → X between diagrams on C is a Reedy
                                                                   ̂ z , p) is a (trivial)
(trivial) fibration if and only if, for all objects z ∶ C, the map Nat(i
                    z
fibration (where i ∶ ∂C[z] → C[z]).
Proof. Immediate consequence of Lemma 4.5.                                                □
   Using Definition 4.6, we can make precise the claim that we can construct fibrant
limits of certain well-behaved diagrams.
Theorem 4.8 (see [Shu15b, Lemma 11.8]). Assume that C is an inverse category
with a finite type of objects ∣C∣ and that X ∶ C → U is a Reedy (trivially) fibrant
diagram. Then, X has a (trivially) fibrant limit.
Proof. By induction on the cardinality of ∣C∣. In the case ∣C∣ ≅ Fin0 , the limit is the
unit type.
  Otherwise, we have ∣C∣ ≅ Finn+1 . Let us consider the rank functor
                                        φ ∶ C op → ω.
Choose an object z ∶ C such that φ(z) is maximal; this is possible (constructively)
due to the finiteness of ∣C∣. Let us call C ′ the category that we get if we remove z
from C; that is, we set ∣C ′ ∣ ∶≡ Σ (x ∶ ∣C∣) . x ≠ z. Clearly, C ′ is still inverse, and we
have ∣C ′ ∣ ≅ Finn .
   Denote by 1 the terminal diagram on C, and by 1′ the left Kan extension of the
terminal diagram on C ′ to C. So 1′ has value 1 on all objects except z, where it has
value 0. Similarly, let X ′ be the restriction of X on C ′ .
38 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


  The following square of diagrams on C

                                  ∂C[z]       / C[z]


                                                 
                                    1′          /1

is a pushout, as one can easily check levelwise, using the fact that equality on
objects in C is decidable, since ∣C∣ is finite.
   By applying the bifunctor Nat with X on the right, we get that the square

                                  lim X        / Xz


                                                
                                  lim X ′     / MX
                                                  z


is a pullback. The right vertical map is a fibration by Reedy fibrancy of X, hence
the left vertical map is a fibration by part (i) of Lemma 3.10. Now lim X ′ is fibrant
by induction hypothesis, hence lim X is fibrant.                                    □

   In Shulman’s work [Shu15b], the notion of an outer type does not exist, and every
type that occurs is inner. This means that every diagram is valued in inner types,
and consequently, matching objects do not necessarily exist, so the definition of a
Reedy fibration has to include the condition that all the matching objects involved
are available.
   If we wanted to precisely reproduce Shulman’s definition of a Reedy fibration, we
would have to modify Definition 4.6: first, that all occurring diagrams are valued in
fibrant types; and second, that all occurring matching objects, obtained by coercing
to outer types then taking a limit, happen to be fibrant.
   In our setting, it is more natural to work with outer types from the beginning.
We recover Shulman’s notion in the special case where the outer types that occur
are coercions of inner types. Although diagrams of fibrant types (C → U i ) are what
we are ultimately interested in, we can at no cost enlarge the class of diagrams
that we talk about to those that are built out of outer types, possibly not even
isomorphic to inner ones. The ability to make this choice is an important feature
of two-level type theory as a meta-theoretic reasoning framework, and it can help
to obtain some slightly more general results compared to a traditional approach.
   Similarly to the notation C <n (see Definition 4.1), we will denote by X∣n the
restriction of a diagram X ∶ C → U to C <n .
   The following lemma generalises Lemma 3.10 to Reedy fibrations.

Lemma 4.9. Reedy (trivial) fibrations are closed under:
    (i) pullbacks (see [Shu15b, Theorem 11.11]),
   (ii) finite compositions.
  (iii) finite products,

Proof. As before, part (iii) is a consequence of (i) and (ii).
   For part (i), we first give an abstract argument. Recall from [RV14] that the
functorial action of the pullback hom in its second argument preserves morphisms
                                                       ̂ z , p∗ f ) is a pullback of
between arrows that are pullbacks. It follows that Nat(i
      z
 ̂ , f ) for any z ∶ C. This reduces the claim to part (i) to Lemma 3.10.
Nat(i
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                          39


  For the benefit of the reader, we also include a more direct proof, which is
obtained by unfolding the abstract argument. Suppose we have a pullback square:

                                    Y
                                          g
                                                /X
                                    q              p
                                                  
                                    A           / B,
                                          f

where p is a Reedy fibration. We want to show that q is a Reedy fibration. Now
fix an object n ∶ ∣C∣, and consider the cube:

                                    MnX ×MnB Bn                       / MX
                                    5                                   ; n

                  MnY ×MnA An                               / MY
                                                                  n

                                                                        
                                         5 Bn                         / MB
                                                                       ; n
                                                              
                       An                                   / M A.
                                                                  n

The front and back faces are pullbacks by construction, and the right face is a
pullback because it is the limit of a pullback square. By a pullback pasting argu-
ment, the square determined by the front left and the back right vertical arrow is
a pullback. By a second pullback pasting argument, the left face is a pullback.
   Now consider the diagram:
                              Yn                         / Xn


                                                      
                         MnY ×MnA An            / M X ×M B Bn
                                                     n       n




                                                           
                              An                         / Bn .

We have proved that the lower square is a pullback, and the outermost square is
a pullback because limits in categories of diagrams are pointwise. It follows that
the upper square is a pullback for all n ∶ C, which shows that the map Y → A is a
Reedy fibration.
   For part (ii), recall from [RV14] that the pullback hom with a fixed map iz ∶
∂C[Z] → C[Z] of a finite composition is a finite composition of pullbacks of pullback
homs of iz with the individual factors. Thus, the claim reduces to parts (i) and (ii)
of Lemma 3.10.                                                                     □

  Reedy fibrations admit “change of base” along discrete Grothendieck fibrations.
Lemma 4.10. Let H ∶ C → D be a discrete Grothendieck fibration of inverse cate-
gories. Then the restriction functor H ∗ ∶ [D, U] → [C, U] preserves Reedy (trivial)
fibrations.
Proof. There are various way to check this. Because H is a discrete fibration,
for z ∶ C, the induced functor H ∶ z/C → Hz/D on slices is an isomorphism, and
it restricts to an isomorphism H ∶ z C → Hz D of reduced slices. The Reedy
fibrancy conditions for a map p in [D, U] thus restrict to particular cases of the
Reedy fibrancy condition for H ∗ p in [C, U]. The same holds for Reedy trivial
fibrations.
40 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   Alternatively, one checks for z ∶ C that left Kan extension H! along H sends the
map iz ∶ ∂C[z] → C[z] in [C, U] to the map iHz ∶ ∂C[Hz] → C[hZ] (this always holds
for the codomain, independently of requiring that H is a discrete Grothendieck
fibration). Indeed, this follows from the following special case. The map iz is itself
the left Kan extension of the maximal non-trivial subobject of the terminal object
in diagrams over z/C, and similarly for the abstract boundary iHz and D. The
claim then follows from commutativity of the diagram

                                    z/C
                                          H       / Hz/D
                                          ≃


                                                       
                                    C
                                          H           /D
of categories.                                                                      □
4.4. Reedy fibrant factorisations. The goal of the current section is to show
that any functor X from an admissible inverse category C to Ufib has a Reedy
fibrant replacement; that is, we can construct a Reedy fibrant diagram which is
equivalent to X in a suitable sense. More generally, given any map of pointwise
fibrant diagrams, we can always factor it into a (pointwise) equivalence followed by
a fibration.
   We emphasise that we are talking about diagrams that are valued in fibrant
types. An obvious reason why this is necessary is that the only notion of equiva-
lence for general diagrams that we could use would be (strict) isomorphism, which
clearly would be too strong. But even if we came up with a weak notion of equiv-
alence of general diagrams, we could not expect it to be possible to start with any
diagram C → U and derive a Reedy fibrant one from it which is in some sense
equivalent. Already in the special case that C is the discrete category with exactly
one object, this would correspond to finding a fibrant replacement of an outer type.
By Theorem 2.20 such a fibrant replacement cannot be defined internally.
   Our construction is an internalisation of the known analogous construction in
traditional mathematics (see e.g. [Shu15b, Lemma 11.10] or [RV14]).
Definition 4.11. We say that a map i ∶ A → B is anodyne if it has the left lifting
property with respect to fibrations. More precisely, for all fibrations p ∶ Y → X, the
pullback exponential (B → Y ) → (B → X) ×A→X (A → Y ) has a section.
  The following characterisations of anodyne maps are straightforward to establish.
Lemma 4.12. A function i ∶ A → B is anodyne if and only if for all families
X ∶ B → Ufib of fibrant types over B, and all terms t ∶ Πa∶A X(i(a)), we can find a
term t′ ∶ Πb∶B X(b) such that t′ (i(a)) = t(a) for all a ∶ A.                    □
Lemma 4.13. Assume we are given a commutative triangle

                                A
                                              i             /B

                                     p                 q
                                                  ~
                                          X,
where the map i is fibrewise anodyne, i.e. for all x ∶ X, the induced map p−1 (x) →
q −1 (x) between the fibres is anodyne. Then, i is anodyne.                       □
   Since anodyne maps are defined by a left lifting property, they exhibit familiar
closure properties, of which we recall the following:
Lemma 4.14. Anodyne maps are closed under retracts.                                 □
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                             41


  When focusing on fibrant types, we can say more about anodyne maps.
Lemma 4.15. If i ∶ A → B is an anodyne map between fibrant types, then i is an
equivalence.
Proof. Since A is fibrant, we get a map r ∶ B → A such that r ○ i = id, in particular
r ○ i =i id. To show that i ○ r =i id, it is enough, by Lemma 4.12, to show that
i ○ r ○ i =i i, which follows from the first part.                                 □
   Trivial cofibrations are in particular anodyne maps, as the following lemma
shows.
Lemma 4.16. If i ∶ A → B is a trivial cofibration, then it is anodyne.
Proof. For any fibration p, the pullback exponential ê
                                                      xp(i, p) is a trivial fibration,
so it has a section by Lemma 3.11.                                                  □
  The following lemma provides an important example of anodyne map which is
not necessarily a trivial cofibration.
Lemma 4.17. Let A be a fibrant type, and a0 ∶ A a term. Then the map i ∶ 1 →
Σ (a ∶ A) . a =i a0 which selects the pair (a0 , refla0 ) is anodyne.
Proof. Immediate consequence of the elimination rule for the fibrant identity type
and its computation rule.                                                       □
Corollary 4.18. Let f ∶ A → B be a function between fibrant types. Then there
exists a fibrant type N , an anodyne map i ∶ A → N , and a fibration p ∶ N → B, such
that f = p ○ i.
Proof. Let N ∶≡ Σ (a ∶ A) . Σ (b ∶ B) . (f (a) =i b). The function i is given by i(a) ∶≡
(a, f (a), reflf (a) ), while p is simply the projection into the component of type B.
Then p is a fibration by construction.
   Now consider the projection q ∶ N → A on the first component. If we use q
to regard i as a map over A, then it is clear that the fibres of i have the form
of Lemma 4.17 up to isomorphism, hence they are anodyne. It then follows from
Lemma 4.13 that i itself is anodyne, as required.                                     □
  We will refer to the type N constructed in the proof of Corollary 4.18 as the
mapping cocylinder of f .
Definition 4.19. Let C be an inverse category. We say that C is admissible if, for
all a ∶ C, Reedy (trivially) fibrant diagrams over the reduced coslice a C have a
(trivially) fibrant limit.
   Let C be an inverse category with a functor F ∶ C → U. Since the category
of elements F /C → C is a discrete Grothendieck opfibration, the induced functor
(a, x) F /C → a C is an isomorphism for any (a, x) ∶ F /C, and similarly for the
(non-reduced) coslices. It follows that admissibility of C implies admissibility of
F /C.
Lemma 4.20. Let C an admissible inverse category, and let X ∶ C → U be a Reedy
fibrant diagram. Then X is pointwise fibrant, and all the matching objects of X are
fibrant.
Proof. First observe that if X is a Reedy fibrant diagram on C, and z ∶ C is any
object, then j ∗ X is a Reedy fibrant diagram on z C, where j ∶ z C → C is
the forgetful functor. This follows from the above observation that j induces an
isomorphism between (reduced) coslices of z C and (reduced) coslices of C.
   Therefore, if C is admissible, the matching object MzX of X is fibrant for all z ∶ C.
Since furthermore the map Xz → MzX is a fibration by the assumption that X is
Reedy fibrant, we get that Xz is fibrant as well.                                     □
42 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   The main example of an admissible inverse category is ∆op
                                                           + , the opposite of the
simplex category restricted to strictly monotone maps. We can define it concretely
as follows:
Definition 4.21 (category ∆op                         op
                                   + ). The category ∆+ has natural numbers as objects,
                                                 op
written [0], [1], [2], . . . , and morphisms ∆+ ([m], [k]) are strictly increasing func-
tions Fink+1 → Finm+1 . Composition of morphisms is given by function composition.
   That ∆op+ is admissible follows from Theorem 4.8 and the fact that all the reduced
coslices of ∆op
             + are finite.
   The notion of anodyne can be extended to diagrams in a pointwise fashion.
Definition 4.22. Let C be a category, and X, Y be diagrams on C. A natural
transformation f ∶ X → Y is said to be anodyne if it is so pointwise, i.e. for all n ∶ C,
the function fn ∶ Xn → Yn is anodyne.
  Similarly, we have a notion of equivalence of diagrams, defined pointwise.
Definition 4.23. For a category C, let X, Y ∶ C → U be pointwise fibrant diagrams.
A natural transformation f ∶ X → Y is said to be an equivalence if, for all n ∶ C, the
function fn ∶ Xn → Yn is a (“homotopy”) equivalence.
Lemma 4.24. An anodyne natural transformation between pointwise fibrant dia-
grams is an equivalence.
Proof. Immediate consequence of Lemma 4.15.                                             □
Lemma 4.25. Let p ∶ X → Y be a (trivial) Reedy fibration of diagrams over an
inverse category C. Suppose that Reedy (trivially) fibrant diagrams over C have
(trivially) fibrant limits. Then the limit lim p ∶ lim X → lim Y is a (trivial) fibration.
Proof. We only do the case of fibrations.
   Let y ∶ lim Y be an arbitrary element of the limit. We can think of y as a natural
transformation y ∶ 1 → Y . Consider the following pullback of diagrams:
                                     X[y]                 /X

                                                               p
                                                            
                                       1
                                                   y
                                                          / Y.
   By part (i) of Lemma 4.9, X[y] is a Reedy fibrant diagram, hence its limit is
fibrant by the assumption on C. Since limits commute with pullbacks, we get a
pullback diagram:
                             lim X[y]     / lim X

                                                                   lim p
                                                   
                                  1
                                        y
                                               / lim Y,
  showing that the fibre of lim p over y is fibrant.                                    □
Lemma 4.26. Let f ∶ X → Z be a natural transformation of pointwise fibrant
diagrams over an admissible inverse category C. Then f can be factored as:

                                f ∶X
                                            i      /Y      p
                                                                    / Z,
where i is anodyne, and p is a Reedy fibration.
Proof. We will construct, by induction on the natural number n, a diagram Y (n)
over C <n , and a factorisation of f :
                                     i(n)                 p(n)
                              X∣n               / Y (n)             / Z∣n,
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                              43


where i(n) is anodyne and p(n) is a Reedy fibration.
   For n = 0 there is nothing to construct, so assume the existence of Y (n) , and fix
any object x ∶ C of rank n + 1. The forgetful functor jx ∶ x C → C factors through
C <n , hence we can consider the composition Y (n) ○jx and take its limit L. Note that
L is not necessarily fibrant, but the map L → MxZ induced by p(n) is a fibration
by Lemma 4.25 and the admissibility of C. By part (i) of Lemma 3.10, we get a
fibration L ×MxZ Zx → Zx , hence L ×MxZ Zx is a fibrant type.
                                                                               (n+1)
   Now f , together with i(n) , determine a map Xx → L ×MxZ Zx . Define Yx          to
be the mapping cocylinder of this map. For any object y of rank n or less, define
  (n+1)       (n)
Yy       as Yy , and for any morphism f ∶ x → y in C, the corresponding function
  (n+1)      (n+1)
Yx       → Yy      is given by the projection from the mapping cocylinder, followed
by a map of the universal cone of the limit L. The action of Y (n) on morphisms
between objects of ranks n or less is defined to be the same as that of Y (n) .
   It is easy to see that those definitions make Y (n+1) into a diagram that extends
                                                                           (n+1)
Y (n) to objects of rank n + 1. We can also extend i(n) by defining ix           to be
                                                         (n+1)
the embedding of Xx into the mapping cocylinder Yx             , which is anodyne by
Corollary 4.18.
                           (n+1)
   Similarly, we define px       to be the composition of the projection from the
mapping cocylinder with the map L ×MxZ Zx → Zx defined above. The fact that
p(n+1) is a Reedy fibration follows immediately from the construction, since L is
exactly the matching object of Y (n+1) at x.
   To conclude the proof, we glue together all the Y (n) , i(n) and p(n) into a single
diagram Y and natural transformations i, p. Clearly, p is a Reedy fibration, and i
is an equivalence.                                                                  □

Corollary 4.27. Let X be a pointwise fibrant diagram. Then there exists a Reedy
fibrant diagram Y and an anodyne natural transformation η ∶ X → Y .
Proof. Apply Lemma 4.26 with Z equal to the constant diagram on the unit type.
                                                                            □

Corollary 4.28. Let i ∶ A → B be a natural transformation of pointwise fibrant
diagrams. Then i is anodyne if and only if it has the left lifting property with
respect to Reedy fibrations, i.e. for all Reedy fibrations p ∶ Y → X, the induced map
Nat(B, Y ) → Nat(B, X) ×Nat(A,X) Nat(A, Y ) has a section.
Proof. First suppose that i ∶ A → B is anodyne, and let p ∶ Y → X be any fibration.
Consider a commutative square

                                      A
                                             u        /Y

                                     i                         p
                                                        
                                      B               / X.
                                              v

For all natural numbers n, we will construct a lift w for the square of the restrictions
of all the diagrams involved to C <n . The base of the induction is trivial, so suppose
we have constructed such a lift for n, and let x ∈ C be an object of degree n + 1.
Consider the square:
                              Ax
                                        u     / Yx

                               i                               p
                                                          
                               Bx           / M Y ×M X Xx ,
                                    (w,v)         x            x
44 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


where the bottom map is obtained from the inductively constructed lift w, together
with the bottom natural transformation v of the original square.
    The right map is a fibration by the assumption that p is a Reedy fibration, which
lets us construct a diagonal lift wx for the square. This gives an extension of the
lift w to all objects x of degree n, and naturality of w follows immediately from
the commutativity of the bottom right triangle. Note that we have not used the
assumption that A and B are pointwise fibrant for this direction.
    Conversely, suppose that i ∶ A → B has the stated lifting property. Since A and
                                                       j   p
B are pointwise fibrant, we can factor i as A Ð
                                              →N Ð
                                                 → B, where j is anodyne and
p is a Reedy fibration, thanks to Lemma 4.26. At this point, a standard retract
argument shows that i must be anodyne. More explicitly, first consider the square

                                      A
                                           i    /M

                                     j             p
                                                  
                                      B         / B,
                                           id

and use the lifting property of i to get a natural transformation r ∶ B → M . It then
follows that i is a retract of j, so in particular ix is a retract of jx for all objects
x ∶ C. The conclusion now follows from Lemma 4.14.                                    □

4.5. Classifiers for Reedy fibrations. Let C be an admissible category. The
goal of this section is to construct a type that classifies, in the appropriate sense,
Reedy fibrant diagrams over C. In certain cases, this type will itself be fibrant,
giving a construction of a classifier for diagrams which is completely internal to the
inner level.
   The construction of this classifier makes use of a stricter notion of fibration than
the one we have used so far.
Definition 4.29. Let X be a type. A strict fibration on X is simply a family of
inner types indexed over X.
   Any strict fibration A over X determines a map Y → X, where Y ∶≡ ΣX A. We
will sometimes abuse language and refer to a map p ∶ Y → X itself as a strict fibra-
tion, with the convention that strict fibrations are always assumed to be equipped
with a corresponding choice of a family A, which we will refer to as a strict fibration
structure on p. Fibrations can then be characterised as those maps Y → X that
are isomorphic over X to some strict fibration. In particular, strict fibrations are
fibrations.
Lemma 4.30. If X is a cofibrant type, then the type of strict fibrations over X is
fibrant.
Proof. Immediate consequence of the fact that this type is, by definition, X →
U i.                                                                         □

   Correspondingly, we get a notion of strict Reedy fibration, simply by replacing
fibrations with strict fibrations in Definition 4.6.
Definition 4.31. Let C be an inverse category. A strict Reedy fibration is a natural
transformation p ∶ Y → X, where X and Y are diagrams on C, together with, for all
z ∶ C, a choice of a strict fibration structure Y z for the canonical map
                                 Yz → MzY ×MzX Xz .                               (4.2)
A strictly Reedy fibrant diagram is a strict Reedy fibration X → 1.
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                           45


   It is crucial to observe that the notion of strict fibration is not invariant under
isomorphism, since it uses strict equality of types. Consequently, (4.2) has to be
intended with a specific choice of pullbacks and limits in the target type. For
concreteness, given a functor F ∶ A → U, we will always choose the limit of F to be
the type given by Nat(1, F ).
   Nevertheless, given a type X, the type of strict fibrations over X is isomorphic
to the type of functions X → U i , so it is a representable functor of X, hence in
particular if X ≅ Y , then also the types of strict fibrations over X and Y are
isomorphic.
   Again, since strict fibrations are in particular fibrations, it follows that strict
Reedy fibrations are Reedy fibrations. Recall that both notions are equipped with
structure, namely a choice of a family of inner types for all objects of the base
category. For our usage of Reedy fibration, this choice usually does not matter;
however, for strict Reedy fibrations, it is important.

Definition 4.32. Given strict Reedy fibrations X → A and Y → B, a morphism
between them is a pullback square

                                     X                 /Y


                                                         
                                     A                 / B,

such that for all z ∶ C, the induced triangle

                     MzX ×MzA Az                              / M Y ×M B Bz      (4.3)
                                                                z     z




                                          %        y
                                              Ui

commutes.

   With this definition of morphisms, the collection of strict Reedy fibrations on an
inverse category C forms a category, which we will denote by RC .

Lemma 4.33. The functor RC → [C, U] which maps a fibration X → A to its base
A is a discrete Grothendieck fibration.

Proof. First, let us prove that every morphism of RC is Cartesian over [C, U]. Let
X → A, Y → B and Z → C be strict Reedy fibrations, f ∶ A → B, g ∶ B → C natural
transformations, and suppose we are given morphisms
                  Y       /Z                            X        /Z


                                                         g○f 
                   B
                        g
                           /C                            A       / C,
   then it is clear we can uniquely construct a map X → Y that fits into a pullback
square

                                     X                 /Y

                                                         
                                     A
                                              f
                                                       / B.
46 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   To show that this is a morphism of strict Reedy fibrations, observe that in the
induced diagram

                   MzX ×MzA Az            / M Y ×M B Bz                / M Z ×M C Cz
                                             z            z              z     z



                                                      
                                                 '      w
                                                     Ui
the outermost triangle and the right triangle commute, and hence the left triangle
commutes as well.
   Now, let f ∶ A → B be a natural transformation, and Y → B a strict Reedy
fibration. We want to show that there exists a unique strict Reedy fibration X → A
equipped with a morphism Y → B. For all natural numbers n, we construct a strict
Reedy fibration X (n) → A∣n on C <n , together with a morphism to Y ∣n → B∣n, with
the property that X (n+1) ∣n = X (n) .
   The base case is trivial as usual, hence we can assume that we have constructed
                                   (n+1)
X (n) . If z ∶ C has rank n, let X z     be the composition
                                (n)
                          MzX         ×MzA Az → MzY ×MzB Bz → U i ,
and define Xz ∶≡ ΣM X (n) ×      Az
                                      X z . It is easy to verify that this defines an extension
                      z     A
                           Mz

X (n+1)
        of X (n)
                  to objects of degree n. The map X (n+1) → A is a strict Reedy
                                (n+1)
fibration, and the choice of X z      induces a morphism of strict Reedy fibrations
X (n+1) → Y , essentially by construction.
                                                 (n+1)
   As for uniqueness, note that the choice of X z      is forced by the requirement
that the triangle (4.3) commute, hence the fibration X (n+1) → A and the morphism
to Y ∣n → B∣n are uniquely determined by the corresponding data for n. It follows
that the whole fibration X → A and morphism to Y → B, obtained by gluing all
the X (n) , are uniquely determined.                                             □

   The discrete Grothendieck fibration RC → [C, U] determines a presheaf Reedy on
[C, U]. For the next lemma, recall that, for a category A with pullbacks, a diagram
X ∶ I → A is said to have a van Kampen colimit if the colimit of X exists, and the
reindexing functor induces an equivalence of categories
                                                      ≅
                                      A/ colim X Ð
                                                 → lim A/Xi .
                                                              i

Lemma 4.34. The functor ReedyC ∶ [C, U]op → U maps van Kampen colimits in
[C, U] to limits in U.
Proof. Let I be any small category, and X ∶ I → RC a diagram of strict Reedy
fibrations. Let X i → Ai denote the component of the diagram X at an object i ∶ I,
and assume that the Ai have a van Kampen colimit B. It is enough to show that
there exists a unique cocone for X in RC over the colimit cocone of the Ai .
   We will construct a strict Reedy fibration Y → B, by induction on the rank of an
object z ∶ C, and prove that Y is a colimit of the X i over the corresponding colimit
cocone of the Ai . Suppose that we have constructed Y on objects of C <n , and let
z have rank n. From the fact that the colimit of the Ai is van Kampen, it follows
that
                                   X i ∣n      / Y ∣n


                                                                 
                                         Ai ∣n                / B∣n,
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                          47


is Cartesian, and therefore in the diagram
                           i
                       MzX ×M Ai Ai                 / M Xi           / MY
                                     z
                                                        z              z



                                                                      
                               Aiz                  / M Ai           / MB
                                                        z              z

both squares are Cartesian, hence so is the outer rectangle. This, and universality
of colimits in [C, U], imply that
                                                             i
                        MzY ×MzB Bz ≅ colim MzX ×M Ai Ai ,
                                                i                z

                                          i      i
hence the collection of inner families X z ∶ MzX ×M Ai Ai → U i uniquely determines
                                                     z

an inner family Y z ∶ MzY ×MzB Bz → U i , and if we define

                                     Yz ∶≡ ΣMzY ×M B Bz Y z ,
                                                    z


it follows again from the van Kampen property that Yz is a colimit of the Xzi , and
that the corresponding squares

                                         Xzi         / Yz


                                                       
                                          Ai         / B,

are Cartesian. It is then easy to verify that our choice of strict Reedy fibration
structure on the extension of Y to objects of rank n makes the colimit injections
X i → Y into morphisms of strict Reedy fibrations.
   As for uniqueness, let Y ′ → B be a strict Reedy fibration, together with mor-
phisms
                                  Xi        / Y′


                                                       
                                         Ai          / B,
forming a cocone for the diagram X.
    Universality of colimits, applied to the identity map colimi Ai → B, yields that
Y → B is a colimit of the X i → Ai , and therefore Y and Y ′ are isomorphic over
  ′

B. From the fact that the colimit injections into Y ′ are morphisms of strict Reedy
fibrations, and the choice of strict Reedy fibration structure on Y , it then follows
easily that the isomorphism Y ≅ Y ′ can be chosen to be a morphism of strict Reedy
fibrations over the identity of B. Since strict Reedy fibrations form a discrete
Grothendieck fibration over [C, U] by Lemma 4.33, we get that Y = Y ′ on the nose,
as required.                                                                       □

   The next step is defining a universe of strictly Reedy fibrant types in the cat-
egory of diagrams on C. We use the basic idea for the construction of a universe
in presheaves [HS97], but we specialise it to strict Reedy fibrations rather than
arbitrary natural transformations.
Definition 4.35. Let V be the diagram on C defined by:
                                     Vz ∶≡ ReedyC (C[z]),
with the obvious action on morphisms.
48 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


Lemma 4.36. For any diagram B on C, there is a natural isomorphism

                              Nat(B, V) ≅ ReedyC (B).

Proof. We can write B as a van Kampen colimit of representables

                                   B ≅ colim C[z].
                                         z∶C
                                        b∶Bz

Since Nat(−, V) clearly maps colimits to limits, and ReedyC maps van Kampen col-
imits to limits by Lemma 4.34, we get that Nat(B, V) ≅ ReedyC (B), and naturality
easily follows.                                                                □

Corollary 4.37. If C is admissible, the diagram V is Reedy fibrant.

Proof. Let z ∶ C be any object. We have to show that the map

                          Nat(C[z], V) → Nat(∂C[z], V),
                     ̂ to the inclusion ∂C[z] → C[z] and the map V → 1, is a
obtained by applying Nat
fibration. By Lemma 4.36, this map is isomorphic to the restriction map

                          ReedyC (C[z]) → ReedyC (∂C[z]).

Given a strict Reedy fibration X over ∂C[z], an extension of X to a strict Reedy
fibration over C[z] is uniquely determined by the choice of a strict fibration over
MzX . Since C is admissible, MzX is fibrant, hence cofibrant, and therefore the type
of strict fibrations over MzX is itself fibrant by Lemma 4.30.                    □

   The type of strictly Reedy fibrant diagrams over C can now be recovered as the
limit of V.

Lemma 4.38. Assume that C is admissible. The type lim V is isomorphic to the
type of strictly Reedy fibrant diagrams on C.

Proof. The type lim V is defined as Nat(1, V), which, by Lemma 4.36, is isomorphic
to the type of strictly Reedy fibrant diagrams on C.                            □

   In particular, if C is admissible, and Reedy fibrant diagrams on C itself have
fibrant limits, then we obtain a fibrant type of strictly Reedy fibrant diagrams.
                                                     <n
This applies in particular to the restrictions (∆op
                                                 + )    of the semisimplicial category
to finite level.
   The connection between general Reedy fibrant diagrams and strict ones is made
explicit by the following result.

Lemma 4.39. A diagram X is Reedy fibrant if and only if there exists a strictly
Reedy fibrant diagram Y that is isomorphic to X.

Proof. Let X be a Reedy fibrant diagram. We strictify X by induction on the
rank of the objects of C. Assume X already satisfies the strict Reedy condition for
objects of rank lower than n. If z ∶ C is an object of rank n, we know that the map
Xz → MzX is a fibration, since X is Reedy fibrant. It follows that there exists a
family of inner types Tz ∶ MzX → U i such that Xz ≅ ΣMzX Tz .
   Define a new functor Y by setting Yz ∶≡ ΣMzX Tz for all z of degree n, and Yz ∶≡ Xz
otherwise. It is easy to see that we can extend Y to a functor so that the obvious
pointwise isomorphism Xz ≅ Yz is natural. Furthermore, Y is strictly Reedy fibrant
up to rank n, by construction.                                                       □
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                49


4.6. Exponents of diagrams. In this section, we want to address Reedy fibrancy
of exponentials, and fibrancy of types of natural transformations. As before, we fix
an inverse category C, and work with diagrams on C. We begin by defining a notion
of Reedy (trivial) cofibrations, analogous to that of Definition 3.13.
Definition 4.40. A natural transformation f ∶ A → B between diagrams is:
     ● a Reedy cofibration if ê
                               xp(f, −) preserves Reedy fibrations and Reedy trivial
       fibrations,
     ● a Reedy trivial cofibration if êxp(f, −) sends Reedy fibrations to Reedy
       trivial fibrations.
A diagram B is Reedy (trivially) cofibrant if the natural transformation 0 → B is a
Reedy (trivial) cofibration.
  Given z ∶ C , recall the boundary inclusion iz ∶ ∂C[z] → C[z].
Lemma 4.41. For any z ∶ C and map f ∶ A → B in diagrams over C, the pushout
product iz ̂
           × f exists.
Proof. Pushouts are constructed levelwise. For t ∶ C, we have to construct a pushout
                              ∂C[z]t × At          / ∂C[z]t × Bt


                                                          
                              C[z]t × At                / Pt .

If z and t have different degrees, then ∂C[z]t → C[z]t is an isomorphism, and we
take Pt ∶≡ C[z]t × Bt . If z and t have the same degree, then ∂C[z]t is empty. In that
case, the top map is an isomorphism, and we take Pt ∶≡ C[z]t × At .                 □
    We say that a natural transformation f ∶A → B is a pointwise (trivial) cofibration,
if for all objects z ∶ C, we have that fz ∶ Az → Bz is a (trivial) cofibration. The
following theorem implies that, under a mild assumption on the index category C,
pointwise cofibrations are in particular Reedy cofibrations.
Theorem 4.42. Let f ∶ A → B be a pointwise cofibration of diagrams over C.
Then f is a Reedy cofibration, i.e. given a Reedy (trivial) fibration p, the pullback
exponential
                                   ê
                                    xp(f,p)
                        [B, Y ]               / [B, X] ×[A,X] [A, Y ]

of p with f is a Reedy (trivial) fibration.
Proof. Let z ∶ C be any object. The forgetful functor F ∶ z/C → C is a discrete
Grothendieck fibration. The induced restriction functor F ∗ ∶ [C, U] → [z/C, U] has
a left adjoint, left Kan extension along F , sending a diagram X over z/C to the
diagram F! X over C defined by (F! X)t ∶≡ Σ (f ∶ C(z, t)) . X(t,f ) . We have
                                  F! X × Y ≅ F! (X × F ∗ Y )                          (4.4)
naturally in X ∶ [z/C, U] and Y ∶ [C, U]. Abstractly, this is a consequence of F pre- ∗

serving exponentiation. Explicitly, it unfolds at level t to the natural isomorphism
             (Σ (f ∶ C(z, t)) . A(t,f ) ) × Bt ≅ Σ (f ∶ C(z, t)) . (A(t,f ) × Bt ).
Since F! preserves colimits, the isomorphism (4.4) lifts to an isomorphism
                                   F! u ̂           × F ∗ v)
                                        × v ≅ F! (u ̂                                 (4.5)
naturally in u a map in [z/C, U] and v a map in [C, U] whenever the involved
pushout products exist.
50 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


   Let now p ∶ Y → X be a Reedy fibration. We will argue that ê         xp(f, p) is
again a Reedy fibration. The case of Reedy trivial fibrations is analogous. Us-
                                     ̂ z , ê
ing Lemma 4.7, we have to show that Nat(i     xp(f, p)) is a fibration. Recall from
                              z
the proof of Lemma 4.10 that i ∶ ∂C[z] → C[z] is the image of
                                               i(z,idz )   / ∂(z/C)[(z, idz )]
                       ∂(z/C)[(z, idz )]
under F! . We calculate
                     ̂ ẑ
                    Nat(i           ̂ ! i(z,idz ) ̂
                          × f, p) ≅ Nat(F         × f, p)
                                           ̂ ! (i(z,idz ) ̂
                                         ≅ Nat(F          × F ∗ f ), p)
                                           ̂ (z,idz ) ̂
                                         ≅ Nat(i      × F ∗ f, F ∗ p),
using (4.5) in the second step.
    We denote T the functor 1 → z/C selecting the initial object (z, idz ). Restriction
T ∗ ∶ [z/C, U] → U has left adjoint T! the constant functor. Note that the unit Id →
T ∗ T! of the adjunction T! ⊣ T ∗ is invertible, i.e. the T! is a coreflective embedding.
Its counit induces a map

                         i(z,idz ) ̂
                                   × T! T ∗ F ∗ f          / i(z,idz ) ̂
                                                                       × F ∗f            (4.6)
of arrows. We claim that it is cocartesian, i.e. forms a pushout square. This we
check at each level (t, f ) of z/C. If t has degree less than z, then (i(z,idz ) )(t,f ) is an
isomorphism. Isomorphisms are absorbing for the pushout product, so both source
and target of (4.6) at stage (t, f ) are isomorphisms, making the square a pushout.
Otherwise, we have (t, f ) = (z, idz ). Evaluation at (z, idz ) is given by T ∗ , and
T! T ∗ F ∗ f → F ∗ f becomes invertible upon application of T ∗ . Thus, the map (4.6)
at stage (t, f ) is an isomorphism, in particular cocartesian.
    The functorial action of the pullback hom in its first argument takes cocartesian
maps in its first argument to cartesian maps, i.e. sends pushout squares to pullback
squares. Thus, the map Nat(i  ̂ (z,idz ) ̂                                  ̂ (z,idz ) ̂
                                           × F ∗ f, F ∗ p) is a pullback of Nat(i            ×
T! T F f, F p). Using part (i) of Lemma 3.10, it thus suffices to show that this
     ∗ ∗      ∗

map is a fibration. We calculate
         ̂ (z,idz ) ̂
         Nat(i      × T! T ∗ F ∗ f, F ∗ p) ≅ Nat(T
                                             ̂ ! T ∗ F ∗ f, ê
                                                             xp(i(z,idz ) , F ∗ p))
                                                ̂ ∗ F ∗ f, T ∗ ê
                                              ≅ Nat(T           xp(i(z,idz ) , F ∗ p))
                                              ≅ ê       ̂ (z,idz ) , F ∗ p))
                                                 xp(fz , Nat(i
                                              ≅ ê       ̂ z , p))
                                                 xp(fz , Nat(i
using exponential transposition, the adjunction T! ⊣ T ∗ , the adjunction F! ⊣ F ∗ .
                                                                    ̂ z , p) is a
By assumption, fz is a cofibration. It thus remains to show that Nat(i
fibration. This holds by Lemma 4.7.                                              □
Lemma 4.43. Let f ∶ A → B be a Reedy cofibration and p ∶ Y → X a Reedy fibration
of diagrams over C. Suppose further that all Reedy fibrant diagrams on C have
fibrant limits. Then the pullback hom
                              Nat(f,p)
                              ̂
              Nat(B, Y )                  / Nat(B, X) ×Nat(A,X) Nat(A, Y )

of p with f is a fibration.
Proof. By the assumption on f , the pullback exponential ê xp(f, p) is a Reedy
                             ̂
fibration. The pullback hom Nat(f,  p) is just the limit functor applies to this
map. Since Reedy fibrant diagrams on C have fibrant limits, it is a fibration by
Lemma 4.25.                                                                    □
                     TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                        51


Corollary 4.44. Let X be a Reedy fibrant diagram, and A a pointwise cofibrant
diagram. Then [A, X] is Reedy fibrant. If furthermore Reedy fibrant diagrams on
C have fibrant limits, then Nat(A, X) is fibrant.                             □

4.7. Complete semi-Segal types. The basic facts about diagrams developed in
the previous subsections allow us to use two-level type theory to formulate a vari-
ation of the classically well-established theory of Segal spaces.
   Normally, Segal spaces are employed to reason about higher categorical struc-
tures such as (∞, 1)-categories in a homotopy-invariant fashion. In other words,
Segal spaces are a model of (∞, 1)-categories that can be constructed purely in
terms of existing models of spaces (∞-groupoids) and their homotopy theory.
   By contrast, a model such as the one based on quasicategories [BV73, Joy02]
works by encoding higher categories in terms of their simplicial nerves. The differ-
ence is that the homotopy-theoretic features of complete Segal spaces are inherited
from the environment in which they are defined (i.e. spaces), whereas for quasi-
categories, they have to be imposed by an ad hoc construction (the Joyal model
structure on simplicial sets).
   In the setting of type theory, only the first kind of approach is possible, if we
are aiming for a formulation of higher category theory that can talk about higher
categorical structures within the theory. In this subsection, we will see how to
import the ideas of the framework of complete Segal spaces into two-level type
theory.
   Complete Segal spaces [Rez01] are first of all simplicial objects. Unfortunately,
the fact that our development of Reedy fibrancy is restricted to inverse categories,
rather than more general Reedy categories, implies that we have to limit ourselves
to the semisimplicial case.
   It has been shown by Harpaz [Har15], that semisimplicial spaces satisfying a
Segal condition and a version of the completeness condition form a model of (∞, 1)-
categories, by constructing a Quillen equivalence between the appropriate Bousfield
localisations of marked semisimplicial spaces and simplicial spaces.
   Inspired by Harpaz’s construction, we give the following definitions in two-level
type theory:

Definition 4.45. Let τ ∶ F → G be a Reedy cofibration between semisimplicial
types (i.e. diagrams over the semisimplicial category ∆op+ ), and X a Reedy fibrant
semisimplicial type. Assume that G is bounded, in the sense that it is the left Kan
extension of a diagram over (∆op
                               + )
                                   <n
                                      for some n. We say that X is local with respect
to τ if the induced map
                             Nat(G, X) → Nat(F, X)                              (4.7)

is a trivial fibration.

   Note that the assumptions on τ and G imply that the map (4.7) is already a
fibration.

Definition 4.46. A semi-Segal type is a Reedy fibrant semisimplicial type X that
is local with respect to all inner horn inclusions Λk [n] → ∆[n], with 0 < k < n.
                                                         k
   Since ∆op
           + is inverse, ∆[n] is bounded. Furthermore, Λ [n] → ∆[n] is a pointwise
decidable monomorphism, hence a pointwise cofibration by Corollary 3.22, and
therefore a Reedy cofibration by Theorem 4.42.
   Equivalently (and perhaps more elegantly), we can define the semi-Segal condi-
tion as locality with respect to the pushout corner map in the image under Yoneda
52 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


of

                                   [0]
                                           {0}
                                                 / [b]

                                     {a}            {a,...,a+b}                   (4.8)
                                      {0,...,a} 
                                   [a]         / [a + b]

for all a, b ≥ 0, that is:
                                                    ca,b
                              ∆[a] +∆[0] ∆[b]              / ∆[a + b]             (4.9)

Here, we can equivalently restrict to a = 1.
   However, semi-Segal types do not constitute the correct notion of (∞, 1)-category
that we are after, for essentially two reasons. Firstly, they are not complete, meaning
that their type of vertices X0 carries extra (non-categorical) information, i.e., they
are not univalent; and secondly, they do not necessarily have identity arrows. They
model (∞, 1)-pre-semicategories.
   It turns out, however, that one can define a notion of equivalence in a semi-Segal
type, and using equivalences one can solve both problems at the same time.
   For a semi-Segal type X, let X(x, y) be the type of edges that have vertices
x, y ∶ X0 as endpoints. This is fibrant by the Reedy fibrancy condition. Thanks
to locality with respect to the horn inclusion Λ1 [2] → ∆[2], we get a composition
map:
                             − ○ − ∶ X(y, z) × X(x, y) → X(x, z).

Definition 4.47. Let X be a semi-Segal type. An equivalence in X is an edge
f ∶ X(x, y) such that for all vertices z, the functions f ○ − ∶ X(z, x) → X(z, y) and
− ○ f ∶ X(y, z) → X(x, z) are equivalences (of fibrant types).

   Since being an equivalence is a fibrant proposition, we get that equivalences in
a semisimplicial type X form a fibrant type E, which we can think of as a subtype
of X1 . We are now ready for the main definition.

Definition 4.48. A univalent (∞, 1)-category is a semi-Segal type such that the
source map E → X0 is an equivalence.

   By source map in Definition 4.48 we mean the function mapping every equiv-
alence f ∶ X(x, y) to the source vertex x. The condition of Definition 4.48 is
sometimes referred to as the completeness condition. One way to think of it is
as a formulation of univalence internal to X. Since Definition 4.48 gives the only
notion of (∞, 1)-category that we consider here, we drop the attribute univalent
for simplicity.
   Note that Definitions 4.46 to 4.48 are all invariant under (levelwise) equivalence
of Reedy fibrant semisimplicial types.
   Two of the current authors have checked in detail that this definition is well-
behaved, and equivalent to the manual definition that one might expect, for the
truncated special cases of univalent ordinary categories and (2,1)-categories [CK17].
It is out of the scope of this paper to develop the theory of (∞, 1)-category in two-
level type theory. Therefore, we limit ourselves to sketching some basic examples of
(∞, 1)-categories, to give a taste of how our definition can be employed in practice.
   For a given category C, let N+ (C) be the semisimplicial nerve of C, i.e. the
semisimplicial type whose n-simplices are given by functors [n] → C, where [n]
denotes the ordinal with n + 1 elements, regarded as a category. Observe that the
                   TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                         53


square (4.8) is a pushout in categories. It follows that N+ (C) sends it to a pullback
                             N+ (C)([a + b])            / N+ (C)([a])

                                                                                              (4.10)
                                                              
                               N+ (C)([b])              / N+ (C)([0]).

This is a strict version of the semi-Segal condition. We shall see below that under
sufficient fibrancy conditions, it also forms a homotopy pullback, hence makes the
Reedy fibrant replacement of N+ (C) a semi-Segal type.
Lemma 4.49. Let C be a category with slices that have fibrant types of objects.
Then N+ (C) ∶ ∆op
               + → U sends the map {a, . . . , a + b} ∶ [b] → [a + b] to a fibration.

Proof. By closure of fibrations under composition, it suffices to check the case
a = 1. The map in question is the left map in (4.10). The right map is the target
map N+ (C)([1]) → N+ (C)([0]) induced by {1} ∶ [0] → [1]. This is a fibration by
assumption: its fiber over x ∶ ∣C∣ is isomorphic to ∣C/x∣. The claim follows since
fibrations are closed under pullback.                                           □

Corollary 4.50. Let C be a category such that C and all its slices have fibrant types
of objects. Then N+ (C) ∶ ∆op
                           + → U is valued in fibrant types.                       □
   From a pointwise fibrant semisimplicial type, we obtain a Reedy fibrant semisim-
plicial type (levelwise) equivalent to it using Lemma 4.26.
Lemma 4.51. Let C be a category such that C and all its slices have fibrant types of
objects. Let j ∶ N+ (C) → X be a Reedy fibrant replacement. Then X is a semi-Segal
type.
Proof. Using the map (4.9), we show that Nat(ca,b , X) is an equivalence for all
a, b. Consider the following square:
                                              Nat(∆[a+b],j)
        Nat(∆[a + b], N+ (C))                                         / Nat(∆[a + b], X)

                       Nat(ca,b ,N+ (C))                                           Nat(ca,b ,X)
                                          Nat(∆[a]+∆[0] ∆[b],j)               
    Nat(∆[a] +∆[0] ∆[b], N+ (C))                                   / Nat(∆[a] +∆[0] ∆[b], X)

By Yoneda, the left map is equivalently the pullback corner map in (4.10), hence is
invertible. The top left object is fibrant by Corollary 4.50, hence so is the bottom
left object. Note that j evaluates to an equivalence at all of [0], [a], [b], [a + b].
Thus, the top map is an equivalence. The bottom map is the induced map be-
tween the pullbacks of two cospans of fibrant objects with one leg a fibration
(by Lemma 4.49). The induced morphism between these cospans is (levelwise)
an equivalence. By an argument analogous to the gluing lemma for fibration cate-
gories [RB06, Lemma 1.4.1, part (2)], the induced map between the two pullbacks
is also an equivalence. Finally, since all other maps in the square are equivalences,
so is Nat(ca,b , X).                                                                □

   Let C be a category with fibrant types of objects and morphisms (between any
two given objects). As a consequence of Lemma 4.51, any Reedy fibrant replacement
X of N+ (C) is a semi-Segal type. We may start the construction of such a Reedy
fibrant replacement with X0 ∶≡ ∣C∣ and X1 (x, y) ∶≡ C(x, y). It is then easy to check
that the composition map for X defined before Definition 4.47 agrees with the
composition of C. In particular, an edge in X is an equivalence exactly if the
corresponding morphism in C is a homotopy equivalence (invertible up to inner
54 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


equality). It follows that X is univalent exactly if C is wildly univalent, that is, the
canonical map from ∣C∣ to the type of equivalences of C is an equivalence.
   As an important special case of this construction, we can take for C the category
of fibrant types. The resulting (∞, 1)-category TYPE (large, but locally small) can
be regarded as a classifier for families of types over (∞, 1)-categories.
   One way to construct a universal fibration TYPE● over TYPE is as follows. Let U ●
denote the category of fibrant types with an element (note that morphisms preserve
the element strictly). We have a forgetful functor U ● → U that is Reedy fibrant
on underlying graphs. Taking a relative Reedy fibrant replacement, we obtain the
following square:
                                 TYPE●        / N+ (U ● )

                                                  
                                 TYPE          / N+ (U).
By a relative version of Lemma 4.51 for homotopy left fibrations, the fibration
TYPE● ↠ TYPE is a left fibration. One may go on to show that it is a classifier
for left fibrations with small fibers. This gives one way to adapt the Grothendieck
construction for presheaves of (∞, 1)-categories to our settings. (An alternative is
to directly define the universe of left fibrations and check the semi-Segal condition
and univalence).

                                  5. Conclusions
   We believe that two-level type theory is a suitable framework for expressing and
proving results which, in conventional homotopy type theory, require externally
fixed data that one wishes to keep as variable as possible. We have demonstrated
that this approach can be used effectively to express Shulman’s results on diagrams
over inverse categories [Shu15b]. Starting from there, we have suggested the very
beginning of an internal development of a theory of (∞, 1)-categories. We expect
that such a theory is helpful for other constructions which make use of the fact that
types and universes are, naturally, higher categories; a short discussion is available
in [Kra18].
   Examples for existing results which can be expressed in and benefit from our
framework of higher categories can be found in our previous work [Kra15b, Kra15a,
KS17]. These results use semisimplicial types to express large or even infinite
towers of coherences, and it is unknown how to express such towers in standard
settings of homotopy type theory. If we do these constructions in our suggested
setting, it is important which precise version of two-level type theory we use. If we
only use “basic” two-level type theory without any of the strengthenings discussed
in Subsection 2.4, then the conservativity result means that we immediately get
the corresponding result in homotopy type theory. For the results cited above,
this is the case if the size of required coherence towers is bounded, with a bound
given as an outer natural number; then, the construction works in homotopy type
theory, with the bound fixed externally. An example for this situation is [Kra15b,
Theorem 8.9.6]. Other results however need one or more of the strengthenings
of Subsection 2.4, and for those, it is in general unknown whether they can be
expressed in usual settings of homotopy type theory. In case of the mentioned
work, an assumption made for some results is that limits of Reedy-fibrant towers are
fibrant (A2), but we expect that this assumption can alternatively be substituted by
the axiom (A3) that the outer natural numbers are cofibrant or even fibrant (A1).
To give an example, [Kra15b, Theorem 8.8.5] depends on such an assumption.
Possible future directions include developing a richer theory of (∞, 1)-categories
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                  55


that includes standard concepts such as limits and colimits, and potentially based
on that, a treatment of the internal semantics of higher inductive types as for
example specified by [KK19b].
   As a proof of concept, we have implemented some parts of our paper (with
the main result being Theorem 4.8) in the proof assistant Lean.10 Since Lean
does not support two-level type theory directly, we have used type classes to keep
track of and automatically propagate fibrancy constraints. An overall idea of the
implementation is suitable for most existing proof assistants: we work in a type
theory with universes of outer types (i.e. where uip holds), outer types correspond
to the ordinary types of the proof assistant, while fibrant types are represented
as types “tagged” with the extra structure of being fibrant. The role of the outer
equality is played by the ordinary propositional equality of the proof assistant
(which, thanks to UIP, is indeed propositional in the sense of HoTT). We postulate
the fibrant equality type, its elimination rule J and fibrancy preservation rules for
Π and Σ resulting from the rules in Subsection 2.1. The usual computation (or β-)
rule for J is defined using outer equality — the propositional equality of the proof
assistant — and not judgemental equality. This means that this computation does
a priori not happen automatically, and explicit rewrites along the propositional
β-rules are needed in proof implementations when working in the inner level. In
our development, besides the general two-level framework, we have implemented
machinery required to define Reedy fibrant diagrams and have fully formalised a
proof of Theorem 4.8. We did not find the lack of a definitional β-rule for J in the
inner fragment to affect the internalisation of results on the theory of Reedy fibrant
diagrams we have developed. For other formalisation approaches to 2LTT, we refer
to Subsection 1.1 above.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Benedikt Ahrens, Thorsten Altenkirch,
Simon Boulier, and Michael Shulman for many interesting discussions and insightful
comments. We also thank the anonymous referees for very helpful comments.

                                       References
[ABC+ 16]   Ali Assaf, Guillaume Burel, Raphaël Cauderlier, David Delahaye, Gilles Dowek,
            Catherine Dubois, Frédéric Gilbert, Pierre Halmagrand, Olivier Hermant, and Ro-
            nan Saillard. Dedukti: a logical framework based on the λπ-calculus modulo theory.
            Manuscript http://www. lsv. fr/˜ dowek/Publi/expressing. pdf, 2016.
[ACD+ 18]   Thorsten Altenkirch, Paolo Capriotti, Gabe Dijkstra, Nicolai Kraus, and
            Fredrik Nordvall Forsberg. Quotient inductive-inductive types. In Foundations of
            Software Science and Computation Structures (FoSSaCS 2018), pages 293–310, 2018.
[ACK16]     Thorsten Altenkirch, Paolo Capriotti, and Nicolai Kraus. Extending Homotopy Type
            Theory with Strict Equality. In Jean-Marc Talbot and Laurent Regnier, editors, 25th
            EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL 2016), volume 62,
            pages 21:1–21:17, 2016.
[ADK17]     Thorsten Altenkirch, Nils Anders Danielsson, and Nicolai Kraus. Partiality, Revis-
            ited. In Javier Esparza and Andrzej S. Murawski, editors, Foundations of Software
            Science and Computation Structures: 20th International Conference, FOSSACS
            2017, Proceedings, pages 534–549. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2017.
[AHH18]     Carlo Angiuli, Kuen-Bang Hou (Favonia), and Robert Harper. Cartesian cubical
            computational type theory: Constructive reasoning with paths and equalities. In
            Dan Ghica and Achim Jung, editors, 27th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer
            Science Logic (CSL 2018), volume 119 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Infor-
            matics (LIPIcs), pages 6:1–6:17. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
            2018.
[AK16]      Thorsten Altenkirch and Ambrus Kaposi. Type theory in type theory using quotient
            inductive types. In Principles of Programming Languages (POPL’16), volume 51,
            pages 18–29. ACM, January 2016.

  10Our development uses Lean 2: https://github.com/leanprover/lean2/
56 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


[AKS15]    Benedikt Ahrens, Krzysztof Kapulkin, and Michael Shulman. Univalent categories
           and the Rezk completion. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science (MSCS),
           pages 1–30, Jan 2015.
[ANST20] Benedikt Ahrens, Paige Randall North, Michael Shulman, and Dimitris Tsementzis.
           A higher structure identity principle. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM/IEEE
           Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’20, page 53–66, New York, NY,
           USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[ANST21] Benedikt Ahrens, Paige Randall North, Michael Shulman, and Dimitris Tsementzis.
           The univalence principle. ArXiv e-prints, Feb 2021.
[BA21]     Roberta Bonacina and Benedikt Ahrens. Syntax for two-level type theory, 2021. Ab-
           stract, presented at TYPES’21.
[BAK21]    Roberta Bonacina, Benedikt Ahrens, and Nicolai Kraus. Syntax for two-level type
           theory, 2021. Abstract, presented at HoTT/UF’21.
[BC10]     Yves Bertot and Pierre Castéran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Program De-
           velopment: Coq’Art: The Calculus of Inductive Constructions. EATCS Texts in
           Theoretical Computer Science. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[BCH14]    Marc Bezem, Thierry Coquand, and Simon Huber. A model of type theory in cubical
           sets. In Ralph Matthes and Aleksy Schubert, editors, Types for Proofs and Programs
           (TYPES), volume 26 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs),
           pages 107–128. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, Mar 2014.
[BdBLM19] Guillaume Brunerie, Menno de Boer, Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine, and Anders Mört-
           berg. A formalization of the initiality conjecture in agda, 2019. Talk given by Brunerie
           at the HoTT 2019 conference, slides available at https://guillaumebrunerie.
           github.io/pdf/initiality.pdf.
[Ber13]    Yves Bertot. Private inductive types: Proposing a language extension, 2013. http:
           //coq.inria.fr/files/coq5_submission_3.pdf.
[BGH+ ]    Andrej Bauer, Gaëtan Gilbert, Philipp Haselwarter, Matija Pretnar, and Chris
           Stone. Andromeda. Implementation of a type theory with equality reflection. http:
           //andromedans.github.io/andromeda/.
[BL18]     Guillaume Brunerie and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. Formalising the initiality conjec-
           ture in coq and agda, 2018. Talk at the Stockholm-Göteborg Type Theory Serminar.
[BL20]     Guillaume Brunerie and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. Initiality for martin-löf type
           theory, 2020. Talk at the Homotopy Type Theory Electronic Seminar Talks
           (HOTTEST).
[BM20]     Bruno Barras and Valentin Maestracci. Implementation of two layers type theory in
           dedukti and application to cubical type theory. In LFMPT 2020 - Logical Frameworks
           and Meta-Languages: Theory and Practice 2020, Paris, France, June 2020.
[BT17]     Simon Boulier and Nicolas Tabareau. Model structure on the universe in a two level
           type theory. HAL e-prints, 2017. <hal-01579822>.
[BV73]     Michael Boardman and Rainer Vogt. Homotopy invariant algebraic structures on
           topological spaces. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 347, 1973.
[Cap16]    Paolo Capriotti. Models of Type Theory with Strict Equality. PhD thesis, School of
           Computer Science, University of Nottingham, 2016.
[CCHM17] Cyril Cohen, Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. Cubical type
           theory: a constructive interpretation of the univalence axiom. IfCoLog Journal of
           Logics and their Applications, 4(10):3127–3169, November 2017.
[CHM18]    Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. On higher inductive types in
           cubical type theory. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
           Logic in Computer Science, pages 255–264. ACM, 2018.
[CHS19]    Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Christian Sattler. Homotopy canonicity for
           cubical type theory. In 4th International Conference on Formal Structures for Com-
           putation and Deduction (FSCD 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Infor-
           matik, 2019.
[CK17]     Paolo Capriotti and Nicolai Kraus. Univalent higher categories via complete semi-
           segal types. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 2(POPL’18):44:1–
           44:29, dec 2017. Full version available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03693.
[dB20]     Menno de Boer. A Proof and Formalization of the Initiality Conjecture of De-
           pendent Type Theory. PhD thesis, Stockholm University, Faculty of Science, De-
           partment of Mathematics, Stockholm, Sweden, 2020. Available online at https:
           //su.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A1431287.
[dMKA+ 15] Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris van Doorn, and Jakob
           von Raumer. The lean theorem prover. In Automated Deduction - CADE-25, 25th
           International Conference on Automated Deduction, 2015.
                    TWO-LEVEL TYPE THEORY AND APPLICATIONS                                   57


[Dyb95]    Peter Dybjer. Internal type theory. In Stefano Berardi and Mario Coppo, editors,
           Types for Proofs and Programs (TYPES), volume 1158 of Lecture Notes in Computer
           Science, pages 120–134. Springer-Verlag, 1995.
[GCST19]   Gaëtan Gilbert, Jesper Cockx, Matthieu Sozeau, and Nicolas Tabareau. Definitional
           proof-irrelevance without K. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 3(POPL):3:1–3:28, January
           2019.
[Har15]    Yonatan Harpaz. Quasi-unital ∞–categories. Algebraic & Geometric Topology,
           15(4):2303–2381, 2015.
[Hof97]    Martin Hofmann. Syntax and semantics of dependent types. In Semantics and Logics
           of Computation, pages 79–130. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[HS97]     Martin Hofmann and Thomas Streicher. Lifting grothendieck universes. 1997.
[Joy02]    André Joyal. Quasi-categories and Kan complexes. J. Pure Appl. Algebra, 175:207 –
           222, 2002.
[KK19a]    Ambrus Kaposi and András Kovács. Signatures and induction principles for higher
           inductive-inductive types. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00297, 2019.
[KK19b]    Ambrus Kaposi and András Kovács. Signatures and induction principles for higher
           inductive-inductive types, 2019.
[KL18]     Chris Kapulkin and Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. The simplicial model of Univalent
           Foundations (after Voevodsky). ArXiv e-prints, October 2018.
[Kov22]    András Kovács. Staged compilation with two-level type theory. Proc. ACM Program.
           Lang., 6(ICFP), aug 2022.
[Kra15a]   Nicolai Kraus. The general universal property of the propositional truncation. In
           Hugo Herbelin, Pierre Letouzey, and Matthieu Sozeau, editors, 20th International
           Conference on Types for Proofs and Programs (TYPES 2014), volume 39 of Leibniz
           International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 111–145, Dagstuhl, Ger-
           many, 2015. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik.
[Kra15b]   Nicolai Kraus. Truncation Levels in Homotopy Type Theory. PhD thesis, School of
           Computer Science, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK, 2015.
[Kra18]    Nicolai Kraus. On the role of semisimplicial types, 2018. Abstract, presented at
           TYPES’18.
[Kra21]    Nicolai Kraus. Internal ∞-categorical models of dependent type theory: Towards
           2LTT eating HoTT. Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS 2021), pages
           1–14, 2021.
[KS17]     Nicolai Kraus and Christian Sattler. Space-valued diagrams, type-theoretically (ex-
           tended abstract). ArXiv e-prints, 2017.
[LM18]     Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine and Anders Mörtberg. Formalising the initiality conjec-
           ture in coq, 2018. Talk given by Lumsdaine at the Göteborg-Stockholm Joint Type
           Theory Seminar, slides available at http://peterlefanulumsdaine.com/research/
           Lumsdaine-2018-Goteborg-Initiality.pdf.
[LOPS18]   Daniel R. Licata, Ian Orton, Andrew M. Pitts, and Bas Spitters. Internal Universes
           in Models of Homotopy Type Theory. In Hélène Kirchner, editor, 3rd International
           Conference on Formal Structures for Computation and Deduction (FSCD 2018),
           volume 108 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 22:1–
           22:17, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2018. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik.
[LU13]     Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine and The Univalent Foundations Program. Semi-simplicial
           types, 2013. Wiki page of the Univalent Foundations project at the Institute for
           Advanced Studies, https://uf-ias-2012.wikispaces.com/Semi-simplicial+types.
[Mai09]    Maria Emilia Maietti. A minimalist two-level foundation for constructive mathemat-
           ics. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 160(3):319–354, 2009. Computation and Logic
           in the Real World: CiE 2007.
[Mak95]    Michael Makkai. First order logic with dependent sorts, with applications to category
           theory. 1995. preprint, available at http://www.math.mcgill.ca/makkai.
[MS05]     Maria Emilia Maietti and Giovanni Sambin. TOWARD A MINIMALIST FOUNDA-
           TION FOR CONSTRUCTIVE MATHEMATICS. In From Sets and Types to Topol-
           ogy and Analysis: Towards practicable foundations for constructive mathematics.
           Oxford University Press, 10 2005.
[Nor07]    Ulf Norell. Towards a practical programming language based on dependent type the-
           ory. PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers Uni-
           versity of Technology and Göteborg University, 2007.
[PO18]     Andrew M Pitts and Ian Orton. Axioms for modelling cubical type theory in a topos.
           Logical Methods in Computer Science, 14, 2018.
[RB06]     Andrei Radulescu-Banu. Cofibrations in homotopy theory. arXiv preprint
           math/0610009, 2006.
58 DANIL ANNENKOV, PAOLO CAPRIOTTI, NICOLAI KRAUS, AND CHRISTIAN SATTLER


[Ree74]    Christopher L Reedy. Homotopy theory of model categories. 1974.
[Rez01]    Charles Rezk. A model for the homotopy theory of homotopy theory. Trans. Amer.
           Math. Soc., 353(3):973–1007 (electronic), 2001.
[RS17]     Emily Riehl and Michael Shulman. A type theory for synthetic ∞-categories. Higher
           Structures, 1(1), 2017.
[RV14]     Emily Riehl and Dominic Verity. The theory and practice of Reedy categories. Theory
           and Applications of Categories, 29(9):256–301, 2014.
[Shu15a]   Michael Shulman. The univalence axiom for elegant reedy presheaves. Homology,
           Homotopy and Applications, 17(2):81–106, 2015.
[Shu15b]   Michael Shulman. Univalence for inverse diagrams and homotopy canonicity. Math-
           ematical Structures in Computer Science, pages 1–75, Jan 2015.
[Shu18]    Michael Shulman. Brouwer’s fixed-point theorem in real-cohesive homotopy type the-
           ory. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 28(6):856–941, 2018.
[Shu19]    Michael Shulman. All (∞, 1)-toposes have strict univalent universes, 2019.
[Str93a]   Thomas Streicher. Investigations into intensional type theory, 1993. Habilitationss-
           chrift, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.
[Str93b]   Thomas Streicher. Investigations into intensional type theory. Habilitationsschrift,
           Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 1993.
[Uem19]    Taichi Uemura. A general framework for the semantics of type theory, 2019.
[Uni13]    The Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Founda-
           tions of Mathematics. http://homotopytypetheory.org/book/, 2013.
[Usk25]    Elif Uskuplu. Formalizing two-level type theory with cofibrant exo-nat. Mathematical
           Structures in Computer Science, 35(e30), 2025.
[Voe13]    Vladimir Voevodsky. A simple type system with two identity types, 2013. Unpub-
           lished note.
