              The natural-proofs barrier
         against data structure lower bounds

Michal Koucký           Bruno Loff              Tulasimohan Molli             Mike Saks
                                           Abstract
     Consider a data structure problem with possible data coming from a set D , queries
 coming from a set Q, and in the dynamic case updates coming from a set U . Then, the
 current state of the art in data structure lower bounds is t = Ω̃(log |Q|) for static data
 structure problems, and max(tq , tu ) = Ω̃((log n)2 ) where n = max(|Q|, |U |, log |D|)
 for dynamic.
     We port Razborov and Rudich’s natural-proofs framework to the setting of static
 and dynamic data structures in the cell probe model, in a way that strongly suggests
 this state of the art is unlikely to be improved anytime soon. A similar direction was
 recently taken also by Korten, Pitassi and Impagliazzo (FOCS 2025) who look at static
 data structure lower bounds in a different regime of parameters. Our contribution is:
   • We define notions analogous to pseudorandom functions (PRF). We call these
     primitives local PRFs, in the context of static data structures, and local and locally
     updatable (LLU) PRFs, in the context of dynamic data structures.
   • We then formulate cryptographic conjectures, namely, that secure local PRFs and
     secure LLU PRFs exist, precisely at the frontier where we are no longer able to
     prove static, respectively dynamic, data structure lower bounds. If these conjec-
     tures are true, it follows that the current state of the art in data structure lower
     bounds cannot be improved by a natural proof.
   • We show that (almost) every single known data structure lower bound proof is
     a natural proof, by surveying all lower bounds in the literature (known to us).
     (The only exception is proofs based on lifting theorems.)
   • It follows that, if our cryptographic conjecture is true, then all known lower
     bound proof techniques (minus the one exception) are unable to improve upon
     the state of the art. (We also attempt to address the exception.)
   • Further, we provide concrete candidate constructions for our two pseudo-ran-
     dom primitives. We conjecture that our constructions are secure for parameters
     just above the state-of-the-art lower bounds.
   • We also show that, whether or not they are secure, our candidate PRFs at least
     satisfy the natural properties appearing in all (but one) known proofs.
   • So if one is interested in improving upon the state of the art in static or dy-
     namic data structure lower bounds, one must either find a non-natural method
     of proving such lower bounds (no such method currently exists), or one may as
     well begin by trying to break our PRF candidates.

                                             i
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                           1
    1.1 Key challenges for data structure lower bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         1
    1.2 Barriers to data structure lower bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3
    1.3 Our contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5

2   Preliminaries                                                                                          11
    2.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
    2.2 Decision trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12
    2.3 Data structures in the cell-probe model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        12
    2.4 Communication Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15

3   What is as a natural proof?                                                                            16

4   Proposal: A natural proofs barrier against static data structure lower bounds                          19
    4.1 Local PRFs, and a natural proofs barrier against static data-structure lower-bounds .              20
    4.2 Two candidates for local PRFs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
    4.3 PRGs vs. PRFs, and why it matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25

5   Thesis: All known static data structure lower bounds are natural                                       27
    5.1 The richness method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
    5.2 Round Elimination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31
    5.3 Cell sampling arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33
    5.4 Proofs via CNF refutation techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       34
    5.5 The single exception we know: Lifting theorems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           36

6   Proposal: A natural proofs barrier against dynamic data structure lower bounds                38
    6.1 LLU PRGs, and a natural proofs barrier against dynamic data-structure lower-bounds 39
    6.2 A candidate RLLU generator for Conjecture 6.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
    6.3 Pseudorandom properties of our PRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

7   Thesis: All known dynamic data structure lower bounds are natural                                      47
    7.1 The chronogram method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47
    7.2 Patrascu and Demaine’s information transfer technique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            50
    7.3 Non-adaptive data-structures: Brody and Larsen’s Lower-bounds . . . . . . . . . . .                52
    7.4 Semi-adaptive data-structures: Ko and Weinstein’s Lower-bounds . . . . . . . . . . .               55
    7.5 Chronogram + Cell Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         55
    7.6 Chronogram + Weak One-way Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             59

A k-wise independent LDPC code                                                                             65

Bibliography                                                                                               66




                                                     ii
                                 E RRATA
                  ( CURRENT VERSION : D ECEMBER 27, 2025)

1. An hour before submission we discovered what seems like a genuinely new
   new data-structure lower-bound technique, appearing in the paper ”New Sam-
   pling Lower Bounds via the Separator” by Emanuele Viola. We don’t expect any
   surprises (we predict the proof will naturalize), but we didn’t check yet.

2. After inspecting this paper, Emanuele Viola pointed out that one of the barri-
   ers mentioned in the introduction [DGW19, RR20] which shows that new static
   data-structure lower-bounds imply the existence of certain rigid matrices, is no
   longer a barrier, since matrices with this rigidity have been proven in the mean-
   time (he cites Alman and Chen, Efficient Constructions of Rigid Matrices using
   an NP oracle, and Bhangale, Harsha, Paradise and Tal. Rigid matrices from
   rectangular PCPs).
  We did not know of these two papers. It follows that Viola’s barrier [Vio19] is
  the only other barrier ”left standing”.




                                       iii
1     Introduction
A major goal of complexity theory is to establish lower bounds on the complexity of ex-
plicit functions in various computational models. Despite decades of effort, and many
beautiful results, there is a huge gap between the lower bound results that have been
proved, and what is widely believed to be true. Given this gap, researchers have sought
to understand why existing proof techniques seem incapable of proving stronger lower
bound results. This has led to the formulation of so-called “barrier” results of the follow-
ing form: For a given computational model, proving a strong lower bound for an explicit
function using a specified class of proof techniques is either impossible, or would have
an unexpected consequence. The “relativization” barrier for Turing machine computation,
due to Baker, Gill and Solovay [BGS75], says that it is impossible to separate P from NP
using a proof technique that relativizes (applies to computation relative to an arbitrary
oracle). The ”natural proofs” barrier for circuit complexity, due to Razborov and Rudich
[RR94], introduces the notion of natural proof for a circuit lower bound (which essentially
encompasses all known circuit lower bounds) and shows that the existence of a natural
proof that separates P from NP would imply that there are no pseudo-random generators
                              ε
which are secure against 2n -time distinguishers, thus contradicting a widely believed
cryptographic assumption.


1.1   Key challenges for data structure lower bounds
Data structure lower bounds encompass a major subarea within complexity theory, and
the cell probe model is the standard non-uniform model for studying data structure
lower bounds. There are many static and dynamic data structure problems such that the
best known implementations have much higher complexity than the best known lower-
bounds. In some cases we even have conditional lower bounds, which makes us believe
that the known implementations are optimal or nearly-optimal. Our goal is to understand
what are the obstacles to proving tight unconditional lower bounds.
    In the static setting input data (the “database”) is to be pre-processed into a data struc-
ture to be stored in memory, in such a way that we should be able to quickly answer
certain queries about the data. The data structure should have some size s in memory,
and any given query should be answered by probing at most t memory locations: t is
called the query time. The memory used s is to be substantially smaller than the total
number of possible queries, since, when s is larger than the number of queries, a triv-
ial implementation can simply pre-compute and store the answer to every query, so the
query time becomes 1. The question here is what is the trade-off between the query time
t and the space s used to represent the data in memory. Often one assumes some natu-
ral space bound, usually close to the information-theoretic minimum, and asks about the
query time in that setting.
    A prototypical example of a static data structure problem is the orthogonal range
counting problem. Here the database represents a set of n points from some discrete


                                              1
space of some fixed dimension d ≥ 1, e.g. [n]d . Each query specifies a d-dimensional rect-
angle (axis aligned) in that space and expects as the answer the number of points from the
set that lie in the specified rectangle. Here the number of databases is ndn and the number
of queries is n2d . The typical space we are interested in is s = n · polylog(n). The best
known lower bound on query time for this problem for fixed d ≥ 2 is Ω(log n/ log log n)
[Păt07] while the best upper bound is O((log n/ log log n)d−1 ) [Wil85, JMS04, CW13]. Is
there a reason for this large gap between the known lower bounds and upper bounds?
     In the dynamic data structure setting the stored database can be modified (updated)
using an allowed set of updates. Here we are interested not only in the query time tq
but also in the update time tu — the time needed to perform an update of the memory
representation of the data. There is usually an implicit bound on the space used by the
data structure: If m updates are enough to potentially take the data structure from any
database to any other database then the space used by the data structure is reasonably at
most O(m(tu + tq )). So in the dynamic setting we usually study the trade-off between the
query time and update time, assuming a reasonable space bound.
     A prototypical example of such a data structure problem is the graph reachability
problem. Here, each database is a directed graph on n vertices, we can update the graph
by adding an edge or removing an edge, and we can query whether a vertex u is reachable
from a vertex v. All known implementations require either tu or tq be polynomial in n,
i.e., nδ for some fixed δ > 0, while the best lower bound establishes that either tu or tq
must be Ω̃(log3/2 n) [LY23]. Hence there is an exponential gap between the lower bound
and upper bounds. So is there a reason for this wide gap?
     We will argue that, in both the static and dynamic cases, there is a natural proofs barrier
against proving stronger lower bounds.
    For the purpose of lower bound proofs we abstract data structure problems as follows:
a data structure problem is specified by a 4-tuple F = (D , Q, A, U ) (called a frame) and
a Q × D matrix f (called a table over F ). Here D is a set of databases, Q is a set of queries,
A is a set of answers, U is a set of updates each of which is a function that transforms
one database into another. The table entries f (q, x ) ∈ A specify the desired output of
query q on database x. In an implementation of (F , f ) with space s, word size w and time
t, databases are represented by arrays of s memory cells, each taking a value in {0, 1}w
and each query and update is implemented by a decision tree of depth t that accesses
cells and branches on the value in the cell, where the output value at a leaf of the decision
tree associated to a query is the answer to the query, and the output value at a leaf of the
decision tree associated to an update specifies updated values for the cells that were read
along the path to the leaf. (See Section 2 for more details.) In the static setting the set U is
empty and is omitted.
    In the static setting, the question of interest is: For a given s and w, what is the min-
imum t so that a particular data structure can be implemented with query decision trees
of depth at most t?
    If the space s is sufficiently large, namely at least |Q| log |A|/w, there is a trivial (and
essentially optimal) implementation with time t = ⌈log |A|/w⌉ by storing the answer to

                                               2
each query (encoded in binary) in a separate block of log |A|/w cells. On the other hand,
if the space is too small, assuming that no two databases give the same answers on all
queries, the problem can’t be solved at all for information theoretic reasons. So in the
static setting the interesting range of space is log |D|/w ≤ s ≤ |Q| log |A|/w.
    There is a large body of research proving lower bounds on time for static data struc-
ture problems. If the space is limited to be equal to the information theoretic bound,
or only very slightly larger (e.g. a 1 + o (1) factor greater than the information-theoretic
minimum), then some strong lower bounds on query time have been proved (see, e.g.
[GM07, Păt09, CKL18]). However, in the more important case that the space is not so
constrained, the best lower bounds known do not exceed log |Q|. Indeed log |Q| is an
inherent upper limit on any such lower bound that is proved using the connection to
communication complexity that was observed in the seminal paper of Bro Miltersen et al.
[MNSW98] (See Section 5 for details.)
    On the other hand, there are many data structure problems known where the best
available implementations require significantly more time per query than log |Q|. Thus
the following problem summarizes where research on lower bounds for static data struc-
tures is currently stuck:
Open Problem 1.1. For some explicit static data structure problem, prove that the worst case
time of a query exceeds log |Q| for any amount of space that not too close to (e.g. it is at least
twice) the information theoretic minimum.
   Two well-known candidate problems for achieving the goal stated in this problem are
the orthogonal range counting problem mentioned above and the vector-matrix-vector
multiplication problem (VMV) defined in Section 4.
   In the dynamic setting the best lower bounds we have for explicit problems do not
exceed log |Q| log |U |, but there are many data structure problems for which the current
best upper bounds are |Q| β + |U | β for some β > 0. This is the case for the dynamic graph
reachability problem.
Open Problem 1.2. For some explicit dynamic data structure problem, prove that the worst case
time of an update or query exceeds nϵ where n = max(|Q|, |U |, log |D|).


1.2   Barriers to data structure lower bounds
The situation with data structure lower bounds thus seems similar to that for circuit lower
bounds: the best lower bounds we can prove fall far short of what we expect. Over the
past decade several papers have appeared that attempt to identify barriers to significantly
improving the existing lower bounds.
    Viola [Vio19] showed that any static data structure lower bound improving the state
of the art would imply a strongly super-linear lower bound on the wire complexity of an
explicit function. This barrier applies to dynamic data structure problems, also, if they
are of decomposable type. One caveat is that this barrier only works in the setting where
the space s is close to maximum, namely, s = Ω((log |Q|)1−ε ).

                                                3
    Around the same time, Dvir, Golovnev and Weinstein [DGW19] showed that any
ω (log2 |Q|) static data structure lower bound would imply new semi-explicit construc-
tions of rigid matrices (matrices that can not be expressed as the sum of a low rank matrix
and a sparse matrix). Rigid matrices were introduced by Valiant as an approach to prov-
ing explicit lower bounds in algebraic circuit complexity, and constructing explicit (or
even semi-explicit) rigid matrices is a well known unsolved problem. A follow-up paper
by Ramamoorthy and Rashtchian [RR20] showed that a lower bound of ω (log |Q|) on
the vector-matrix-vector (VMV) problem, which is widely believed to have complexity
Ω̃((log |Q|)2 ), would also imply new constructions of rigid matrices. These barrier re-
sults hold even if the lower bound is only proven against non-adaptive data structures
with close to minimal space.
    In the above papers, the “barrier” identified is that making progress on a data struc-
ture problem would yield explicit or semi-explicit constructions of combinatorial objects
which have defied all previous efforts to construct them. This is very different from the
barrier identified by Razborov and Rudich.
    Earlier this year, Korten, Pitassi, and Impagliazzo [KPI25] identified a barrier for static
data structure lower bounds that much more closely relates to the barrier identified by
Razborov and Rudich. They adapted the natural proofs framework to the setting of static
data structure lower bounds and proved that a natural proof of sufficiently strong data
structure lower bounds would prove the non-existence of certain pseudo-random gener-
ators which are believed to exist.
    For example they show that, under standard assumptions about the existence of NC0
pseudo-random generators, for every constant ϵ > 0 there exists a constant t(ϵ) such
that no natural proof can prove a lower bound of t(ϵ), for data-structure problems where
|Q| ≥ |D|ε , against implementations that are allowed to use space |Q|ϵ . This is a strong
result, but does not directly pertain to Open Problem 1.1 where the goal is to prove
stronger lower bounds on time when the space used is not too large, when compared with
the information theoretic bound. Unfortunately, the parameter regime to which their bar-
rier applies excludes most natural problems, such as the ORC and VMV problems. For ex-
ample, for the ORC problem, a natural proof by Patrascu [Păt07] shows a super-constant
          log n
t = Ω( log log n ) lower-bound. So this lower-bound proof goes beyond the barrier raised in
[KPI25]. What is happening here? Well, from Patrascu’s proof we can get a distinguisher
which can break all NC0 PRGs. This does not contradict the standard cryptographic con-
                                                                         2
jectures on NC0 PRGs, because the complexity of the distinguisher (2n ) is higher than the
                                          o (1)
conjectured security of NC0 PRGs (2n ). Patrascu’s proof shows that, in order to get a
natural proofs barrier that holds in all parameter regimes, it cannot be established via NC0
PRGs as done in [KPI25]. Instead, we establish the barrier by constructing PRFs directly,
and our PRFs will, in particular, fool the distinguisher arising from Patrascu’s proof. We
explain the difference between these two approaches in Section 4.3.
    Furthermore, Korten, Pitassi, and Impagliazzo have also shown that some of the
lower-bound techniques used in the literature are natural proofs. But they only showed
this for a small subset of all known proofs. And, in order to fully establish a natural proofs

                                              4
barrier, one should aim to show that every existing static data structure lower-bound proof
can be naturalized. Otherwise, one might still argue that one of the techniques which was
not treated could conceivably be used to prove a new lower bound beyond the state of
the art. To rule this out, then, one should strive to cover every single technique that was
ever used in the literature. Finally, the approach of [KPI25] does not address dynamic
data structure lower bounds and Open Problem 1.2.
   Here, we will attempt to extend their work to address all of these shortcomings.


1.3   Our contribution
Our goal is to show that the natural proofs paradigm gives us a barrier for pushing the
frontier of data structure lower bounds, and in particular, in solving Problems 1.1 and 1.2.
    Lower-bound proofs can be thought of as identifying a certain “combinatorial” prop-
erty of the data structure problem that makes the problem hard. For the lower-bound
to work, this property should be such that any function for which it holds needs large
time/space to solve the problem. (This is referred to as usefulness of the property.) In
most proofs, whether a data structure problem possesses the property can be decided by
an efficient algorithm that inspects the truth-table of the data structure problem. (This
is referred to as constructivity of the property.) Furthermore, the kind of property that
shows up in most proofs is such that most data structure problems will have it, meaning,
a randomly selected truth-table will satisfy the property with high probability. (This is
referred to as largeness of the property.)
    A lower bound proof which uses a useful, constructive, large property is called a nat-
ural proof and such a property is called a natural property. (In many cases the property
used in the proof may not be natural, but can be slightly modified to be made natural,
and we still call this a natural proof.) The issue with such natural properties is that they
contradict the existence of pseudo-random function generators. Let us explain.
    In our framework, when considering a particular frame F = (D , Q, A, U ), each table
over F (that is, each Q × D matrix with entries in A) specifies the desired behavior of
queries and thus represents a different data structure problem. We refer to a probability
distribution over tables as function generators.
    Now, suppose that we have managed to show that a given data structure problem (a
table f ) cannot be implemented in space s, word size w and time t, by showing that f
satisfies some natural property Φ. Now consider function generators supported on easy
tables, namely, every function f in the support of the generator can be implemented in
space s, word size w and time t. We refer to such distributions as local function generators.
Because of the usefulness condition, the probability that the output of such a generator
satisfes the natural property is 0. (We emphasize that the notion of usefulness depends
on the particular choice of s, w and t under consideration.) However, because of the
largeness requirement, a non-trivial fraction of all tables satisfy Φ. Hence, the natural
property serves as a distinguisher between the output of any local function generator, and
the uniform distribution over all tables. This distinguisher is efficient, by constructivity.


                                             5
    By contrapositive, if for some s, w and t, there does exist a local function generator that
fools all efficient distinguishers, i.e., can not be distinguished from the uniform distribu-
tion by an efficient algorithm — we will call such a generator a local PRF — then we must
conclude that no natural property can exist, that is, there is no property that simultane-
ously satisfies usefulness, largeness and constructivity. And hence there exists no natural
proof establishing a lower-bound with parameters s, w, t.
    This is a straightforward adaptation of the natural proofs paradigm, which was pro-
posed by Razborov and Rudich for circuit lower bounds, to data structures, and this was
used in [KPI25]. In [KPI25] the authors do not explicitly consider local function genera-
tors. Instead they consider only a very restricted family of local function generators which
they call locally computable pseudo-random generators. These have the advantage that
the existence of such generators that fool natural properties follows from standard as-
sumptions in the theory of pseudo-randomness. However, they have the disadvantage
that they only are able to rule out natural proofs for data structure lower bounds where
the space is large. In particular, their barrier results do not apply to Open Problem 1.1.
They also do not address dynamic data structures.
    Our framework incorporates the update structure into the underlying frame so it ap-
plies both to the static and dynamic case. To rule out natural proofs for a specific s, w, t, it
suffices to identify local pseudo-random function generators that fool all natural proper-
ties (with respect to the given s, w, t). Considering the full class of such generators (rather
than the restricted version considered in [KPI25]) provides more flexibility to construct
such a local PRG, but this added flexibility has the drawback that we don’t know how to
apply standard assumptions about PRGs to show that such generators exist.
    What we do is to propose two concrete local function generators, one for the static case
and one for dynamic. We conjecture that the generator for the static case fools natural
properties that seek to answer Open Problem 1.1 and that the generator for the dynamic
case fools natural properties that seek to answer Open Problem 1.2.
    Because these generators seem to differ in significant ways from generators that have
been considered previously, we are not able to relate their security to standard assump-
tions about pseudo-random generators. Instead we provide evidence of their security by
proving that they fool the natural properties that arise in nearly all of the existing lower
bound proofs in the literature.
    One key insight that allows us to address the dynamic case is to restrict attention
to so-called history independent implementations of data structure problems. A history
independent implementation has the property that the memory representation of data
is independent of the sequence of updates that lead us to the current database. Hence
each database has a unique representation in memory. This notion was defined originally
in the context of cryptographic applications [NT01] but found interesting applications in
design of usual data structures, e.g. [BCF+ 22, BFGK24].
    History independence puts additional constraints on the space of possible implemen-
tations so proving lower bounds on history independent implementations is potentially
easier than proving lower bounds for general implementations. We will argue that even if


                                               6
we restrict to history independent implementations, proving lower bounds for the prob-
lems in question require overcoming natural proofs barrier.
For the remainder of this introduction we give an overview of our generators.
Static pseudo-random function generator. For the static case we will consider two nat-
ural pseudo-random function generators that combined together will give our candi-
date pseudo-random function generator. For simplicity let us assume w = 1, so we
are dealing with bit-probe model. Let us set D = {0, 1}n , |Q| = 2o(n) , A = {0, 1},
t = ω (log n + log |Q|) and s = ω (nt). The pseudo-random function generator will take
as its seed a table of |D| × s bits specifying the memory representation of each database,
and a description of |Q| decision trees, where for each q ∈ Q, the q-th tree represents
the algorithm that answers query q by querying the memory representation of the cur-
rent database at t positions. The length of the description of each of the decision trees is
bounded by O(log s · 2t ). Assuming that for some c > 1 and δ < 1 we have t ≤ (log |D|)δ ,
s ≤ |Q|δ and s ≤ (log |D|)c , the seed length is at most O(|D| · |Q|δ + |D|δ+o(1) · |Q|) while
the output size is |Q| · |D|. Hence the seed of the pseudo-random generator is shorter than
its output.
     One could hope that this pseudo-random function generator is going to be hard to dis-
tinguish from random. One can verify that the output restricted to a particular database,
i.e. the query truth-table for that database, is uniformly random. Unfortunately, any row
in the table f output by this generator will be 2−O(t) -biased, which is much more than
the bias of a randomly-chosen function, hence this local function generator can be distin-
guished from random.
     To remove the bias we will combine this generator with another one. Our second
pseudo-random function generator is based on low-density parity-check matrix of a bi-
nary code. We consider a LDPC matrix with |Q| rows and s columns, where each row has
at most t ones. We fix such a matrix P and the seed to the generator will be the |D| × s
memory representation of all databases. The output of the generator for a database x and
query q is the inner product of the memory representation of x with the q-th row of P.
Since the row contains at most t ones, the output can be determined by a decision tree of
depth t.
     One can show that the output of the second pseudo-random function generator con-
tains no large monochromatic rectangle with high probability. So it exhibits certain
pseudo-random properties. However it can still be distinguished by a rank test from
a truly random.
     We take as our candidate pseudo-random function generator the bit-wise XOR of the
two pseudo-random generators from above applied on the same seed. (Technically this
pseudo-random function generator will have a query complexity 2t but one can adjust
the parameters accordingly.) Details of the construction are given in Section 4.2.
     In Section 5 we will show that almost every proof technique used to prove static data
structure lower bounds is natural. That means that almost every known technique pro-
duces an efficient distinguisher which separates easy functions (below the proved lower
bound) from random functions. We will show that our local PRF candidate fools every

                                              7
one of these distinguishers. We only found two exceptions. The first is lifting theorems —
here it seems that the natural proofs barrier simply does not apply, as has been observed
already in the work on the KRW conjecture [KRW95], which precisely seeks to circumvent
this barrier. The second non-naturalizing proof is a proof in [KPI25] which uses a property
of the table which they call being γ-biased. This property is not efficiently computable,
nor does there seem to be any obvious way of making it efficiently computable. Nonethe-
less, we will show that our PRF also fools this hardness-implying property, which shows
that the proof is “essentially natural” (see Definition 3.3).
    We have tried to break our candidate pseudo-random function, so far with no success.
Perhaps they can be broken, or perhaps they are secure. One thing can surely be said:
any proof of a static data structure lower bound better than ω (log log |D| + log |Q|), with
s = Ω((log |D|)2+ε ), will either not be natural, or will have to somehow break every
single local generator, including the generators we propose. So one could either believe
that our generators are secure, and try to conceive of how a data structure lower bound
could avoid being natural, or we could believe that data structure lower bounds can be
proven by natural proofs, in which case all local PRFs can be broken, and one might as
well begin by attempting to break our candidate. In either case, the main point is that the
natural proofs barrier offers a suggestion of what needs to be done next.
Dynamic pseudo-random function generator. In Section 6.1, we will define a notion of
a generator, called a local and locally updatable (LLU) generator, and propose the conjecture
that such a generator exists which is sufficiently secure to rule out natural lower bound
proofs. As far as we know, this is the first fully general barrier result which applies to
dynamic data structure lower bounds.
    It should be said, however, that our level of confidence on the existence of a LLU
PRG is not as high as in the static case. In fact, the notion of locally updatable will have
two versions, a natural notion of locally updatable derived directly from the existence
of a dynamic data structure implementation, and another, less stringent notion of locally
updatable generator (Relaxed Local-and-Locally-Updatable, RLLU) derived from the ex-
istence of a relaxed implementation. The difference between implementations and relaxed
implementations is as follows: in an implementation to a dynamic data structure prob-
lem, for each possible update u ∈ U there must exist a ≤ tu -depth read-write decision
tree Tu which transforms an encoding E( x ) to an updated encoding E(u( x )). The fact
that Tu is low-depth implies a bound on the Hamming distance: ∆ H ( E( x ), E(u( x )) ≤ tu .
In a relaxed implementation, there does not need to exist such a decision tree Tu ; instead,
the only requirement is that ∆ H ( E( x ), E(u( x ))) ≤ tu for all x ∈ D , u ∈ U .
    In Section 6.2, we construct a candidate RLLU generator which we believe is secure.
At first, it might appear that we have relaxed the notion of a generator too much: indeed
the requirement that the Hamming distance between E( x ) and E(u( x )) is at most tu ap-
pears to be a very weak requirement, it gives no algorithmic guarantees. Nonetheless, in
Section 7, we will show that every single dynamic lower-bound proof in the literature is a nat-
ural proof, which proves lower bounds not just against implementations, but also against
relaxed implementations! So whatever difference there might exist between implementa-


                                              8
tions and relaxed implementations, the known lower-bound techniques fail to make use
of it.
    The different possibilities are then as follows (with parameters matching the state-of-
the-art in dynamic data structure lower bounds):

   • Secure LLU generators exist, in which case no natural proof of dynamic data struc-
     ture lower bounds is possible beyond the current state of the art.

   • Or perhaps only secure RLLU generators exist (for example, our candidate), in
     which case a natural proof of dynamic data structure lower bounds might still be
     possible beyond the state of the art, but such a proof would have to (somehow, un-
     like all proofs in the literature) use something about the update decision-trees Tu ,
     other than the fact that Tu ( E( x )) is close to E( x ) in Hamming distance. This is a real
     possibility, and deserves further thought.

   • Or perhaps RLLU generators don’t exist, and only in this case could we use the
     known lower bound techniques to go beyond the state of the art. In this case, lower-
     bound provers may as well begin by breaking our candidate RLLU generator.

    Here we give a high-level overview of the candidate generator for the case when
databases come from {0, 1}n , each of the n update functions flips one of the bits of a
database and the answer set A equals {0, 1}. The generator will take as its seed an (im-
plicit) description of memory representation of each database x, and also descriptions
of decision trees answering the data structure queries from the memory representation of
databases. The output of the pseudo-random generator is the truth-table of the associated
data structure problem.
    Each memory representation E( x ) consists of ℓ + 2 = θ (log n) blocks, each block
j = 0, . . . , ℓ will be of length (1 + κ ) j d, for some suitable parameter κ > 0. Instead of
specifying the content of E( x ) for each x, the seed will specify the action of i-th update on
the memory representation, i ∈ [n]. Hence for each update i ∈ [n] and block j = 0, . . . , ℓ,
the seed will describe O(d) bits that are flipped by the i-th update in the j-th memory
block. We will assume that blocks 0, . . . , ℓ are all-0 for the database 0n , so the memory
representation of each x (except for the block ℓ + 1) can be obtained by applying the rel-
evant updates on that memory representation, i.e. XOR-ing them bit-wise together. The
last, (ℓ + 2)-th, block will be of length d and will be specified explicitly by the seed of the
pseudo-random generator. Hence, except for this very last block updates to all the other
blocks can be performed by depth O(d) read-write decision trees.
    For each data structure query the seed specifies a random decision tree that along each
path reads d random locations from each block j = 0, . . . , ℓ in the order of the blocks, and
then reads the entire block (ℓ + 1). The decision tree outputs the label of the reached
leaf which is selected from a balanced labeling of the leaves of the tree. Thus the query
complexity of the tree is (ℓ + 2)d.
    In Section 6.2 we give a more general definition also for non-boolean domains. In
Section 7 as we overview all lower-bound techniques in dynamic data-structures (that

                                               9
we know of), and show that they are all natural, we will also attempt to show that our
PRF fools the natural properties that arise from such proofs. We have managed to show
this formally for all but one of the proof techniques. We do believe our PRF fools the
remaining natural property, also, but we have not been able to prove it, yet.
Conclusion. We will establish a natural-proofs barrier for static and dynamic data-
structures. The barrier seems to kick in exactly at the border (log |Q| for static, (log n)2 for
dynamic, where n = max(|Q|, |U |, log |D|)) above which we don’t know how to prove
static or dynamic lower-bounds.
    This seems to suggest that any further progress on data-structure lower-bounds is
contingent on overcoming the same barrier which is preventing us from proving uncon-
ditional lower bounds in Boolean circuit complexity.




                                              10
2     Preliminaries
It will not be possible to make much sense of this paper if one has never seen lower-
bounds against data structures in the cell probe model. The definitions may seem a little
arbitrary and overly formal if one has never seen them, and our overview of the known
proofs is very terse, but our purpose here is not to familiarize. In this case, we can recom-
mend two excellent video lectures by Huacheng Yu1 , or by Kasper Green Larsen 2 , and a
survey by Miltersen on cell probe complexity [Mil99].


2.1    Notation
D , Q, A, U The sets of databases, queries, updates, and answers.
|Q| The number of queries.
|D| The number of databases.
P A data-structure problem, either static (Definition 2.2) or dynamic (Definition 2.8).
s The space used, meaning, the number of words in the encoding of the data.

w The number of bits in each word of the encoding.

t The query time of an implementation to a static data-structure problem (Definition 2.5).

tq , tu The query time and update time of an implementation for a dynamic data-structure
        problem (Definition 2.10).

T A decision tree.

E An map for encoding the data E : D → ({0, 1}w )w .

F , Tables(F ), f A frame, the set of tables of a given frame F , and a table f ∈ Tables(F )
      (Definitions Definitions 2.3 and 2.6).

B A complexity bound (Definitions 2.4 and 2.9).
S The size of a distinguisher (a circuit to distinguish random from pseudorandom in-
    puts).

ℓ The number of epochs in a Chronogram argument.
Ui , ni The sequence of updates performed in the i-th epoch, and its bitlength ni = |Ui |.

k For k-wise independence and similar notions.
    1 https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLKVCRT3MRed6YOwYqbpolWZaroWWUWAgr
    2 https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLJWyfGi_JNUsyw2ZS1XwpOGhciNGOKRj-




                                             11
Comparison of the notation from [KPI25]. For readers familiar with the work of Ko-
rten, Pitassi and Impagliazzo [KPI25] we provide here a brief dictionary of our notation
so that one could translate between them. For our notation the goal was to avoid the use
of N and M, as their choice is somewhat arbitrary.

N vs. |Q| [KPI25] uses N for the number of queries, we use |Q|.

M vs. |D| [KPI25] uses M for the number of databases, we use |D|.

S vs. s [KPI25] uses capital S for the space used by an implementation, we use uncapital-
      ized s. We use capital S for the complexity of a distinguisher.

w, t, f We both use the same notation for these parameters.


2.2    Decision trees
Definition 2.1. A decision tree over s-long {0, 1}w -words with output set A is a rooted,
node-labeled and edge-labeled tree T, such that:

   • Every non-leaf node v is labeled with an index iv ∈ [s], and has 2w children v0w , . . . , v1w , so
     that the edge v − vz is labeled by z ∈ {0, 1}w . We say that index iv is probed at node v.

   • Every leaf node v is labeled by an element of A.

Given an element y ∈ ({0, 1}w )s , we write T (y) for the label of the leaf obtained as follows: we
start with v being the root, and then repeatedly set v to be the child vyiv (i.e. we follow the edge
labeled by yiv ; we say that position iv is probed at node v), until v is a leaf.
    The depth or number of probes of T is the maximum number of edges of a root-to-leaf path.
    A read-write decision tree is a decision tree T with output set A = ({0, 1}w )≤s , and such that
every leaf node at depth d is labelled by an element of ({0, 1}w )d . Such a decision tree naturally
defines a map, which we denote by T̄ : ({0, 1}w )s → ({0, 1}w )s : if on input y ∈ ({0, 1}w )s the
tree T probes indices (i1 , . . . , id ) ∈ [s]d and outputs (z1 , . . . , zd ) ∈ ({0, 1}w )d , then y′ = T̄ (y)
equals y except on positions i j where instead yi′j = z j . (So the read-write decision tree examines
some part of its input and outputs a list of modifications that shall be done to the input.)                  ⌟

2.3    Data structures in the cell-probe model
The next definition appears already in [MNSW98, Section 1.1]:
Definition 2.2. A static data-structure problem is given by a tuple ((D , Q, A), f ) where

   • D , Q, and A are finite sets: D is the set of databases, Q is the set of queries, and A is the set
     of possible answers to queries.

   • f : Q × D → A is a map where f (q, x ) is the answer to query q about database x.

                                                      12
                                                                                             ⌟
In the above definition the tuple (D , Q, A) specifies the universes that f applies to and it
will be useful to have terminology to refer to this tuple.
Definition 2.3.       • A static data-structure frame or static frame is a tuple F = (D , Q, A)
      of finite sets.
    • Tables(F ) is the set of all functions f : Q × D → A. We refer to elements of this set as
       tables.
                                                                                              ⌟
    We think of elements of Tables(F ) as being analogous to the truth table of a Boolean
function. This also explains the choice of the name “frame”: the frame indicates the shape
of the table and the range of values in the table before being filled-in with the values
f (q, x ).
    The goal in a static data structure problem ((D , Q, A), f ) is to construct an efficient
implementation, consisting of an encoding that represents each database in D by a vector
of some fixed length s with entries in {0, 1}w and represent each query by a decision tree
of depth t where s, w, t are ”small”. This motivates the following definitions:
Definition 2.4. A static data-structure complexity bound, or simply static bound, is a tuple
B = (s, w, t) of positive integers.                                                           ⌟
Definition 2.5. Let B = (s, w, t) be a static bound. A B -implementation of a static data-
structure problem ((D , Q, A), f ) is given by a tuple ( E, ( Tq )q∈Q ) where
   • E : D → ({0, 1}w )s is an encoding map,
   • For each q ∈ Q, Tq : ({0, 1}w )s → A is a decision tree over s-long {0, 1}w -words with
     output set A, having depth at most t, and such that
                                 ∀x ∈ D       Tq ( E( x )) = f (q, x ).

We say that (D , Q, A), f ) is B -implementable if it has such an implementation and define
TablesB (F ) to be the set of B -implementable tables for frame F .                       ⌟
    In the above definition, the encoding map E specifies the memory representation of a
given database x using s cells of w bits each.
    The above notion of an implementation was originally formalized by Yao [Yao78] and
is called a solution in [MNSW98, Section 1.1].
Note. As we will see below, the notion of natural proof depends on these four notions,
of frame, table, bound, and implementation. More generally, for a given computational
model, a frame defines a family of problems that share some parameters in common, a
table is one problem in this family, a bound gathers together the metrics of how efficient is
an algorithm in the model, and an implementation is an algorithm for solving a problem
within some bound.
    For dynamic data structure problems, the notion of frame must be augmented to ac-
count for updates:

                                              13
Definition 2.6.     • A dynamic data-structure frame or dynamic frame, is a tuple F =
     (D , Q, A, U ), where (D , Q, A) is a static frame, U is a set of updates, where update is a
     function from D to D . U is called the update structure of the frame, and can be thought
     of as an edge-labeled directed graph on vertex set D where for each database x and update
     u ∈ U , there is a directed edge labeled u from x to u( x ).

   • Tables(F ) is the set of all functions f : Q × D → A.
                                                                                                             ⌟
    Thus a dynamic frame is obtained by taking a static frame and augmenting it by an
update structure. The definition of table for dynamic frames does not depend on the
update structure.
    The reader should note the asymmetric way in which we treat queries and updates. A
frame specifies the names of queries but not the values that queries assign to databases;
this assignment is specified by a table for the frame. However, the frame fixes both the
names of the updates and the action of updates on databases. This asymmetry is an
important feature of our framework.
    The most natural and important dynamic frame has the following update structure:
Example 2.7 (Hamming Frame). Let D = Σn for some set Σ and integer n. For i ∈ {1, . . . , n}
and ϕ : Σ −→ Σ define the Hamming update ui,ϕ to be the function that maps x ∈ D by
changing the value of the ith coordinate xi to ϕ( xi ), i.e., ui,ϕ ( x ) = x1 . . . xi−1 ϕ( xi ) xi+1 . . . xn .
In a Hamming frame for D , the set of updates is a subset of the set {ui,ϕ }.                                ⌟
    Analogous to the definition of a static data structure problem we have:
Definition 2.8. A dynamic data-structure problem is given by a tuple ((F ), f ) where F is a
dynamic frame and f ∈ Tables(F ).
                                                                                           ⌟
History-independence. Next we want to define the notion of an implementation of a dy-
namic data-structure problem. In our definition we restrict attention to implementations
that are history-independent. A history-independent implementation is one in which each
database has a unique encoding, so the encoding in memory depends only on the data
being encoded, not on the sequence of updates that took us there. Since history inde-
pendence imposes a restriction on the implementation this might make it easier to prove
lower bounds. However, in this paper we will argue that the natural-proofs paradigm
explains the difficulty of proving lower-bounds for dynamic data-structure implementa-
tions even when restricting attention to history independent implementations.
Definition 2.9. A dynamic data-structure complexity bound dynamic bound is a tuple B =
(s, w, tu , tq ) of positive integers                                                              ⌟
Definition 2.10. Let B = (s, w, tu , tq ) be a dynamic bound. A B -implementation to a dynamic
data-structure problem ((D , Q, A, U ), f ) is given by a tuple ( E, ( Tq )q∈Q , ( Tu )u∈U ) where

   • E : D → ({0, 1}w )s is an encoding map.


                                                      14
   • For each u ∈ U , Tu : ({0, 1}w )s → ({0, 1}w )s is a read-write decision tree over s-long
     {0, 1}w -words, having depth at most tu , such that

                                  ∀x ∈ D       T̄u ( E( x )) = E(u( x )).

   • For each q ∈ Q, Tq : ({0, 1}w )s → A is a decision tree over s-long {0, 1}w -words with
     output set A, having depth at most tq , and such that

                                  ∀x ∈ D        Tq ( E( x )) = f (q, x ).

   We say that (D , Q, A, U ), f ) is B -implementable if it has such an implementation and define
TablesB (F ) to be the set of B -implementable tables for frame F .                              ⌟

2.4   Communication Complexity
Communication Complexity serves as a powerful technique to prove lower bounds across
different areas of computer science, especially in cases involving information bottlenecks.
Many lower bounds found in Data Structures are either directly proved through Com-
munication Complexity or can be more easily expressed using its terminology.
    This is not an accident. One can formally see static data-structures in the cell-probe
model as a restricted communication game. One player, say Alice, knows the query q
that needs to be answered, Bob knows the data x, and they must communicate until Alice
learns f (q, x ). The communication is organized in rounds, so that Alice communicates
log s bits per round, and Bob communicates w bits. The “only” additional restriction
that data-structures must obey, when compared to this general communication setting, is
that in data-structures Bob must behave non-adaptively, namely, his answer must depend
only on what Alice communicated in the last round, ignoring all previous rounds. This
single difference makes a huge difference, in that with this additional restriction there are
functions f (q, x ) that need ω (|q|) communication to be solved, whereas if Bob is adaptive
Alice can just send an encoding of q in |q|/ log s rounds, and Bob directly answers f (q, x ).
A similar analogy can also be done for dynamic data-structures [Păt10].
    Hence, in this section, we recall some basic notions of communication complexity,
which we will refer to in the rest of the paper. We will be fairly informal: for more details,
two good references in this topic are [KN97, RY20].

Deterministic communication complexity
Deterministic communication complexity is a computational model where two parties, Alice
and Bob, communicate in order to solve some joint computational task. Typically, Alice
knows some input x ∈ X and Bob knows some input y ∈ Y , and they wish to compute
a function f ( x, y) of their joint input. In order to compute f , Alice and Bob agree on
a strategy, called a protocol, where they take turns to speak and exchange messages such


                                               15
that, at the end of the communication, both the parties have learned f ( x, y). The sequence
of the messages exchanged in this process is called the transcript.
    We could formally define a protocol as a binary tree π, where each internal node v is
labeled with the player whose turn it is to communicate, alongside a function mv : X →
{0, 1} or mv : Y → {0, 1} (depending on which player is speaking) that determines the
bit to be transmitted next. The players start at the root, and then successively follow the
edge given by mv ( x ) and mv (y), until they reach a leaf. The leaves are labeled by the
answers from A, and the output π ( x, y) is the label of the leaf reached by the players. We
say π computes f if π ( x, y) = f ( x, y) for all x, y. The cost of a deterministic protocol is the
depth of this tree. The Communication complexity of a function f is the smallest cost of a
deterministic protocol which computes f .
    A combinatorial rectangle R is a product set R = A × B for some A ∈ X and B ∈ Y . The
most basic insight about protocols is that, for each node v in a protocol, the set of input
pairs ( x, y) that go through v is a combinatorial rectangle Rv . It follows that a protocol
computes f precisely if the every combinatorial rectangle Rv corresponding to a leaf v is
monochromatic, namely, f ( x, y) is constant for ( x, y) ∈ Rv .

Asymmetric Communication
The asymmetric setting is when X is significantly smaller than Y . In this setting, we keep
track of the number of bits sent across by Alice and Bob separately.
Definition 2.11. An [ a, b]-protocol is a protocol where the total number of bits that Alice sends to
Bob is at most a and the total number of bits that Bob sends to Alice is at most b.                  ⌟
                            A
Definition 2.12. A [t, a, b] -protocol is a protocol where each of Alice’s messages contains at most
a bits and each of Bob’s messages contains at most b bits and the players alternate, sending at most
t messages in total, with Alice sending the first message. A [t, a, b] B protocol is defined similarly,
but with Bob sending the first message.                                                              ⌟


3     What is as a natural proof?
The notion of a natural proof is not a formal notion: there is no rigorous definition, and as
we will see this is for good reason. Instead, the formal notion is that of a natural property.
We now formalize the notion of natural property in the context of data structures.
    The reason for defining the four concepts frame, bound, table and solution using the
same names as above is that the definition of natural proof is the same for both static and
dynamic data structures, or in fact for any computational model, provided we properly
instantiate the notions of frame, table, bound and solution as appropriate to the model.
Definition 3.1. Let F be a frame, B a bound, p ∈ (0, 1) and C ∈ N. An (F , B , p, C )-natural
property is a predicate Φ : Tables(F ) → {0, 1} such that:

    • (Usefulness) If f ∈ Tables(F ) is a table such that (F , f ) has a B -solution, then Φ( f ) = 0.


                                                  16
   • (Largeness) For f chosen uniformly at random from Tables(F ), Pr[Φ( f ) = 1] ≥ p.

   • (Constructivity) Φ is computable by a circuit of size C.3
                                                                                                    ⌟
    Now let us argue why the definition of a natural proof should actually be an informal
definition. Note that, if we have an (F , B , p, C )-natural property Φ such that Φ( f ) = 1,
this necessarily implies that the data-structure problem f does not have solutions with
bound B . I.e. Φ( f ) = 1 gives us a lower-bound on the complexity of f (this follows
from usefulness). One might then be tempted to define a natural proof as a proof that
explicitly constructs a natural property Φ and shows that Φ( f ) = 1. However, the reality
is that most lower-bounds in the literature explicitly use specific properties of the function
f , which are not true of a random function, or properties which appear to be hard to
compute efficiently when given the truth-table of f . It would then seem that such lower-
bounds are not natural proofs, because the lower-bound-implying property does not obey
largeness, or constructivity, hence it is not natural.
    The very surprising fact is that, whenever one finds such a seemingly-unnatural proof
in the literature, then systematically, time and again, after a bit of thinking, one concludes
that the proof can be changed only slightly, to extract from it a similar argument which
does not actually require any of the specific properties of f that were used in the orig-
inal argument, and which indeed also applies to a random function. And we will find
that this extracted property is very simple to compute when given f as input. One has
then obtained a natural property from the original lower-bound proof. We will see many
instances of this in this paper.
    This process of extraction of a natural property is called naturalizing a lower-bound
proof. We may then think of it like so: the proof didn’t seem natural, but deep down it
actually was a natural proof. So in practice we call natural proof to any naturalizable lower-
bound proof. Of course, such a concept of natural proof is necessarily imprecise: there
is no way to formally specify or even predict what will be necessary to do in order to
naturalize a given lower-bound proof. Nonetheless, if a natural proofs barrier exists, no
lower-bound proof can exist which can be naturalized, no matter how one might try to do
it. So this imprecise concept is somehow the right concept. We must therefore settle for
an informal definition. In the context of static or dynamic data structures, the informal
definition is the following:
Definition 3.2 (informal). Let F be a frame, f ∈ Tables(F ) a table, and B a bound. If we have
a proof that the problem (F , f ) does not have B -solutions, and from this proof we can somehow
extract an (F , B , p, C )-natural property Φ, where p is reasonably large (e.g., p = Ω(1)), C is
                                                             O (1)
not too large (e.g. C ≤ | f |O(1) , or maybe C ≤ 2(log | f |) ), and the proof can be adapted to show
that Φ( f ) = 1, then we call this proof a natural proof.                                           ⌟
   3 Here we have opted for defining constructivity in a non-uniform way, i.e. with respect to circuit size

instead of deterministic time. This simplifies the treatment, and it is a reasonable choice to make, since
often PRGs are thought of as being secure against circuits, and not just uniform algorithms. But the notion
of a natural property could also be defined, mutatis mutandis, for uniform algorithms.


                                                    17
We again remark that both notions of natural property and natural proof generalize to
other computational models, if the correct analogues of frame, table, bound and solution
are defined.
We wish to make one further generalization of the notion of natural proof, which relaxes
the notion of constructivity. For this to make sense, one must understand how the notion
of natural proof gives rise to the natural proofs barrier. As explained in the introduction,
any natural proof provides us with a distinguisher Φ which accepts a random function
w.h.p. but rejects all easy functions. And crucially, by constructivity, this distinguisher is
efficient, i.e. Φ can be computed efficiently in the size of f . Now suppose that, within
a certain model, we have a pseudorandom function generator, i.e. we can generate a
pseudorandom function f which is easy, but the pseudorandom distribution we get on
the tables fools any efficient distinguisher. It then follows that no natural proof can prove
the hardness of any function. Here we used the fact that PRFs fool efficient distinguishers,
together with constructivity of natural proofs Φ, to show that Φ cannot prove a lower-
bound. But, indeed, we can skip the middle step: It isn’t essential that Φ is constructive,
per se, what is important is that Φ is a property which can be fooled by a pseudorandom
family of easy functions! This leads to the following informal definition:
Definition 3.3 (informal). Let F be a frame, f ∈ Tables(F ) a table, and B a bound. Suppose
that we have a proof that the problem (F , f ) does not have B -solutions, and from this proof we
can somehow extract an (F , B , p, C )-large-and-useful property Φ, where p is reasonably large,
C is not too large, and the proof can be adapted to show that Φ( f ) = 1. Suppose further that
there exists a PRF, namely a pseudorandom distribution over Tables(F ), which fools all efficient
distinguishers, and also fools the property Φ (even though Φ itself might not be constructive).
Then we call this proof an essentially natural proof.                                           ⌟
    Sometimes we are faced with lower-bound proofs that appear to use large, useful, but
non-constructive properties Φ. In most cases, we can change Φ into some other property
Φ′ which is also constructive, but sometimes we do not know how to do that. Nonethe-
less, we find that the property, although it is not obviously constructive, is still easy to
fool by PRFs. Then the property also cannot be used to prove lower-bounds against the
class where the pseudorandom functions are sampled from! I.e. the proof might not be
natural, but it is still essentially natural, as per the above informal definition.
    In this paper we will strive to show that all known data-structure lower-bound proofs
are natural. There are a few proofs where making the property constructive is possible
but technically challenging, and two exception, both in the static case, where we do not
know how make it constructive at all. One of these exceptions (lower-bounds based on
CNF refutations via γ-biased property) is essentially natural (our PRFs fool it), and the
other exception (lifting theorems) does not appear to be natural at all. In the dynamic
setting, all known proofs are natural.




                                               18
4     Proposal: A natural proofs barrier against static data str-
      ucture lower bounds
We will now consider two fundamental problems, which exemplify where we are stuck
in static data structure lower-bounds.
    The first is the VMV problem. Here, the data set is D = F2n×n , the set of all n × n
Boolean matrices, our query set is Q = F2n+n , the set of all pairs of n-dimensional vectors,
and our problem is f : Q × D → F2 is given by f ((u, v), x ) = uT · x · v. I.e., we wish to
store a matrix x and for each pair q = (u, v) of vectors the corresponding query outputs
the vector-matrix-vector product. We will then call the VMV frame to the static data-
                       2
structure frame (F2n , F2n 2 , F2 ). Of course, most tables of this same frame will completely
ignore the linear structure of the data and queries, so we should think of the VMV frame
                   2
as being just ([2n ], [22n ], {0, 1}).
    The best known lower-bound for the VMV problem4 is:
                                                       !              !
                                         log |Q|               n
                              t=Ω                        =Ω             .
                                       log( logsw|D| )      log( sw
                                                                 n2
                                                                    )

   The second prototypical problem we consider is the orthogonal range counting, or
ORC, problem. Here our data is a collection of n points in a d-dimensional cube in
Euclidean space, which we have discretized into a coarse grid, so D = [n]dn . A
query specifies a range, in the orthogonal case this is just a box within the grid, so
Q = {q = ( a1 , b1 , . . . , ad , bd ) ∈ [n]2d | 1 ≤ ai ≤ bi ≤ n}. Our function f (q, x ) returns
the number of points in the collection x which are inside the box q. The ORC frame is
thus ([ndn ], [n2d ], {0, . . . , n}).
   The best lower-bounds for this problem [Păt07] state that, for any d ≥ 2, if the space
s = O(npolylogn) and width w = O(log n), then any (s, w, t)-solution has
                                                       !
                                           log |Q|
                                                                       
                                                                log n
                                   t=Ω                   =Ω               .
                                          log logsw|D|        log log n

The best upper-bounds, however, are strictly greater when d ≥ 3, standing at t ≤
O((log n/ log log n)d−1 ) [Wil85, JMS04, CW13]. So one could hope to prove, e.g., a
Ω((log n/ log log n)3 ) lower-bound for d = 4. However, in a not-as-tight but more gen-
eral result as Ramamoorthy-Ratshtchian, which in fact preceded and inspired it, Dvir,
Golovnev and Weinstein [DGW19] have shown that proving lower-bounds of the form
t = ω ((log |Q|)2 ), for any static data structure problem, would imply better construc-
tions of rigid matrices. This quadratic loss makes the [DGW19] result not meaningful for
the VMV problem, but it is still meaningful for ORC and other problems.
    4 This was proven using lifting theorems in [CKLM18], and later using a cell sampling argument in

[RR20].


                                                 19
                                                            
                                                log |Q|
   It should be said, the expression Ω        log logsw|D|
                                                                 appearing in both lower-bounds above
is not a coincidence: no better lower-bound is known for any static data-structure, over
any frame.


4.1   Local PRFs, and a natural proofs barrier against static data-structure
      lower-bounds
In this section, we spell out the cryptographic assumption which we require for the nat-
ural proofs barrier. Our definitions are slightly more general than those of [KPI25], and
this is an important difference, so we will explain it in Section 4.3.
Definition 4.1. Let F = (D , Q, A) be a static data-structure frame.

   • A function generator over F is a distribution µ over Tables(F ).

   • For B = (w, s, t) we say that a function generator is B -local if every f in the support of
     µ is B -implementable. (So for a B -implementable generator every table in the support has
     columns labeled by vectors in ({0, 1}w )s and rows labeled by depth t decision trees over s
     variables taking values in {0, 1}w .)

   • For any property P of tables over F (i.e. a mapping from Tables(F ) to {0, 1}) we say that
     the function generator µ ϵ-fools P if

                           | Pr [P ( f ) = 1] −          Pr         [P ( f ) = 1]| < ε.
                             f ∼µ                  f ∼Tables(F )

   • A function generator µ is (S, ε)-secure, if it fools any property that is computable by a
     boolean circuit C of size S that takes as input the table.

   • An (F , B , S, ε)-local pseudorandom function (local PRF) is a B -local, (S, ε)-secure gen-
     erator over F .

                                                                                                 ⌟
   The notion of local PRF does not appear explicitly in [KPI25] but they implicitly con-
sider the following special case of local PRF’s that are induced by a locally computable pseudo-
random generator (PRG).
Example 4.2.       • A locally computable pseudorandom generator for bound B = (s, t, w) and
      frame F is a tuple G = ( Gq : q ∈ Q) where Gq is a depth t decision tree over s-long
      {0, 1}w -words having output set A. Such a generator defines a probability distribution over
      functions from Q to A by selecting z uniformly from ({0, 1}w )s and evaluating G (z) =
      ( Gq (z) : q ∈ Q).




                                                   20
   • The local PRF for frame F induced by the local PRG G is obtained by choosing a uniformly
      random encoding function E : D −→ ({0, 1}w )s and for each x ∈ D setting column x of
      the table to be G ( x ).
                                                                                            ⌟
   We then conjecture that sufficiently secure local PRFs exist, right at, or very near to,
              log |Q|
the t = Ω( log sw ) border where we know how to prove lower-bounds. This could be
                 log |D|
stated using many different choices of frames and bounds. We exemplify the conjecture
for the VMV and ORC frames.

Conjecture 4.3. For any constant c > 1, the following holds for all large enough n.
                    2
(a) Let F = ([2n ], [22n ], {0, 1}) be the VMV frame, let B = (w, s, t) be a bound with w = 1,
                                            O (1)
      s ≥ nc , and t = ω (n), and let S = 2n , ε = o (1). Then, there exists an (F , B , S, ε) local
      PRF.5

(b) Let d = Θ(1) be a large enough constant, F = ([nn ], [n2d ], {0, . . . , n}) be the ORC frame,
     let B = (w, s, t) be a bound such that w = Θ(log n), s ≥ nc , and t = ω (log n), and let
            O (1)
     S = 2n , ε = o (1). Then, there exists an (F , B , S, ε) local PRF.

    The conjecture above is tailored to almost match the known
                                                             lower-bounds.
                                                                           To ex-
                                                                                 log |Q|
actly match them, one would instead use the condition t = ω                    log( logsw|D| )
                                                                                                 , for the VMV
frame. We prefer to state the conjecture in such a way that it is agnostic over whether
the logarithmic denominators can be removed or not. Indeed, we would rather focus on
the larger point of whether one can prove any static data-structure lower-bound such as
t = ω (log |Q|), i.e., which distinguishes data-structure complexity from communication
complexity6 .
    We now observe that the above conjecture implies the existence of a natural proofs
barrier. Indeed, if super-linear lower-bounds on the VMV problem could be shown by a
                                                      O (1)
natural proof, this would give us an (F , B , Ω(1), 2n ) natural property, which would re-
ject every table f ∈ Tables(F ) in the image of the conjectured local PRF, and yet accept an
Ω(1) fraction of all tables in Tables(F ). The same reasoning applies to the ORC problem.

Theorem 4.4. If Conjecture 4.3 (a) is true, then there does not exist a natural proof showing that
the VMV problem needs t = ω (n). Likewise, if Conjecture 4.3 (b) is true, then there does not
exist a natural proof showing that the ORC problem needs t = ω (log n).
   5 For the VMV frame we can consider the bit-probe model, where each cell stores w = 1 bit, instead of

the usual w = Θ(log n), since we are unconcerned about log n factors.
   6 One can consider the communication complexity of the associated communication problem, where

Alice is given q and Bob is given x, and they wish to output f (q, x ). This problem can be solved with little
communication if the data structure has an efficient solution, but in this setting Alice can always send q to
Bob, who computes the answer and sends it back, so we have an upper bound of log |Q|. We believe that
such an upper bound is impossible for static data-structure problems such as the VMV problem.


                                                     21
4.2   Two candidates for local PRFs
We now present two local generators, which we conjecture are sufficiently secure to be
local PRFs. Of course, proving that any generator is secure would require proving that
P ̸= NP along the way. Instead, one could hope to devise a generator whose security
is dependent on the intractability of some known hard problem. This is the case with
several previous constructions of pseudorandom functions, whose security is based on
the conjectured hardness of factoring, discrete log, and lattice problems (see [BR17] for a
survey). However, it appears that local PRFs are not expressive enough to carry out any
of these constructions, which are inherently very non-local. The paper [KPI25] proposes
a way of constructing a pseudorandom function using a pseudorandom generator. Their
approach is not fully general, for example our PRF candidates are not captured by it: we
will discuss this further in the Section 4.3.
    Here, we propose two different candidates, one of which is non-adaptive, and the
other is adaptive. We have tried to break these generators, so far with no success. Per-
haps they can be broken, or perhaps they are secure. One thing can surely be said: any
proof of a static data-structure lower-bound better than ω (log log |D| + log |Q|), with
s = Ω((log |D|)2+ε ), will either not be natural, or will have to somehow break every sin-
gle local generator, including the two generators we propose. So one could either believe
that our generators are secure, and try to conceive of how a data structure lower-bound
could avoid being natural, or we could believe that data structure lower-bounds can be
proven by natural proofs, in which case all local PRFs can be broken, and one might as
well begin by attempting to break our two candidates. In either case, the main point is
that the natural proofs barrier offers a suggestion of what needs to be done next.
    Our constructions were eventually found by starting with two different attempts, find-
ing out that they can be broken by particular tests, and finding a way of overcoming these
tests.
The frame and bound. Let F = (D , Q, {0, 1}) be a frame with |D| = 2n data elements,
|Q| ≤ 2o(n) queries, and Boolean answers. Let t = ω (log n + log |Q|) and s = ω (nt) =
ω (n log |Q|), with s = o (|Q|).7 Notice that this choice of parameters is compatible with
both the VMV and ORC frames.
    And also notice that s ≈ n log |Q| is not ideal, we would like to have a PRF with s ≈ n,
i.e. using close to minimum space so to exclude lower bounds for very compact data
structures. However, our construction does not achieve this.
1st attempt: random non-adaptive queries. A natural first thing to try, to obtain a non-
adaptive local PRF, is as follows. Choose a random family (Sq )q∈Q of subsets Sq ⊆ [s] of
size t.
     Now sample a table f ∈ Tables(F ) as follows. We choose the encoding function E :
[2n ] → {0, 1}s uniformly at random, so that each encoding E( x ) is an independently
sampled, uniformly random binary string of length s. We then choose functions f q :
  7 The bound s = o (|Q|) is needed for the setting to make sense, since with s = |Q| we can solve any

problem with 1 query.


                                                 22
{0, 1}t → {0, 1}, independently for each q ∈ Q, uniformly at random. Finally, f (q, x ) =
f q ( E( x )|Sq ), i.e., the function f q applied to the Sq positions of E( x ).
      How does one break this generator? It is enough to look at a single row, i.e., we take
any q ∈ Q, and examine the bias 21n ∑ x f (q, x ) of that row. Since f (q, x ) = f q ( E( x )), then
no matter how f q was fixed, since E( x ) is chosen independently at random, f q ( E( x )|Sq ) is
a bit with the same bias as f q . Unless f q is perfectly balanced, which only happens with
probability Θ̃(2−t ), the bias of f is at least 22t , and hence the entire row is very likely to
                                                                                 n
have a bias Ω(2−t ). But a uniformly random row will have bias Õ(2− 2 ) with high proba-
bility, which is much less. So an algorithm can distinguish the two cases by computing
the bias.
      One can try to fix this by sampling f to be a uniformly chosen, perfectly balanced func-
tion, i.e., with vanishing degree-0 Fourier coefficient, but now a similar trick works: we
can fix any two rows q1 and q1 , and look at the bias of the parity f q1 ( E( x )) ⊕ f q2 ( E( x )).
It is only Θ̃(2−t ) likely over the choice of f q1 and f q2 that such a bit (with random E( x ))
is unbiased, and if this is biased then its bias is at least 2−2t . But if f is a random table,
each bit in the parity of two rows is completely unbiased, so again the average bias of
                                                                     n
the parity of the entries of these two rows would be Õ(2− 2 ), which is much smaller than
2−2t .
2nd attempt: LDPCs. Our second generator is specifically designed to fool all such
discrepancy-like tests that check for biases of rows and submatrices and so forth (which
the first generator did not fool).
    To do this we will need a |Q| × s matrix P such that (1) each row has at most t 1’s and
(2) any k rows are linearly independent. There is a way of doing this using low-density
parity-check codes (LDPCs). Let N (s, k, t) be the largest number of rows in a matrix P that
has s columns, where each row has at most t ones, and such that every k rows are linearly
independent (mod 2). It can be proven (see Appendix A) using a variant of an argument
by Lefman, Pudlák and Savický [LPPS96], that

                      N (s, k, t) ≥ exp((1 − o (1))t) ≥ |Q|, if s = ω (kt).

Let us then choose k = ω (n), and notice that for our choice of s = ω (n log |Q|), we do
indeed have s = ω (kt).
   We now sample a table f ∈ Tables(F ) as follows. The encodings E( x ) ∈ {0, 1}s are
chosen uniformly at random. Let P be a |Q| × s matrix as above, and let Pq be the qth
row of P and define f (q, x ) = ⟨ Pq , E( x )⟩ = ∑i∈[s] Pq,i E( x )i mod 2 = i∈ Pq E2 ( x )i . By
                                                                               L

construction, Pq has t 1’s, hence f has an (s, 1, t)-solution.
   Many consequences will follow from this, including the fact that such a matrix cannot
have large monochromatic rectangles. More on this later. The issue now is that this PRF
                                                                                                 n
can be broken by a linear algebra test. Indeed, think of each row f (q, ·) as a vector in F22 .
Since each row is a parity of some of the bits in the encodings E( x ) ∈ {0, 1}s , then these
rows, as vectors of dimension 2n , live in a space of dimension s (they are spanned by the
                                                                         |Q|×2n
s-many single-bit parities), and so the rank of f (as a matrix from F2          ) is at most s + 1.

                                                23
But a uniformly random table has full rank |Q| ≫ s with high probability, so this rank
test distinguishes the two cases.
Candidate 1 (non-adaptive). Our first candidate, then, is simply the XOR of the above
two attempts. I.e., we choose two encodings E1 ( x ) and E2 ( x ) independently and uni-
formly at random, and f (q, x ) = f 1 (q, x ) ⊕ f 2 (q, x ) where f 1 (q, x ) = f q ( E1 ( x )|Sq ) and
             L
f 2 (q, x ) = i∈ Pq E2 ( x )i , where (Sq )q∈Q is a random family of size-t subsets of [s], ( f q )q∈Q
are randomly chosen functions from {0, 1}t to {0, 1}, and Pq is the q-th row in the above
LDPC matrix. (The number of queries is now 2t instead of t, but let us ignore such con-
stant factors.)
Candidate 2 (adaptive). Our second candidate is obtained slightly differently. We choose
E1 ( x ), E2 ( x ), and Pq as before. But instead of random Sq and f q , which we can think of
as random non-adaptive decision trees, we sample random adaptive decision trees Tq of
depth t, as follows.
   • For each internal node v of Tq , by order of ancestry starting from the root, we sample
     a coordinate i ∈ [s] uniformly at random among those coordinates in [s] which were
     not probed by any ancestor of v. This will be the cell which is probed at node v.
   • Finally, for each leaf node v, we choose uniformly random bit and this is the output
     at v.
This process outputs a complete decision-tree of depth t. The sampled table f is then
given by f (q, x ) = f 1 (q, x ) ⊕ f 2 (q, x ), where f 2 (q, x ) =
                                                                    L
                                                                      i ∈ Pq E2 ( x )i as before, and
f 1 (q, x ) = Tq ( E1 ( x )).
Sanity checks. For both constructions, one can readily verify that any single row f (q, ·) of
the table is uniformly random, since each entry x in that row chooses a random encoding
                                                                                      L
E2 ( x ), which gives us a completely random input to the parity f 2 (q, x ) = i∈ Pq E2 ( x )i .
Since the parity is a balanced function, this is a fresh, independent random bit for each
x. The same reasoning extends to any choice of up to k rows, because every k parities are
independent.
    Likewise, any single single column f (·, x ) is uniformly random: if we fix any encod-
ing E1 ( x ) for x, the different outputs f 1 (q, x ) (over different q) are given by the different
values f q ( E( x )|Sq ), or Tq ( E( x )), and these values are themselves chosen independently at
random. Less clear is when we look at different columns x1 , . . . , xℓ . However, since the
encodings E( x ) are random bits, one can see that the probability that E( xi )|Sq = E( x j )|Sq
is 2−t . So provided that ℓ = o (|Q|2 2t ), the probability that any two such partial encod-
ings are the same is o (1), and conditioned on this event the submatrix f (·, x1 ) . . . f (·, xℓ ) is
completely random. The same argument works for the second, non-adaptive candidate,
noticing that the probability that Tq ( E( xi )) follows the same path as Tq ( E( x j )) is also 2−t .
    From the above it follows that: any test which looks at fewer than k rows, and any test
which looks at fewer than o |Q|2 2t ) columns, will necessarily fail to distinguish the output
of these generators from random, except with o (1) probability.

                                                  24
Size of monochromatic rectangles. We just argued above that any k choice of rows is
uniformly random, and we chose k = ω (n). It follows that the marginal distribution
on any 2n × 2n submatrix is uniformly random. The probability that such a submatrix is
                        2                                                     2n2 . It follows
monochromatic is 2−4n . The number of such submatrices is (|D|         |Q|
                                                                n )×( n ) ≤ 2
from a union bound that with probability 1 − o (1) there will exist no monochromatic
submatrix of size greater than 2n × 2n. This will be enough to imply several natural
properties used in lower-bound proofs.
    A similar argument using Hoefding’s inequality shows that, for any constant ε > 0
there exists a constant c such that, with probability 1 − o (1), f will have no rectangle of
size ≥ cn × cn and bias ≥ 21 + Ω(1).

Other checks. In Section 5 we will show that almost every proof technique used to
prove static data-structure lower-bounds is natural. That means that almost every known
technique produces an efficient distinguisher which separates easy functions (below the
proved lower-bound) from random functions. We will show that our local PRF candidate
fools every one of these distinguishers. We only found two exceptions. The first is lift-
ing theorems — here it seems that the natural proofs barrier simply does not apply, as
has been observed already in the work on the KRW conjecture [KRW95], which precisely
seeks to circumvent this barrier. The second non-naturalizing proof is a proof in [KPI25]
which uses a property of the table which they call being γ-biased. This property is not ef-
ficiently computable, nor does there seem to be any obvious way of making it efficiently
computable. Nonetheless, we will show that our PRF also fools this hardness-implying
property, which shows that the proof is essentially natural (as in Definition 3.3).

4.3   PRGs vs. PRFs, and why it matters
The definition of generator appearing in [KPI25] is slightly different, and we wish to
explain the difference, because it is an important aspect of local PRFs. The definition
in [KPI25] is the following:
Definition 4.5 (Definition 5 of [KPI25]). A locally-computable generator with time com-
plexity t and space complexity s is a map G : ({0, 1}w )s → {0, 1}Q such that, for every
q ∈ Q, there exists a depth-t decision-tree Tq over s-long words of w bits, so that G ( E)q = Tq ( E)
for all q ∈ Q, E ∈ ({0, 1}w )s .                                                                    ⌟
    The authors don’t explicitly define what it means for such a generator to be secure,
but the standard definition of (S, ε)-security would be that
                          |Pr[C ( G ( E)) = 1] −        Pr     [C (y) = 1]| ≤ ε
                           E                       y∈{0,1} N

whenever C is computable by a circuit of size S. Let us call a locally-computable PRG (as
opposed to our definition of local PRF) to such an object.
    It turns out, if we have a locally-computable PRG, i.e. a locally-computable generator
which is sufficiently secure, this implies the existence of a local PRF, as per our Defini-
tion 4.1, but with worse parameters. Given a locally-computable PRG G, we sample a

                                                   25
table f G ∈ Tables( f ) by sampling each of the D columns of f G from independent runs
                                                                            ε
of G. It follows from a standard hybrid argument that if G is a (S, |D|       )-secure PRG, then
f G is an (S, ε)-secure PRF. Conversely, if f G is (S, ε)-secure, then the PRG must have also
been (S, ε)-secure, since f G must have been indistinguishable from random, also by dis-
tinguishers which look at a particular, fixed column. But, as you can see, this is not an
equivalence because of the loss in the distinguishing probability ε, and there remains the
possibility of constructing f in a different way, i.e. which does not come from a PRG.
    Our PRFs use this possiblity, since our decision-trees Tq are themselves chosen at ran-
dom, instead of being fixed choices. This would not make any sense if one is only choos-
ing a single pseudorandom column — because the randomness needed to sample a deci-
sion tree is more than the randomness of any single column — but this is okay if one is
choosing an entire table f , as a PRF does, because the entire table is much larger.
    Furthermore, notice that even among PRFs f G , i.e. whose columns are sampled from
                                                                 ε
a single PRG G, it is not necessarily required that G is (S, |D|    )-secure, so that the PRF f G
is (S, ε)-secure. In fact, the local PRFs which we will construct in the next section, are
                                       1
NOT (S, ε)-secure for some ε ≤ |D|        , but only for ε ≤ exp(−t). Since in our case we
have t ≈ log |Q| and thus exp(−t) ≈ |Q|, and in most data-structures of interest we
have |Q| ≪ |D|, this is a crucial difference, and is another reason why we need a more
general, more permissive definition of local PRF, beyond those PRFs derived from locally-
computable PRGs.
                                                                                        1
    It is not at all clear how to create a PRF, or PRG, which is secure in the ε ≤ |D|    regime.
This is a-priori possible since the length of the encoding E can be polynomially-larger in
                                                               1
log |D|, but in most of our attempts some detectable ω ( |D|       ) bias has crept in. And even
when we could not see how to break a particular PRF with such small distinguishing
probability ε, we were still not confident enough in the construction to conjecture that it
was secure.
    And for the purpose of establishing a natural-proofs barrier, it doesn’t really matter,
because all known natural proofs give us distinguishers with very large, 1 − o (1), distin-
guishing probability, so ε = o (1) security is already enough to defeat all these proofs.
    The final reason for considering PRFs instead of PRGs, is that it allows us to think also
about dynamic data-structures. The notion of locally-computable PRG cannot be used in
that context. We will of course make use of this in the forthcoming sections on dynamic
data structures.




                                               26
5     Thesis: All known static data structure lower bounds are
      natural
In this section, we cover the existing static data-structure lower-bound proofs and explic-
itly state natural properties which arise out them. We will cover 5 techniques: the richness
method (Section 5.1), round-elimination (Section 5.2), cell sampling lower-bounds (Sec-
tion 5.3), and lower-bounds via CNF-refutation (Section 5.4). We will also briefly discuss
(Section 5.5) to the one lower-bound technique which don’t seem to be natural, or even
essentially natural: lifting theorems.
    We will ignore several results in closely related lines of research, such as succinct data-
structures [GM07, Păt09, CKL18], so that we can focus on the “vanilla” setting of data-
structure lower-bounds in the cell-probe model.


5.1    The richness method
The richness method is a lower-bound technique in asymmetric communication com-
plexity. It first appeared in a seminal paper of Miltersen, Nisan, Safra and Wigderson
[MNSW98], and has been used and expanded upon many times, in order to prove static
data-structure lower-bounds [BOR99, BR02, PT06a, ACP08, WY14, Yin16].
Definition 5.1. Let d, p ∈ N. A table f : Q × D → {0, 1} is called (d, p)-rich if there are at
least d elements x of D for which we can find p elements q of Q with f (q, x ) = 1.          ⌟
Lemma 5.2 (Richness Lemma). If f : Q × D → {0, 1} is (d, p)-rich and has an (s, w, t)
solution, then there exists a 1-rectangle A × B ⊆ Q × D of size | A| ≥ 2−t log s p and | B| ≥
2−t(w+log s) d, which is 1-monochromatic, meaning f ( A × B) = {1}.

    It then follows that, if a function f is (d, p)-rich, and yet it is also such that no such
large 1-monochromatic rectangles exist, then the corresponding data problem does not
have an (s, w, t)-solution. For example, for w = Θ(log n) and s = nO(1) , the following
results have been proven using this technique:8

    • Lopsided set disjointness. Suppose k ≤ ℓ ≤ n2 , and let Q = ([nk ]), D = ([nℓ ]), f :
      Q × D → {0, 1}, given by f (S, T ) = 1 iff S and T are disjoint. Then f is ((nℓ ), (n−ℓ k ))-
      rich, and yet if A × B ⊆ Q × D is a 1-monochromatic rectangle, i.e. every (S, T )
      pair in A × B is disjoint, then ∪ A and ∪ B are also disjoint, which implies either
      | A| ≤ (n/2        −Ω(k) (n) or | B | ≤ (n/2) = 2−Ω(ℓ) (n). Hence, if k ≤ n , it follows that
                 k ) = 2        k               ℓ             ℓ                 4
      t ≥ Ω ( k ).
    8 There are also lower-bounds on the asymmetric communication complexity of the membership prob-

lem, but these are two small to be relevant for static data structures.




                                                      27
                                                          n
   • The span problem. Let f : {0, 1}n × {0, 1} 2 ×n → {0, 1} so that f (q, x ) = 1 iff x · q =
                                                 2
     0.9 Then (for any ε > 0) f is (2(1−o(1))n , 2(1−ε)n )-rich, but any 1-monochromatic
                                                   2
     rectangle A × B has | A| ≤ 2n/3 or | B| ≤ 2n /6 . Hence t ≥ Ω( logn n ).

   It is not obvious how to naturalize these proofs. The issue is that, naively, the
hardness-implying property Φ( f ) would say that f is sufficiently rich, which is easy to
check when given f as a table, and that f does not have large 1-monochromatic rectan-
gles. This latter predicate, however, is equivalent to deciding whether a given bipartite
graph has a large biclique, which is an NP-complete problem [Joh87]. After all, we are
quantifying existentially over all rectangles, which are exponentially-many in | f |.
   The key observation that helps us is that all of the functions above are not only free of
1-monochromatic rectangles, they also fail to have any nearly-1-monochromatic rectan-
gles. In graph terminology, it’s not just that they fail to have large bicliques, they even fail
to have large near-bicliques. It is then possible to use a polynomial time algorithm that
finds a near-biclique of a given size.
                                                                                  | f −1 (1)∩ A× B|
Definition 5.3. A δ-nearly-1-monochromatic rectangle is one such that                   | A× B|
                                                                                                    ≥ δ.    ⌟

First, let us state the claims with respect to the above problems. Pay attention to the
quadratic loss in the disjointness problem: avoiding it requires a long technical digression,
which at this point would be a distraction.
Lemma 5.4. We can prove the following upper-bounds on the size of nearly-1-monochromatic
rectangles:
   • Lopsided Set disjointness. Let f be the lopsided set disjointness problem given above. Sup-
     pose k and ℓ are chosen with k · ℓ = n (as in the birthday paradox, but here ℓ ≫ k is allowed).
     Then there exists some constant c > 0 such that every (1 − ε)-nearly-1-monochromatic rect-
     angle A × B has | A| ≤ |Q| · 2−c·k or | B| ≤ |D| · 2−c·ℓ . This is proven by an argument
     of Babai, Frankl, and Simon [BFS86]. The quadratic loss is because we require k · ℓ ≤ n,
     whereas in general we could have k · ℓ = Θ(n2 ).
   • The Span problem. Let f be the span problem given above. Then there exists some constant
     c > 0 such that any (1 − ε)-ne arly-1-monochromatic rectangle A × B has | A| ≤ |Q| · 2−cn
                         2
     or | B| ≤ |D| · 2−cn .
Proof. For disjointness. Suppose | A| ≥ (nk)2−ck . Assume without loss of generality (by
Markov’s inequality) that every row in A × B is 1 − 2ε-nearly-1-monochromatic. We claim
                         n
                           = Θ(ℓ) sets q1 , . . . , qm ∈ A with |qi | j<i q j | ≥ 2k . I.e. each qi
                                                                     S
that we can find m = 3k
adds at least 2k new elements. This is because, letting z = j<i q j , we have |z| ≤ (i −
                                                                 S

1)k < mk ≤ n3 . The number of q ∈ D such that |q ∩ z| > 2k is less than10 n(n/3   2n/3
                                                                            k/2 )( k/2 ) =
   9 This problem is sometimes defined so that V is an n -dimensional subspace and and f ( q, V ) = 1 iff q is
                                                           2
in V, here we have simply encoded V = span( x1 , . . . , xn/2 )⊥ .
                            2n k          √         k
  10 Using the estimate √1       ≤ (nk) ≤ n · en
                               
                             k                   k      , which follows from Stirling’s approximation.
                         nk


                                                     28
             k     k
nΘ(1) ( 23 ) 2 ( 31 ) 2 ( 2e )k ( 2n  k   n −ck
                                   k ) ≤ ( k )2 = | A|, therefore some qi ∈ A has |qi ∩ z| ≤ 2k . Again by
                                                | B|
Markov, some subset B′ ⊆ B of | B′ | ≥ 2 intersects at most 4εm of the queries q1 , . . . , qm .
So any x ∈ B′ must avoid at least (1 − 4ε)k of the qi , and the union of any such set of
                                                                              k    6n/7
qi has size at least (1 − 4ε) mk  n
                              2 ≥ 7 . Hence the number of such x is at most (4εk )( ℓ ) <
(nℓ )2−cℓ = |D|2−cℓ .
                                                       1
   For the span problem. Suppose | A| ≥ 2 2 n , and assume again w.l.o.g. that every row in
A × B is (1 − 2ε)-nearly-1-monochromatic. It follows that it spans a subspace of dimen-
sion at least n2 , so let q1 , . . . , qm , m = n2 , be a basis of this space. Again by Markov, some
                               | B|
subset B′ ⊆ B of | B′ | ≥ 2 columns has, for every x ∈ B, f (qi , x ) = 0 for at most 4εm
qi . So the rows of every x ∈ B′ must be chosen so that their span avoids some space of
                                            m            n n               2
dimension (1 − 4ε) n2 . There are at most (4εm )(2(1−4ε) 2 ) 2 ≤ |D| · 2−cn such choices for
x.

The following was proven by Siddharth Barman [Bar18]:11

Theorem 5.5 (Theorem 5.5 in [Bar18]). There exists an algorithm which, when given a table
f : Q × D → {0, 1} and a parameter k, such that f has a 1-monochromatic rectangle of size
k × k, finds a (1 − ε)-nearly-1-monochromatic rectangle of size k × k. This algorithm runs in
         (log(|Q|+|D|))2
time 2          ε2         .

    Our natural property Φ( f ) then states that f is sufficiently rich, and Barman’s algo-
rithm fails to output a large nearly-monochromatic rectangle. This property is:

   • Constructive because the algorithm is efficient: it runs in time quasipolynomial
     in | f |, and if our conjecture holds then a polytime algorithm exists which is good
     enough for our purpose.

   • Useful by the Richness Lemma, which implies that any sufficiently rich, sufficiently
     easy f has a large 1-monochromatic rectangle, the existence of which ensures that
     the algorithm finds a large nearly-monochromatic rectangle.

   • Large, because w.h.p. every large rectangle is unbiased for a random function f .
     Indeed if we consider large enough rectangles (polylog(| f |) will do), the exponen-
     tial concentration around 1/2 is so high, that this every-large-rectangle-is-unbiased
     property happens with probability 1 − | f |−Ω(1) .

Hence, modulo the (important) quadratic loss, all the above applications of the richness
method are strongly natural proofs. Let us now discuss how one might avoid this loss:
  11 Although it is well beyond the scope of this paper, we speculate that the running time can be improved

to a polynomial, if we allow for a gap between the size k × k of the 1-monochromatic rectangle (i.e. biclique)
which is assumed to exist, and the size k′ × k′ of the (1 − ε)-nearly-1-monochromatic rectangle which is to
be found.


                                                           29
   • The proof of non-existence of a nearly-1-monochromatic rectangle for disjointness
     is the very same proof by √ Babai, Frankl, and Simon [BFS86], where they show the
     corruption bound of Ω( n) for disjointness under a certain product distribution.
     The result was later improved to Ω(n) by Razborov [Raz92], using a non-product
     hard distribution. Both proofs can be found in [CP10].
                                      √
   • [BFS86] had also shown that Ω( n) is the best-possible lower-bound under product
     distributions. This is the same reason why we have a quadratic gap.

   • To overcome this gap, we need a non-product version of the richness lemma. Let
     d, p ∈ [0, 1]. Given some distribution µ over Q × D , we say that f : Q × D → {0, 1}
     is (µ, d, p)-rich if there exists a set B ⊆ D with marginal mass µ( B) ≥ d such that,
     for every x ∈ B, the conditional mass is µ( f −1 (1) ∩ Q × { x } | x ) ≥ p. The same
     proof of the richness lemma now shows that, if f is (µ, d, p)-rich and has an (s, w, t)-
     solution, there exists a 1-monochromatic rectangle A × B with µ( B) ≥ 2−t(w+log s) d
     and, for every x ∈ B, µ( A | x ) ≥ 2−t log s .

   • Using the same argument as in [Raz92], we can construct a distribution µ over
     the inputs to Lopsided Set Disjointness, and prove that no nearly-1-monochromatic
     rectangle can exist with such a large mass. Here “nearly” is with respect to µ-mass.

   • We are now left to check that the proof has become natural. For this, we need to
     look at Barman’s algorithm, and realize that it will also work not just to find nearly-
     monochromatic cliques in unweighted bipartite graphs, but also in graphs where
     the edges have been given some weight µ.

   • Incidentally, from the preceeding discusion one has also understood that Barman’s
     algorithm implies that lower-bounds based on the corruption method are natural
     proofs. This is not at all obvious for the same reason: one cannot naively test every
     single sub-rectangle.

    As you can see, the work required to fully naturalize the set disjointness lower-bound
is substantial and rather technical, it sidesteps the main message of we wish to convey,
and there is a lot more to cover, so we will leave it for the journal version of the paper. We
believe that there are no real obstacles to doing it. From the next paragraph, it already fol-
lows that the tight disjointness lower-bound is essentially natural (Definition 3.3), which
further diminishes the importance of this technical addendum.
Our candidate PRF. We are only left to check, as promised, that our candidate passes the
above natural property. As we have mentioned at the end of Section 4.2, if we choose
some large enough constant c, then, for every choice of nc columns, the marginal dis-
tribution of f is uniformly random on those columns, hence any subrectangle is unbi-
ased, except with probability 2−Ω(n ) , which is enough to union bound over the choice of
                                    c


columns. It follows that every subrectangle of our pseudorandom function is unbiased:
f will not just have large corruption, it will have large discrepancy.

                                             30
5.2    Round Elimination
Now we turn to round elimination. Round elimination first appeared implicitly in a pa-
per by Ajtai [Ajt88], and eventually was formalized using communication complexity in
[MNSW98]. This style of argument has been used many times, in many different vari-
ations, to prove static data-structure lower bounds [BF02, CCGL03, PT06b, SV08, CR10,
PT07, LPY16, GL16, SW19, AS25]. Here we will sketch the simplest proof available, for a
simple, deterministic version of the round-elimination lemma. This proof consists of an
information-theoretic argument by Sen and Venkatesh [SV08].
    Round elimination is another good example of a proof technique which does not ob-
viously naturalize. This time, the reason why the proof is not obviously natural is not
because there is an obviously large property which is not obviously constructive. In-
stead, it is because the proof uses very specific properties of the functions involved in
the lower-bound. More precisely it makes use of a certain kind of self-reducibility, where
certain restrictions of the function are equal to the original function on smaller inputs,
and this self-reducibility is simply not true of a random function. Nonetheless, the self-
reducibility can be relaxed into a natural property, as we are about to see.
    Again let’s assume that s = nO(1) and w = O(log n). The existence of an (s, w, t)-
solution for a static data-structure problem f (q, x ) naturally gives rise to a protocol where
Alice gets q, Bob gets x, and then Alice plays the role of the decision-tree, and Bob gives
the answers to the probes, so this protocol has r = 2t rounds of communication, in odd
rounds Alice communicates a = log s bits, and in even rounds Bob communicates b = w
bits. Let’s call such a protocol a [r, a, b] A -protocol, since Alice starts. Likewise we define
an [r, a, b] B protocol, if Bob were to start.
    Suppose we have a family of functions f n : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}n → A. The lemma states
that given an [r, a, b] A -protocol for f n , where a is very small, we can obtain an [r − 1, a, b] B -
protocol that works for a sub-function of f . This is proven using the chain rule. We
imagine that the input q, x are chosen uniformly at random. We then divide the input q
into ℓ = ω ( a) blocks q = q1 . . . qℓ , and the chain rule implies that there exists one of the
blocks i ∈ [ℓ] about which the first message π1 of Alice reveals very little information. So,
say, I (π1 : qi | q1 , . . . , qi−1 ) ≤ ℓa = o (1). It then follows that the first message is close to
being independent of the i-th block. Hence there exists some fixing of q<i = q1 , . . . , qi−1
and π1 , such that qi conditioned on this fixing still has near maximal entropy |qi | − o (1) =
                                                                                    n
n                                                                        ′
 ℓ − o (1). So, by Pinsker’s inequality, for a 1 − o (1) fraction Q ⊆ {0, 1} of all possible qi ,
                                                                                    ℓ

there exists some way of choosing q>i = qi+1 , . . . , qℓ which is compatible with q<i , qi and
                                                                                    n
π1 . In this way we have defined a map qi 7→ q<i qi q>i from Q′ ⊆ {0, 1} ℓ to {0, 1}n .
    Alright, now suppose that the family of functions f n has the following self-reducibility
                                                                                  n        n
property. If we wish to compute f n (qi , xi ), for some (qi , xi ) ∈ {0, 1} ℓ × {0, 1} ℓ , and we
                                            ℓ
have a map qi 7→ q = q<i qi q>i where q<i is fixed (but q>i might not be), then we can
construct a map xi 7→ x = x<i xi x>i such that f n (qi , xi ) = f n ( x, q). Then, when Alice is
                                                        ℓ
                                                 n
given qi ∈ Q′ and Bob is given xi ∈ {0, 1} ℓ , they can run the above protocol for f (q, x ),
by skipping the first message and pretending it was equal to π1 . This is a [r − 1, a, b] B


                                                  31
                                                n
protocol for f n (restricted to Q′ × {0, 1} ℓ ). If the same trick can be applied in the other
               ℓ
direction, this eventually gives us a zero-round protocol for a non-trivial function, which
is a contradiction.
    Here is an example of a function with this self-reducibility property, for which
[MNSW98] have proven lower-bounds:

   • The greater-than function GTn : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}n → {0, 1} such that GTn ( x, y) = 1
     iff x > y when interpreted as natural numbers written in binary. Indeed, if
     we split x into blocks x1 . . . xℓ , and fixed some prefix x1 . . . xi−1 , then by setting
     y = x1 . . . xi−1 yi 0 . . . 0, we have GT n ( xi , yi ) = GTn ( x, y). It follows from the above
                                                 ℓ
      reasoning that there does not exist a [k, o (n1/k ), o (n1/k )]-protocol for GTn , so in par-
                                      o (1)
      ticular t = Ω(log n) for any (2n , no(1) , t)-solution.12

    Clearly, a random function is not self-reducible in this way. However, by looking care-
fully at the above proof, what is needed is not, strictly speaking, that the function f is self
reducible. What is needed is that we are free to fix the inputs in certain ways so that, even
after doing t rounds of such fixing, the resulting rectangle is not monochromatic. So one
could generalize the useful (hardness-implying) property used in the round elimination
lemma, to be something similar to the following.
    The predicate Φ( f ) is true if, for every choice i1 of the block used to eliminate the
first round, for every prefix q1 , . . . , qi1 −1 that we might have fixed in the proof, to ensure
that I ( xi1 : π1 | x1 = q1 , . . . , xi1 −1 = qi1 −1 ) is small, for every setting of qi1 , for every
suffix qi1 +1 , . . . , qℓ , and for every choice xi of the i1 -th block of x, there exists some choice
x<i1 and x>i1 for the remaining blocks, such that, for every choice i2 of the block used to
eliminate the second round, for every prefix . . . etc, . . . the subfunction of f conditioned on
all the fixing done so far, is not constant. This predicate is useful: any function f obeying
this predicate is hard by the same argument used in the round-elimination lemma, and
the functions f considered above all have Φ( f ) = 1. The property Φ obeys largeness,
since random functions have no large monochromatic rectangles, in particular it doesn’t
matter how the bits of the input are partially fixed, that if at least, say, 10 log n bits are left
unfixed, the resulting subfunction of f is not constant. As for constructivity, this might at
first appear to be a very complicated predicate, but notice that the number of bits being
quantified is O(n + t log n), which is O(n) for all the lower-bounds proven above. Hence,
an algorithm can evaluate this predicate in time 2O(n) = | f |O(1) . Hence Φ is a constructive
property, and so we have just naturalized the round-elimination lemma.
Our candidate PRF. By the same observation as above, that our pseudorandom function
f has no large monochromatic rectangles, we also have Φ( f ) = 1 with high probability.
  12 Their lower-bound is randomized. A fun exercise is to prove a matching randomized solution to the

data-structure problem with s = nO(1) , w = Θ(log n), and t = O(log n). This is simple, but only given the
known literature on GTn .




                                                     32
5.3    Cell sampling arguments
The cell-sampling method first appeared in [PTW10], and was used in several static data-
structure lower-bounds (e.g. [AV15, PY22]). More notably, it was used together with the
chronogram method to prove super-logarithmic dynamic data-structure lower-bounds
(we will see these in Sections 7.5 and 7.6).
    Let us illustrate how the cell sampling method works, by proving a lower-bound
against deterministic solutions. For simplicity suppose the data is D = [ p]n , and the
queries are Q = [m], with n1+Ω(1) ≤ m ≤ poly(n), 2 ≤ p ≤ poly(n). Suppose that there
                                                             log m
exists a solution for f : Q × D → [ p] which makes t = o ( log sw ) queries. Now choose
                                                                                   n log p
                              n log p
a random set C ⊆ [s] of |C | = 2w + t cells13 : there are (|Cs |) many such choices. For a
pair (q, x ), how many “good” choices for C will be such that the decision tree Tq , on input
E( x ), only queries cells in C? Exactly (|Cs− t
                                             |−t). The probability that C is such a good choice
is then at least

                  (|Cs−|−t t)  (s − t)!|C |!
                                                 
                                                     |C | − t
                                                                t       
                                                                             n log p
                                                                                       t
                       s     =               ≥                       =                      = m − o (1) .
                    ( |C | )   s!(|C | − t)!             s                    2sw

For each x, then, such a random C is good for an expected number of ≥ m1−o(1) = n1+Ω(1)
queries q. By an averaging argument, there is set X ⊆ {0, 1}n containing a large fraction
m−o(1) of all possible databases, such that for every x ∈ X, there exist m1−o(1) queries
Q( x ) ⊆ Q such that, for every q ∈ Q( x ), the decision tree for computing f (q, x ) only
probes the cells in C.
     One then appeals to the redundancy of f . The prototypical example is when f is
polynomial evaluation, so x is a polynomial, q is a field element, and f (q, x ) is the evalu-
ation of the polynomial x at p. Data structure problems such as this have a redundancy
property, so that x can always be determined when we known f (q, x ) for at least m1−o(1)
different choices of q. It follows that any x ∈ X can be encoded by knowing only the con-
tents of the cells in C, since knowing these contents allows us to answer m1−o(1) different
queries. This encoding has |C ( x )|w ≤ n2 bits, which is less than log | X | ≥ n − O(log m), a
contradiction.
     This basic lower-bound strategy was used in many papers to prove static data struc-
ture lower-bounds. The proofs are essentially what we just explained, but with additional
technical details that allow the lower-bound to work against randomized solutions.
     The hardness-implying property would be then that f is redundant. However, in the
case when p ≪ m, such as in the binary case p = 2, a random f is not likely to be
redundant, in the above strict sense: we must relax the notion of redundancy a little. The
strict notion above states that, for any set Q = {q1 , . . . , qk } of size k ≥ m1−o(1) , for any x ∈
[ p]n , the string f ( Q, x ) = f (q1 , x ), . . . , f (qk , x ) ∈ [ p]k is unique, i.e. f ( Q, ·) : [ p]n → [ p]k
is injective. But when p = 2 this is not likely to be true for a random function: we will
  13 Which is reasonable to assume is less than s, since the s cells of w bits must encode x and t is small.



                                                        33
always be able to find two databases x1 , x2 such that the map f (·, x1 ) and f (·, x2 ) agree
on at least Ω(m) ≫ k coordinates, so the redundancy property will fail for the set Q of
such coordinates.
     So, instead of requiring f ( Q, ·) to be one-to-one for every set Q of size k ≥ m1−o(1) , we
require it to be few-to-one. Namely, our property Φ( f ) is as follows (for some sufficiently
small ε > 0): for every set Q ⊆ [m] of size k = n1+ε , the map f Q : [ p]n → [ p]k given by
f Q ( x ) = f ( Q, x ) will have | f Q−1 (z)| ≤ n for every z ∈ [ p]k . The property is useful: the same
argument as above works, we append to the n2 bits containing the contents of the cells
in C, which allows us to learn z = f Q( x) ( x ) for some set Q( x ) of size ≥ k, a pointer to x
in the set f Q−(1x) (z). This pointer is only log n bits long. The property is also natural: the
algorithm goes over all sets Q, and counts the size of all pre-images f Q−1 (z). This runs in
time 2poly(n) which is quasipolynomial in | f |.
    Finally, the property is also large. Choose f : [m] × [ p]n → [ p] at random. Fix any
set Q ⊆ [m] of size k = n1+ε , and any set X ⊆ [ p]n of size | X | ≥ n + 1. What is the
probability that f (q, x ) is constant on Q × X? It is at most p−kn , since f Q ( x ) ∈ [ p]k must
                                                                                              n
be the same on all n + 1 choices of x ∈ X. This is much less than the inverse of (mk)(np+1) ≤
  1+ ε
pn log m+n(n+1) , so by a union bound with high probability there will exist no such Q
and X.
Our candidate PRF. Now, as we have seen, if f is chosen according to our local PRF
candidates, any fixed choice X of n + 1 columns will have uniformly random entries.
Hence the probability that f (q, x ) is constant on Q × X can be upper-bounded in the
same way, and the union bound still applies. Hence Φ( f ) = 1 with high probability.


5.4      Proofs via CNF refutation techniques
The paper by Korten, Pitasi and Impagliazzo proves lower-bounds using two different
techniques. The first of these lower-bounds is a natural proof, as was already stated in that
paper, here we will further check that our PRF satisfies the natural property. The second
lower-bound does not appear to be natural, but here we will show that it is essentially
natural (as per Definition 3.3).
   Let us say that a distribution µ over {0, 1}|Q| is γ-almost k-wise independent if for
every choice Q of | Q| = k coordinates, and every possible setting α1 . . . αk ∈ {0, 1}k , we
have Pra∼µ [ aS = α] ∈ 2−k − γ, 2−k + γ .

Theorem 5.6 (Theorem 1 of [KPI25]). Let t > 1, t = O(1) be a fixed even number, s, t, w, k ∈
N be such that k ≥ tw + 1. Let f : Q × D → {0, 1} be a table such that there exists a γ-almost
k-wise-independent distribution supported on its columns f (·, x ), with γ ≤ |Q|−t 2−O(ktw) . Then
any (s, w, t)-solution for f must satisfy:
                         2               1− 2
                  |Q|      t                    t                                                     t
   1. s ≥       log |Q|
                                    k
                                 log |Q|
                                                    t−1 2−O(w) for all k ∈ [t log |Q|, |Q|2−O(tw) t− 2 ].


                                                                34
                          11 2
                  |Q|
   2. s ≥       log |Q|
                           t( 2 + )
                                 k    t−1 2−O(w) for all tw + 1 ≤ k ≤ t log |Q|.

    Suppose that the table f is chosen uniformly at random and we are in the regime
                     2
where |D| ≫ |Q|ω (t w) , for w = Θ(log log |D|). This is a standard regime for |D|, |Q| and
w (usually the number of databases is much larger). Then let us show that the distribution
which samples a random column from f is γ-almost k-wise independent, where k =
                        1
t log |Q| and γ = |D|− 4 = |Q|−ω (t) 2−ω (ktw) . Indeed, choose any k rows of f , and fix any
α ∈ {0, 1}k . When sampling the contents of f on those rows, each column will equal to α
with probability exactly 2−k . By a Chernoff bound, the probability that the number of seen
α is not within (1 ± γ)2−k |D| is at most 2 exp(− 31 γ2 2−k |D|) = exp(−Ω(|D|1/2 )) ≪ 2|Q| ,
so we may union bound over the choice of k queries. To see that our PRG fools this
property, recall that any ω (n) = ω (log |Q|) ≫ t log |Q| rows of our PRF have uniform
marginal distribution, hence the same argument applies.
The second technique in [KPI25] uses a property of the table which they call being γ-
biased. A table f : Q × D → {+1, −1} has this property if the following happens. A
distribution over {+1, −1}|Q| is called γ-biased if, for every non-empty S ⊆ Q, the ex-
pected value of the XOR is |E[∏i∈X Xi ]| ≤ γ. We say that f is γ-biased the distribution
obtained by sampling a random column x ∈ D and outputting X = ( f (q, x ))q∈Q is γ-
biased. The theorem they prove is equivalent to the following:

Theorem 5.7 (Theorem 2 of [KPI25]). Let t > 1, t = O(1) be a fixed odd number. Let f :
Q × D → {0, 1} be a |Q|−c -biased table, where c = Ot (1) is a sufficiently large constant
(depending on t). Then any (s, 1, t)-solution for f must satisfy:
                                                                2
                                                   s ≥ Ω̃(|Q| t +ε t )

where ε t > 0 is a positive constant depending only on t.

    The naive tester for the property of being γ-biased will take time Ω(2|Q| ), which is
sometimes larger than quasipolynomial in the size of the table f . This is the case, e.g.,
for the VMV frame, and for the frame of the (artificial but constructive) problems for
which they prove a lower-bound, but in the case of the ORC frame we actually have
2|Q| = | f |O(1) , so sometimes this naive algorithm does run efficiently in | f |.
    A random table will be 2−Ω(|D|) = |Q|−ω (1) -biased, so the only question remains
whether testing if a table is |Q|−c -biased can be done efficiently. This seems unlikely,
since the problem is equivalent to asking if the XOR of any non-zero number of rows of f
has Hamming weight between ( 12 − |Q|−c )|D| and ( 21 + |Q|−c )|D|, which is very similar
to the problem of testing whether minimum distance of the F2 -linear code generated by
the rows is at least ( 21 − |Q|−c )|D|. This latter problem is hard to approximate [DMS03].
One might speculate as follows: for the proof to work, it is sufficient that there exists some
set D ′ ⊆ D of columns such that the corresponding subtable of f has the required two
properties (1) and (2). It might be easier to decide whether this is the case (although we

                                                           35
do not immediately see how). But also, the proof might be naturalizable in some other
way which we don’t currently realize.
    Regardless, we note that this property is fooled by our candidate PRF. Namely, let
us show that a function f sampled by it will have a |Q|−c -biased subtable with high
probability. Specifically we will show that f 1 = f q ( E1 ( x )|Sq ) will already have small bias
(which is enough so that f = f 1 ⊕ f 2 to also have small bias). This follows from the
following sequence of observations:

   • Take any arbitrary choice of sets Sq , and recall that |Sq | = t. Recall that the paramter
     t in the construction of our PRF is as large as: t = ω (log n + log |Q|). Therefore,
     let ℓ = ω (1) be super-constant, but still small enough so that the parameter t in the
     construction is t = ω (ℓ(log n + log |Q|)). Then let D ′ ⊆ D contain the first |Q|ℓ
     databases/columns of our table.

   • Fix any query q. Each database x ∈ D ′ is given a random encoding E1 ( x ) ∈
     {0, 1}n log |Q| . When we choose the Sq -bits of the encodings e = E1 ( x )|Sq and
     e′ = E1 ( x ′ )Sq of two strings x ̸= x ′ , these encodings will be different except with
     probability 2−Ω(t) . The probability, then, that any two encodings in D ′ have the
     same Sq -bits is ≤ |D ′ |2−t ≤ 2−Ω(t) ≪ |Q|−1 . It follows that, with high probability
     over the choice of E1 , for all queries q and all pairs x ̸= x ′ of databases in D ′ , the
     encodings e and e′ are different.

   • Hence, the random choice of the functions f q will give us a completely random
     subtable f ′ : Q × D ′ → {0, 1} of f . This random subtable is, indeed, |Q|−ω (1) -
     biased, and hence it will be hard according to Theorem 5.7.

    In summary, although being γ-biased is not a natural property — it is large but not
constructive — this property is nonetheless fooled by our PRF, and thus cannot be used —
either on its own or in conjunction with other natural properties — to prove lower-bounds
beyond the state of the art.


5.5   The single exception we know: Lifting theorems
There is a single known application of lifting theorems in proving static data-structure
lower-bounds, appearing in [CKLM18]. Lifting theorems fail to be natural because they
only address functions of the form f = h ◦ g, and most functions are not of composed
form, so the largeness property fails. However, in lifting theorems the gadget g is usually
fixed, and it is true that lifting theorems will prove a lower-bound against h ◦ g for a
random choice of h; the lower-bound is then usually related with a simple complexity
measure on h, such as decision-tree depth, and this complexity measure can be efficiently
decided. So in this limited sense the used property is large (among composed functions)
and constructive, and one might informally say that the proof has the flavor of a “natural”
proof.


                                               36
    Nonetheless, lifting theorems are not natural proofs in the strict sense we have de-
fined here (they are not even essentially natural), and one might hope that they could
could prove lower-bounds beyond what is currently known. This is also the main hope
of the KRW conjecture, as an approach to proving lower-bounds against NC1 [KRW95].
However, in this context, the paper [CKLM18] proves static data-structure lower-bounds
via asymmetric communication complexity, and any such approach will fail to prove any
lower-bound of the form tq = ω (log |Q|), simply because a communication protocol ex-
ists that uses log |Q| communication. There is a possibility, however, that lifting theorems
could be designed specifically for data-structures, which might allow us to beat the nat-
ural proofs barrier. Such a proof would still have to contend with the remaining barriers
[DGW19, RR20, Vio19], but lifting theorems are sophisticated methods of proving lower-
bounds, so perhaps they can be used to prove such strong results. However, the authors
of [CKLM18], two of whom also co-author this paper, have already tried to do precisely
that: new ideas will be needed.




                                            37
6      Proposal: A natural proofs barrier against dynamic data
       structure lower bounds
Recall that in the dynamic setting the frame includes a set of updates. In this section we
restrict attention to Hamming Frames (see Example 2.7) which are the frames that arise
in most dynamic problems of interest.
     The problem which best illustrates where we are stuck in dynamic data-structure
                                                                                          2
lower-bounds is the dynamic reachability problem. Our data set is D = {0, 1}n , the
set of all directed graphs on n vertices. Our query set is Q = [n] × [n] with Boolean an-
swers A = {0, 1}, so that f ((i, j), x ) ∈ {0, 1}, for x ∈ D , indicates whether there exists a
(directed) path from i to j in the directed graph x. The update set consists of the Hamming
updates u(i,j),τ where τ : {0, 1} −→ {0, 1} is τ (α) = α ⊕ 1. Thus u/ (i, j), τ ( x ) = x ⊕ e(i,j)
flips the presence of the edge (i, j). (Strictly speaking, the (i, i ) edges are not necessary,
but we will ignore this detail to make notation less cumbersome.) This defines a dynamic
                                      2
data-structure frame F = ({0, 1}n , [n]2 , {0, 1}, [n]2 ) (where for simplicity we have iden-
tified the set of updates with the set [n]2 ). We call this the reachability frame.
     The best known upper-bounds for this problem allow for various tradeoffs between
query and update time14 , but in every case we have max(tq , tu ) = nΩ(1) . In contrast, the
best known unconditional lower-bound is max(tu , tq ) ≥ Ω̃((log n)3/2 ) [LY23]. There is
some hope, perhaps, to improve this lower-bound to Ω̃((log n)2 ) — such a lower-bound
is known for some (non-Boolean) problems (see Section 7.5), even if Ω̃((log n)3/2 ) is the
best that is known for any problem with Boolean answers.
     There is good reason to believe that these lower-bounds are far from optimal: we have
strong conditional lower-bounds. Indeed, assuming either the Strong Exponential-Time
Hypothesis (SETH), or the usual conjectured hardness of the 3SUM or triangle detection
problems, or the OMv conjecture, it follows that dynamic reachability requires nε query
or update time, for some ε > 0 depending on the specific conjecture used [Păt10, AW14,
HKNS15, BNS19]. Nonetheless, the best unconditional lower-bound that has been proven
for any dynamic data-structure problem with nΘ(1) queries and updates is Ω̃((log n)2 ).
     Here we propose that, also in this dynamic setting, there exists a natural-proofs bar-
rier which explains precisely why we are stuck where we are. So, in Section 6.1, we will
define a notion of a function generator, called a local and locally updatable (LLU) function
generator, and propose the conjecture that such a function generator exists which is suffi-
ciently secure to rule out natural lower-bound proofs. As far as we know, this is the first
fully general barrier result which applies to dynamic data-structure lower-bounds.
     It should be said, however, that our level of confidence on the existence of a LLU PRG
is not as high as in the static case. In fact, the notion of locally updatable will have two
versions, a natural notion of locally updatable derived directly from the existence of a dy-
namic data structure solution, and another, less stringent notion of locally updatable func-
    14 For example, t                                                                              0.575 , t           1.575
                   q = O ( n ), tu = O ( m + n log n ) [RZ04] (m is the number of edges), tq = n               u = n
[San04], and tq = tu = n1.407 [BNS19].


                                                      38
tion generator (Relaxed Local-and-Locally-Updatable, RLLU) derived from the existence
of a relaxed solution. The difference between solutions and relaxed solutions is as follows:
in a solution to a dynamic data-structure problem, for each possible update u ∈ U there
must exist a ≤ tu -depth read-write decision tree Tu which transforms an encoding E( x )
to an updated encoding E(u( x )). The fact that Tu is low-depth implies a bound on the
Hamming distance: ∆ H ( E( x ), E(u( x )) ≤ tu . In a relaxed solution, there does not need to
exist such a decision tree Tu ; instead, the only requirement is that ∆ H ( E( x ), E(u( x ))) ≤ tu
for all x ∈ D , u ∈ U .
    In Section 6.2, we construct a candidate RLLU function generator which we believe is
secure. At first, it might appear that we have relaxed the notion of a function generator
too much: indeed the requirement that the Hamming distance between E( x ) and E(u( x ))
appears to be a weak requirement, it gives no algorithmic guarantees. Nonetheless, in
Section 7, we will show that every single dynamic lower-bound proof in the literature
is a natural proof, which proves lower-bounds not just against solutions, but also against
relaxed solutions! So whatever difference there might exist between solutions and relaxed
solutions, the known lower-bound techniques fail to make use of it.
    The different possibilities are then as follows (with parameters matching the state-of-
the-art in dynamic data-structure lower-bounds):

   • Secure LLU PRFs exist, in which case no natural proof of dynamic data-structure
     lower-bounds is possible beyond the current state of the art.

   • Or perhaps only secure RLLU PRFs exist (for example, our candidate), in which
     case a natural proof of dynamic data-structure lower-bounds might still be possible,
     but such a proof would have to (somehow, unlike all proofs in the literature) use
     something about the update decision-trees Tu , other than the fact that Tu ( E( x )) is
     close to E( x ) in Hamming distance. This is a real possibility, and deserves further
     thought.

   • Or perhaps RLLU PRFs don’t exist, and only in this case could we use the known
     lower bound techniques to go beyond the state of the art. In this case, lower-bound
     provers may as well begin by breaking our candidate RLLU function generator.

   In any case, the natural proofs barrier, once again, brings clarity to the status quo in
unconditional complexity lower-bounds.


6.1   LLU PRGs, and a natural proofs barrier against dynamic data-
      structure lower-bounds
Definition 6.1. Let F = (D , Q, A, U ) be a dynamic data-structure frame. A generator over F
is a distribution µ over Tables(F ). We say that µ is (S, ε)-secure, if for every Boolean circuit of
size ≤ S,
                          | Pr [C ( f ) = 1] −  Pr      [C ( f ) = 1]| < ε.
                          f ∼µ               f ∼Tables(F )


                                                39
Let B = (w, s, tu , tq ) be a dynamic data-structure bound. We say that µ is B -local-and-locally-
updatable (B -LLU) if every f in the support of µ has a B -solution.
    An (F , B , S, ε) local-and-locally-updatable pseudorandom function (LLU PRF) is a B -
LLU, (S, ε)-secure generator over F .                                                            ⌟
    We then conjecture that sufficiently secure LLU PRFs exist, right at the border where
we know how to prove lower-bounds. This could be stated using different choices of
frames and bounds. We exemplify the conjecture for the Reachability frame.
Conjecture 6.2. For any constants a > 1, b ≥ 1, there exists a constant c for which the following
                                                 2
holds for all large enough n. Let F = ({0, 1}n , [n]2 , [n]2 , {0, 1}, U ) be the reachability frame.
Let B = (w, s, tu , tq ) be a bound such that w = O(log n), s ≥ n2a , and tu , tq ≥ c(log n)2 , and
          b
let S = 2n , ε = Ω(1). Then, there exists an (F , B , S, ε) LLU PRF.
   Although we have repeatedly tried to devise a reasonable LLU PRF, we failed to come
up with a convincing candidate. After many attempts, we realized that by relaxing the
requirements on solutions, and hence on the generator, we could provide a reasonable
candidate PRF, while at the same time every known lower-bound proof also applies to
such relaxed solutions. The definitions are as follows.
Definition 6.3 (analogous to Definition 2.10). An (s, w, tq , tu )-relaxed-solution to a dynamic
data-structure problem ((D , Q, A, U ), f ), is a tuple ( E, ( Tq )q∈Q ) where
   • E : D → ({0, 1}w )s is an encoding map.
   • For each u ∈ U and every x ∈ D , we have an upper-bound on the Hamming distance
     between adjacent encodings:
                                       ∆ H ( E( x ), E(u( x ))) ≤ tu .

   • For each q ∈ Q, Tq : ({0, 1}w )s → A is a decision tree over s-long {0, 1}w -words with
     output set A, having depth at most tq , and such that
                                    ∀x ∈ D        Tq ( E( x )) = f (q, x ).

                                                                                               ⌟
    Please compare this with Definition 2.10. As you can see, the two definitions are the
same, except that we drop the requirement that there exist read-write decision trees Tu to
transform E( x ) into E(u, x ). Instead, our only requirement is that these two strings are
close in Hamming distance. This closeness is a consequence of the existence of the trees
Tu in Definition 2.10. Hence any solution is also a relaxed solution, but not necessarily the
other way around. We then define the analogous notions:
Definition 6.4 (analogous to Definition 6.1). Let F = (D , Q, A, U ) be a dynamic data-
structure frame, µ a generator over F , and let B = (w, s, tu , tq ) be a dynamic data-structure
bound. We say that µ is B -relaxed-local-and-locally-updatable (B -RLLU) if every f in the
support of µ has a B -relaxed-solution. An (F , B , S, ε) relaxed-local-and-locally-updatable
pseudorandom function (RLLU PRF) is a B -RLLU, (S, ε)-secure generator over F .                ⌟

                                                 40
   We now make the following conjecture:
Conjecture 6.5 (analogous to Conjecture 6.2). For any constants a > 1, b ≥ 1,
there exists a constant c for which the following holds for all large enough n. Let F =
        2
({0, 1}n , [n]2 , [n]2 , {0, 1}, U ) be the reachability frame. Let B = (w, s, tu , tq ) be a bound such
                                                                            b
that w = O(log n), s ≥ n2a , and tu , tq ≥ c(log n)2 , and let S = 2n , ε = Ω(1). Then, there
exists an (F , B , S, ε) RLLU PRF.
   Unlike Conjecture 6.2, we will actually provide a candidate RLLU generator which
we believe is secure. The above two conjectures give rise to a natural proofs barrier in the
context of dynamic data-structures:
Theorem 6.6. If Conjecture 6.2 is true, then there does not exist a natural proof showing that
any solution to the dynamic reachability problem needs max(tu , tq ) = ω ((log n)2 ). Likewise, if
Conjecture 6.5 is true, no natural proof can show such a lower-bound against relaxed solutions.

6.2    A candidate RLLU generator for Conjecture 6.5
Here we propose a generator for Hamming frames. Hamming frames were defined in
Example 2.7. So, take a Hamming frame H = (D , Q, A, U ) with D = [ p]n , with |Q|
queries, |A| possible answers, and |U | updates U = {ui1 ,ϕ1 , ui2 ,ϕ2 , . . .}. We will only con-
sider the case where |Q|, |A|, |U | = nΘ(1) , i.e., polynomial in n. (The reachability frame is
an example of this.)
The parameter d. The construction of the PRF candidate depends on one fundamental
parameter d. We will consider d within the range [ω (log n), no(1) ], i.e., d is some number
that grows super-logarithmically in n, but less than nγ for any constant γ > 0.
The choice of ℓ and w. There are two additional parameters: ℓ and w. The parameter ℓ
is the “number of blocks”. The parameter w is the bitlength of a cell (as before). We let
ℓ = w = c log n for c ∈ N as large a constant as we need.
Then, except perhaps with probability o (1), the tables sampled by our generator will
have a (w, s, tu , tq )-solution where s = O(nd), and tu , tq = O(ℓd) ∈ [ω ((log n)2 ), no(1) ].
We will conjecture that setting the parameter d to any value d = ω (log n), so we have
tq , tu = ω ((log n)2 ), already makes our PRF secure against quasipolynomial-size circuits
(this is Conjecture 6.7 below). However, the generator is still interesting for larger d, such
as d = (log n)2 or d = nγ for an arbitrarily small constant γ > 0. We will eventually prove
that our PRF fools the natural proofs in the next section, except for one (we conjecture it
also fools this one, but we could not prove it, yet).
The memory layout. Let us begin by explaining how the s cells of memory are organized.
We encode each x ∈ {0, 1}n with an encoding E = E( x ) ∈ [2w ]s , namely, using s cells of
w = Θ(log n) bits each.
   These cells are divided into 1 + ℓ blocks, where ℓ = Θ(log n), plus one special block.
Let κ > 0 be a small constant, so that (1 + κ )ℓ = 100n. The j-th block E( j) = E( j) ( x ), for

                                                  41
j = 0, . . . , ℓ contains ⌈2(1 + κ ) j d⌉ cells, so the size of the blocks grows geometrically with
basis 1 + κ, and the largest block has 200nd cells. The special block E′ = E′ ( x ) contains
exactly d cells.

           E (0) ( x )                  ···             ≈ 2d cells

           E (1) ( x )                        ···                    ≈ 2(1 + κ ) d cells

                                               ..
                                                .

           E(ℓ) ( x )                                   ···                                ≈ 2(1 + κ )ℓ d cells


             E′ ( x )                               = d cells


How to sample the encodings E( x ). The encodings E( x ) are chosen as follows. For
each block j ∈ {0, . . . , ℓ}, each i ∈ [n] and each z ∈ [ p], we uniformly sample a string
  ( j)                   ( j) |
Di,z ∈ ({0, 1}w )|E               , where | E( j) | = ⌈2(1 + κ ) j d⌉ is the size of the j-th block, as follows:
                                                                 ( j)
    • each cell of E( j) will be non-zero in Di,z with probability exactly 2d( j) , so that, on
                                                                                                      E
                                                                                     ( j)
         expectation, we will have 2d non-zero w-bit words in Di,z .

    • Each of the non-zero cells are chosen uniformly at random from {0, 1}w .
                                                                            n                             ( j)
   The encoding E( x ) of each non-special block is then E( j) ( x ) =
                                                                                                  L
                                                                            i =1 Di,xi . I.e. we
bitwise XOR all the strings Di,xi .15
   The special block is chosen as follows. Let c ≥ 1 be the largest power such that r c ≤ 2w .
We then choose the encodings E′ ( x ) ∈ ({0, 1}w )d of the special block so that E′ ( x ) is
sampled uniformly from [r c ]d (encoded in binary). It then follows that the number of
possibilities for the contents of the special block is r cd , a power of r.
   It is easy to check that this choice of encoding obeys the requirements of a relaxed
solution, with probability 1 − o (1). Indeed, it follows from the Chernoff bound that the
                                                                                                                 ( j)
probability of seeing less than d, or more than 3d, non-zero cells in any given Di,z string
is at most exp(−Ω(d)) ≤ exp(−ω (log n)), which is much less than the number of j, i, z,
so the probability that there exists any Di with more than 3d non-zero cells is o (1).
    Thus, in case there are no such Di , the distance between E( x ) and E(ui,ϕ ( x )) is tu ≤
6dℓ + d = O(ℓd), since to update the encoding E( x ) to E(ui,ϕ ( x )), we need only to flip
  15 More generally, here we could allow ourselves any commutative associative operation on {0, 1}w , such

as product over F2w , it does not have to be bitwise-XOR.


                                                                42
the bits in Di,xi ⊕ Di,ϕ( xi ) at every block, and change the contents of the special block from
E′ ( x ) to E′ (ui,ϕ ( x )).
The queries. We now sample decision-trees T1 , . . . , Tm of depth (ℓ + 2)d, for computing
the queries. Each such tree is sampled independently from the same distribution, which
we now define.
    Below, when we say “sample a random decision-tree of depth d over x”, we mean
that we construct a decision tree of depth d, starting from the root down to the leaves, by
choosing, at each node v, a variable which was not queried on the path from the root to
v. The leaves of this tree will be unlabelled, unless stated otherwise.
    We construct a decision-tree T of depth (ℓ + 2)d by first sampling at random several
decision-trees of depth d:

   • A random decision tree Tλ of depth d over the first block E(0) ;

   • For each j = 1, . . . , ℓ, and each a0 . . . a j−1 ∈ ({0, 1}w ) jd , a random decision tree
     Ta0 ...a j−1 of depth d over the j-th block E( j) ;

   • Finally, for each a0 . . . aℓ ∈ ({0, 1}w )(1+ℓ)d , the decision tree Ta0 ...aℓ queries every
     word in the special block E′ . Recall that E′ ∈ [r c ]d , so that the total number of
     possibilities for E′ is a power of r. We may then label the leaves of this tree with
     numbers in [r ], choosing uniformly among all possible balanced labelings, i.e., such
                                                 cd
     that each value a ∈ [r ] appears exactly rr times.

Then, the decision tree T is obtained by concatenating all of the above decision trees in
the natural way: Tλ appears at the root; on the a1 leaf of Tλ we append Ta1 ; then on the
path a2 of Ta1 we append Ta1 a2 , etc, as in the following figure:




                                               43
                                           Tλ                         queries d words of E(0) ( x )

                                                 a0

                                          Ta0                         queries d words of E(1) ( x )

                                                 a1

                                         Ta0 a1                         queries d words of E(2) ( x )

                                            ..
                                             .
                                       Ta0 ...aℓ−1                           queries d words of E(ℓ) ( x )

                                                 aℓ

                                        Ta0 ...aℓ                           queries all words of E′ ( x )


                     001100100111001011001100101011
                   The leaves of each bottom decision tree are labeled by
                 a random balanced labeling (here examplified with r = 2)



The table. Now that we have sampled T1 , . . . , Tm (m = |Q|) and ( E( x )) x∈{0,1}n , the table
f is defined: f (q, x ) = Tq ( E( x )). By construction, this distribution over tables has a
relaxed solution with bound B = (w, s, tu , tq ) = (Θ(log n), O(dn), O(ℓd), O(ℓd)), so we
have constructed a B -RLLU generator. We conjecture that it is indistinguishable from
random by small circuits:

Conjecture 6.7. Choose d so that d = ω (log n). Then, for any b ≥ 1 and all large enough n, the
                       b
RLLU given above is (2n , o (1))-secure.

   A weaker conjecture would suffice to rule out natural proofs of polynomial lower-
bounds (i.e., of the form max(tq , tu ) = nΩ(1) ):

Conjecture 6.8. For any γ > 0, choose d = nγ . Then, for any b ≥ 1 and all large enough n, the
                       b
RLLU given above is (2n , o (1))-secure.


6.3   Pseudorandom properties of our PRF
The first observation we can make is that any fixed row f (q, ·) is completely uniform,
because we choose E′ ( x ) uniformly at random; this choice will result in us picking a
random leaf within the last level sub-tree (Ta0 ...ak ), which will thus give us a uniformly-
random bit.
   But we will make the following additional observation, which will be used below,
when we show that our PRF fools every natural property extracted from the lower-
bounds which are based on the chronogram method.

                                                        44
    Suppose that d = ω (log n), and that we have |Q| = nΘ(1) queries so that |Q| ≪ 2d .
Take any Hamming subcube D ⊆ [ p]n of dimension n′ , so there exists some set F ⊆ [n]
with | F | = n′ “free” coordinates, and some string y ∈ [ p]n so that D = { x ∈ [ p]n | xi =
yi ∀i ∈ [n] \ F }. (The parameter n′ ≪ n will refer to the number of coordinates updated
by the i-th epoch in chronogram-based lower-bounds.)
    Take also any set Q ⊆ Q containing | Q| ≥ n′ queries. Any such triple (y, F, Q) defines
a map τ = τy,F,Q : D → ({0, 1}w(1+ℓ)d )|Q| , so that τ ( x )q = a0 . . . aℓ ∈ {0, 1}w(1+ℓ)d , for
q ∈ Q, is the sequence of answers to the probes made by the query decision tree Tq on
input E( x ), i.e. the answers to all the probes made on the non-special blocks. Let us think
of [ p] as the “data alphabet”, so we may talk of “data-Hamming-distance” to mean the
Hamming distance between two databases x, x ′ ∈ D as p-ary strings, hence a number
between 0 and n′ . In contrast, we think of {0, 1}w(1+ℓ)d as the “query alphabet”, so here
we are thinking of the output of τ as a word of length | Q|, and we may talk of “query-
Hamming-distance” to mean the number of q such that τ ( x )q ̸= τ ( x ′ )q , hence a number
between 0 and | Q|. (We will later also talk of “encoding-Hamming-distance”, which will
be again over a different alphabet ({0, 1}w ).) Then:
Definition 6.9. Let v be a parameter in the range [10, nγ ] (you may take it as v = 10, this is the
only case we will use) We say that τ = τy,F,Q is “v-well-separated” if for every x, x ′ ∈ D with
                                        n′
data-Hamming-distance | x ⊕ x ′ | ≥ 100    , the query-Hamming-distance is |{q ∈ Q | τ ( x )q =
             | Q|
τ ( x ′ )q }| ≥ v .                                                                             ⌟
     I.e. pairs x and x ′ which are far in data-Hamming-distance are mapped to pairs τ ( x )
τ ( x ′ ) which are far in query-Hamming-distance. In succinct notation, we could write
                                                                | Q|        1 ′
that τ is well separated if, for every x ∈ D, |τ −1 (N (τ ( x ), v ))| ≤ 2 100 n , where N (z, k )
denotes words at query-Hamming-distance ≤ k from z.
     We then claim:
Theorem 6.10. Let D be a subcube and Q a set of queries, as above. Suppose that d =
       log n
ω (v log log n ). Then, with high probability over the choice of the trees Tq , for every single (y, F, D ),
τ = τy,F,D is a “v-well-separated” map:
                                                 | Q|             1 ′            | Q|
            Pr[∃y∃ F ∃ D ∃ x ∈ D |τ −1 (N (τ ( x ),      ))| ≥ 2 100 n ] ≤ 2−Ω(d v log log n) .
                                                   v
Proof. Let us assume for now that y ∈ [ p]n is some fixed string, and think of D as equal
                  ′
to [ p] F = [ p]n . Fix any x ∈ D, and consider only those x ′ ∈ D such that | x ⊕ x ′ | ≥
 n′
100 , i.e., their data-Hamming-distance to x is not too small, and let us prove that there
                                                                                                n′
exists some block j ∈ 0, . . . , ℓ such that, with high probability, every x ′ ∈      / N ( x, 100 ) has
“encoding-Hamming-distance” ∆ H ( E ( x ), E ( x )) ≥ (1 − log n )| E |, where ∆ H ( E1 , E2 )
                                          ( j )    ( j )   ′              1    ( j )

is the number of cells where E1 and E2 differ (this is over a different alphabet than query-
Hamming-distance).
     The intuition is as follows: for every block E( j) , every coordinate i where xi ̸= xi′ will
cause ≈ d positions in that block to be randomly flipped, between E( j) ( x ) and E( j) ( x ′ ),

                                                    45
                                        ( j)
when we choose the strings Di,z that determine the encoding E( j) . If the block length E( j)
                                                                                  ′
is not much larger than n′ , then because x and x ′ differ in ≥ 100        n
                                                                                coordinates, the Di flips
                       ′                                      ( j )
between x and x will transform every cell in E with reasonable probability. And if the
block length E( j) is sufficiently large when compared with n′ , then this process will never
cause E( j) ( x ′ ) to become equal to E( j) ( x ′ ). So we can expect that, for the right block length,
neither too small nor too large, E( j) ( x ) and E( j) ( x ′ ) behave roughly like independently-
                                                     ( j)
sampled random strings (in ({0, 1}w )|E | ), and because the alphabet size 2w ≫ | E( j) |, we
can expect ∆ H ( E( j) ( x ), E( j) ( x ′ )) to be close to the maximum | E( j) | for all x ′ .
    Let us prove this formally. Let j be such that | E( j) | ∈ [3n′ , (1 + κ )3n′ ]. Let x ′ be any
                                                            ′                                                     ( j)
string with Hamming distance | x ⊕ x ′ | ≥ 100
                                            n
                                               . Then E( j) ( x ) ⊕ E( j) ( x ′ ) =                  i:xi ̸= xi′ Di,0 ⊕
                                                                                                 L

  ( j)                                                   ( j)
Di,1 , where, as per our construction the Di,z have each block non-zero with probability
 d                                                                        ( j) ( x ) ⊕ E( j) ( x ′ ) is
 ( j) and each non-zero block is uniformly chosen. A particular cell of E
|E |
zero iff (1) that cell is never chosen, or (2) it is chosen, but happens to be the same for both
                                                                  ′
encodings. Event (1) happens with probability (1 − d( j) )n /10 ≤ exp(− 30       d
                                                                                   ) ≪ 1( j) , and
                                                             |E |                     |E |
event (2) happens with probability 2−w ≪        1
                                                       , so the expected number of zero cells in
                                             | E( j) |
the difference is is µ ≤ 1. These events happen independently over different cells of E( j) ,
so by a Chernoff bound, the probability that ∆ H ( E( j) ( x ), E( j) ( x ′ )) ≤ (1 − ln1n′ )| E( j) | is at
                                             ′                                               n′
most16 exp(−(1 − o (1))| E( j) |) ≪ 2−2n . We may then union bound over all ≥ 100                -distant
pairs ( x, x ), to find that every such pair will have ∆ H ( E ( x ), E ( x )) ≥ (1 − ln n′ )| E( j) |.
                 ′                                              ( j )      ( j ) ′             1

     A crucial point to understand about the above argument, is that it does not depend on
the coordinates outside of F, where the x’s are equal to y, because x ⊕ x ′ equals zero on
those coordinates, no matter what value y takes in them. So the positions E( j) ( x ) ⊕ E( j) ( x ′ )
where the encodings of x and x ′ differ (on the j-th block) are the same for every choice of
y, and hence we will prove well-separatedness simultaneously for all y, and do not need
to union bound over that choice.
     Now consider what happens on a particular query q ∈ Q when we choose the trees
Ta1 ...a j−1 , i.e. the trees which query the j-th block. These trees will select Θ(d) cells within
E( j) , and output the w-bit words in those cells. Since the encodings are (1 − ln1n )-far (in
fractional encoding-Hamming-distance), the probability that E( j) ( x ) = E( j) ( x ′ ) within
these bits, for a pair x, x ′ with | x ⊕ x ′ | ≥ 100
                                                  n
                                                     , is at most ( ln1n )Ω(d) . Hence, the probability
  16 Let N = | E( j) | = Θ ( n′ ) and let X =
                                           ∑ Xi denote the number of zero cells, and suppose Pr[ Xi ] = N1 (in
our case the probability of being zero is even smaller). We then have:
                                                               µ
                                                      eδ
          (Chernoff)       Pr[ X ≥ (1 + δ)µ] ≤
                                                  (1 + δ ) 1+ δ
         µ=1,δ= lnNn′ −1
                                                                                  
                                       N                   N        N       N
              =⇒             Pr X ≥           ≤ exp   −         ln       +       − 1   ≤ exp(− N (1 − o (1))).
                                      ln n′             ln n′      ln n′   ln n′




                                                         46
                                   | Q|
that this happens for some           v queries q ∈ Q is at most

                                        Ω(d | Q| )
                    | Q|
                          
                                 1             v                        log log n                     log log n
                    | Q|                              ≤ 2| Q | · 2− d       v     | Q|
                                                                                         = 2− Ω ( d       v     | Q|)
                                                                                                                        .
                      v
                                ln n

We may now union bound over the choice of Q, since there are at most (|Q|
                                                                      | Q| )
                                                                             = nO(|Q|) such
                                  log log n
choices, which is ≪ 2−Ω(d v |Q|) if d = ω (v log log n ). Outside of this small probability,
                                                                        log n

every single τy,F,Q is well-separated.


7     Thesis: All known dynamic data structure lower bounds
      are natural
In this section we cover all known dynamic data-structure lower-bound proof techniques
and verify, one by one, that they are all natural, and hold against relaxed solutions. We
will cover the chronogram method (Section 7.1), the information transfer technique (Sec-
tion 7.2), lower-bounds against non-adaptive (Section 7.3) and semi-adaptive (Section 7.4)
solutions, lower-bounds that mix the chronogram method and cell-sampling techniques
(Section 7.5), and finally lower-bounds that mix the chronogram method with weak one-
way simulation (Section 7.6).
    We will show that our PRF fools the natural property in all these proofs techniques,
except for the last. We believe that this is also the case for the remaining technique, but
have not been able to show it, yet.


7.1   The chronogram method
The first method to prove lower-bounds against dynamic data structures was the
chronogram method of Fredman and Saks [FS89]. It was originally used to prove a
lower-bound for prefix-sum, and since then it has been applied to many others (e.g.
[AHR98, BAG01, PT11, RR18, Nav25], see also Sections 7.5 and 7.6). For concreteness,
let us illustrate the method for prefix-sum-mod-2. In this problem, our goal is to store a
sequence x = x1 . . . xn ∈ {0, 1}n under bit-flip updates (so the frame is the Boolean cube),
and we have n queries so that f (i, x ) = ∑ j≤i x j mod 2.
    Suppose we start with E( x ) for some arbitrary x ∈ {0, 1}n and perform a sequence of
random updates, organized into k epochs Uk . . . U1 (which we number so that Uk happens
                                                         1
before Uk−1 , etc), as follows. Set β = 10wtu and k = 10   logβ n. In the first (oldest) epoch
Uk we will do βk = n1/10 random updates, in evenly-spaced positions j1 , . . . , jβk (so jz =
⌊z βnk ⌋); by “random” updates we mean that, for each of these positions j1 , . . . , jβk , we toss
a balanced coin, which determines whether to flip the bit of x at this position. Similarly, in



                                                              47
                                                               1/10
the i-th epoch Ui , for i = k − 1, . . . , 1 we do βi = nβk−i updates in approximately-evenly-
spaced positions, so that the updated positions are actually disjoint between epochs.17
                        i
Let Ui ∈ {0, 1} β be the sequence of coin tosses of the i-th epoch, and U = Uk . . . U1 .
    Let also x (i) be the random variable obtained from x after performing the updates
Uk . . . Ui . After all the updates have been performed, we choose a random position q ∈ [n]
and perform the q-th query. Let Sk+1 , Sk , . . . , S1 ⊆ [s] be random variables, so that ℓ ∈ Si if
and only if the ℓ-th cell in the encoding was last written by some update in epoch i (Sk+1
contains those positions which were never written during any of the updates). Let P(q) ⊆
[s] be the random variable containing those positions in the encoding which were probed
during the query q. We now claim that, for every i = k, . . . , 1, EŪ,q [|Si ∩ P(q)|] = Ω(1).
It follows by linearity of expectation that EŪ,q [# queries] = Ω(k ), which is the desired
lower bound.
    To prove the claim, suppose by contradiction that, for some i, EŪ,q [|Si ∩ P(q)|] = o (1).
Fix any choice U −i = Uk . . . Ui+1 , Ui−1 , . . . , U1 , conditioned on which EUi ,q [|Si ∩ P(q)|] =
o (1). Since |Si ∩ P(q)| is a natural number, it follows that, for 1 − o (1) fraction of all
possible i-th epoch updates Ui , for a 1 − o (1) fraction of all queries q ∈ [n], |Si ∩ P(q)| =
0, i.e. f (q, x (1) ) can be answered without probing any cells in Si . We now claim that
every such Ui (among the 1 − o (1) fraction) can be encoded with o ( βi ) bits, which is a
contradiction. Indeed, since we have fixed x, Uk , . . . , Ui+1 , we know the state E( x (i+1) ) of
the data structure before the start of the i-th epoch. We can also encode the position and
contents of every cell in Si−1 , . . . , S1 , since this is ∑ij−       1 j        1 i
                                                                      =1 β tu w ≤ 5 β bits (and the same will
hold for relaxed solutions, since we do not really use the fact that the updated positions
come from a decision tree, only that there are few such positions). So, if we take the
string E( x (i+1) ) and update the cells in Si−1 , . . . , S1 with the given contents, we obtain
some string E′ which equals E( x (1) ) on every cell except the cells in Si . If we then run
every query q on E′ , we will obtain query answers a1 . . . an , a 1 − o (1) fraction of which
are correct, since the corresponding decision trees don’t query any cell in Si .
    Thus far, the entire argument works for any problem using the same frame. Now
comes the part of the argument which is specific to the table of the prefix-sum problem. It
can be shown that knowing a string a1 . . . an which is o (1)-close (in fractional Hamming
distance) to the string f (1, x (1) ), . . . , f (n, x (1) ) of true answers, will allow us to learn of a
                                       1 i
small set A of size, say, 2 10 β , which contains Ui . Hence we append to our encoding the
position of Ui in the lexicographic ordering of this small set.
    We now claim that this final requirement, which is the only place in the proof that
depends on the specific choice of table, directly gives us a natural property. First let us
define the following family of maps. The maps in the family are indexed by z = (i, U −i ) =
(i, Uk , . . . , Ui+1 , Ui−1 , . . . , U1 ), where i ∈ {k, . . . , 1} is an epoch, and U −i is a sequence of
                                                                                                         i
updates for all the remaining epochs. For each such z, the map ψz maps Ui ∈ {0, 1} β to
  17 This is for technical reasons; n positions is much more than kβk , so there are more than enough positions

to make the updates positions disjoint between epochs.


                                                     48
the sequence of query answers ψz (Ui ) = f (1, x (1) ) . . . f (n, x (1) ), where x (1) is the database
obtained from x = 0n by applying the updates Uk . . . Ui+1 Ui Ui−1 . . . U1 . Let N ( x, δ) be
the set of binary strings of length | x | at Hamming distance ≤ δ| x | from x. We say ψz is
                                                        1 i
good if for every Ui , |ψz−1 (N (ψz (Ui ), 100
                                            1
                                               ))| ≤ 2 10 β . I.e., the number of Ui′ such that ψz (Ui′ )
    1
is 100 -close to ψz (Ui ), is reasonably small. The natural property of f , then, is that ψz is
good for every z. It is clear that in time 2O(n) we can go over every single z and every
single Ui , and do the necessary accounting, so the property is constructive. This property
will allow us to carry out the proof (it is useful), and it holds for prefix-sum-mod-2. We
now prove that it holds of a random function.
                                                                                         i
    The proof is by a union bound. Take any two distinct Ui , Ui′ ∈ {0, 1} β . Because the
updates Uk . . . U1 touch different bits of x, it follows that the string x (1) obtained from 0n
by doing the updates Uk . . . U1 is different for Ui and Ui′ . And hence, each image ψz (Ui )
is a different column in the table f , and so all the query answers ψz (Ui ) are chosen inde-
pendently at random for different choices of Ui . Hence, the likelihood (over the choice of
                                                              n
                                                          (       )    3
f ) that ψz (Ui ) and ψz (Ui′ ) are 100
                                     1
                                        -close is at most n/100
                                                           2n   ≤ 2− 4 n , a really small probability.
                                                                                                          1   i
Then, by a Chernoff bound, for any Ui , the likelihood that there exist many Ui′ , say 2 10 β
                                                                                           ω (1)
many, having ψz (Ui′ ) close to ψz (Ui ), this is now a negligible probability (2−n ). Hence
by a union bound, with high probability, this will never happen for any z, Ui , i.e., every
ψz is good.
Our candidate PRF. To finish, let us prove that our RLLU PRF satisfies the above natural
property, already when d = ω (log n), by applying Theorem 6.10 with v = 10. Begin
by noticing that each choice z = (i, U −i ) defines a subcube D ⊆ D of the data set: the
coordinates F of Ui are free, and the remaining coordinates are fixed to some value y
according to U −i . We let Q = [n] contain every query. Since each update Ui has size
ni ≪ n, this subcube has dimension ≪ n. As in Section 6.3, let τ = τy,F,Q : D →
({0, 1}(1+ℓ)d )|Q| , so that τ ( x )q = a0 . . . aℓ ∈ {0, 1}w(1+ℓ)d , for q ∈ Q, is the sequence
answers to the probes made by Tq on input E( x ), i.e. the answers to all the probes made
on the non-special blocks. Theorem 6.10, applied with v = 10, states that, with high
probability over the choice of the encodings E, and the query decision-trees Tq , every
                                                   ni                                              | Q|
x, x ′ ∈ D with data-Hamming-distance ≥ 100           between them, will have at most 10 = 10        n

queries q ∈ Q such that τ ( x )q = τ ( x ′ )q . So, for the remaining 10       9
                                                                                 n queries in Q, the
                      ′
two inputs x and x will choose different subtrees in the decision-tree Tq . Notice that this
property only depends on the non-special blocks, and the choice of the trees Tq before
the last level (which probes the special block), so let us consider what happens now, as
we choose the encodings E′ of the special block, and the last level decision-trees which
probe it. For each the 10  9
                             n queries q such that τ ( x )q ̸= τ ( x ′ )q , the outputs f (q, x ) and
f (q, x ′ ) are two independent random bits. Hence the probability that ψz ( x ) and ψz ( x ′ )
                                                                        10 ), is exp(− Ω ( n )), which
                                 n
have Hamming distance ≤ 100            (which is much smaller than 12 9n
is much less than the inverse of: the number of pairs x, x ′ in D times the number of
choices for z, because | x | + | x ′ | + |z| = ni + ∑ j n j ≪ n. It then follows ψz ( x ) and ψz ( x ′ )

                                                   49
     n
are 100 -far whenever x and x ′ are at data-Hamming-distance greater than 100
                                                                           n
                                                                              , and hence
                                n             1          ni
|ψz−1 (N (ψz ( x ), 100
                     n
                        ))| ≤ ( nii ) ≤ 2 H2 ( 100 ni ) ≤ 2 10 , as intended.
                                10



7.2    Patrascu and Demaine’s information transfer technique
Patrascu and Demaine’s information transfer technique [PD06] (see also [CJS13, CJS16,
LN18, LLYZ23]) was first used to prove the first Ω(log n) lower-bound against dynamic
data structures. More specifically, they proved a lower-bound against the prefix-group-
product problem, which is the dynamic problem of storing a sequence x1 , . . . , xn of elements
from a finite group G, under updates ui,y that change xi to y (so the frame is [| G |]n with
coordinate-wise updates), and queries qi,z ( x1 , . . . , xn ) = 1 if the product x1 · · · xi = z,
                                                                                log | G |
and 0 otherwise18 . They show that max(tu , tq ) = Ω(log n · w ). Applied when G =
Zn , w = Θ(log n), this gives us a lower-bound of Ω(log n) for the prefix-sum problem.
When G = Sn , w = Θ(log n), this gives us a lower-bound of Ω(log n) for the dynamic
connectivity problem19 .
     In order to make sense of the natural-proofs barrier in this case, we need an ad-hoc
change to the notion of natural property. Notice that the table of the function above has
the following non-random-looking feature: for every x = x1 . . . xn ∈ G n , and for every
i ∈ [n], there exists exactly one z ∈ G such that qi,z ( x ) = 1, namely z = x1 · · · xi . Then,
rather than sampling a random table by choosing each query answer qi,z ( x ) is a random
bit, we will instead choose a random table with this “unique z” property, i.e. for each
x, i we choose a single z and set qi,z ( x ) = 1 and qi,z′ ( x ) = 0 for every z′ ̸= z. We will
later define a natural property where the largeness is with respect to a table f uniformly
sampled among all tables with the “unique z” property. We will argue later how to change
our PRF to ensure this property holds.
     The lower-bound proceeds as follows. Suppose n is a power of 2. Consider a se-
quence ui1 ,y1 qi1 ,z1 . . . uin ,yn qin ,zn of update-query pairs, where y j are chosen at random
and each z j is the product of x1 . . . xi j at the time when query qi j ,z j is made (i.e. z j
is the only value for which qi j ,z j will be answered 1). At time-step j we update po-
sition i j , so that i1 . . . in appears in reverse-lexicographic order of the binary represen-
tation of the positions. So for example for n = 8 the updated positions would be
(i1 , . . . i8 ) = (0002 , 1002 , 0102 , 1102 , 0012 , 1012 , 0112 , 1112 ) = (0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7). Now think
of these sequence of positions as the leaves of a full binary tree, which we call the time tree.
The crucial property to be used is that, for any node v in this binary tree, the sequence of
positions appearing in the right sub-tree of v interlaces the sequence of positions appear-
ing in the left sub-tree of v. E.g. for n = 8, and v the root, (1, 5, 3, 7) interlaces (0, 4, 2, 6),
or if v is the left child of the root, then (2, 6) interlaces (0, 4).
  18 Such queries are called VERIFY- SUM queries in [PD06], as a reference to the prefix-sum problem, but the

lower-bound also holds for non-commutative G, where VERIFY- PRODUCT would be more adequate.
   19 Think of the sequence x . . . x as a graph with n layers, with the edges in each layer given by the
                             1       n
permutation; each coordinate-wise update is implemented with n edge-updates and each verify-sum query
is implemented with n connectivity queries, respectively.


                                                        50
     The contradiction with the existence of an efficient solution is via an encoding argu-
ment. Let v be any node in the time tree and let 2L be the number of children of v.
Suppose, for contradiction, that the updates and queries made on the right-subtree of v
            L log | G |
make a o ( w ) average number of probes to positions which were last written by the
left sub-tree of v. Demaine and Patrascu show that in this case there exists an encoding,
of average length o ( L log | G |), of the right-side query answers, meaning: from this encoding
we can extract, for each position j in the right-subtree of v, the value of z j = x1 . . . xi j at the
time when the query qi j ,z j is made. This encoding argument uses only the specific choice
of frame, and the “unique z” property of f , it does not use any other property of the table
f . The encoding will also work for relaxed solutions, since all its bounds depend only on
the fact that an update changes few cells, and not on the fact that these cells were updated
by a decision tree20 .
     Now it turns out that, when the table f is the prefix-group-product problem, because
of the interlacing property, we can recover all the updates y j for all positions j in the left
sub-tree of v if we know (1) the right-side query answers, and (2) the initial x, meaning,
the values of x1 . . . xn before the updates in the left sub-tree of v, and (3) the right-side y j ’s,
meaning, the sequence of updates y j for all j in the right sub-tree of v. So we have encoded
the left-side y j ’s from o ( L log | G |) bits (this gives us 1) plus some information which is
independent of the left-side y j ’s (namely 2 and 3), which is a contradiction. So for every
                                                              L log | G |
node v, the right-side queries must make Ω( w ) probes which were last written by
the left-side updates. For any query (which is a leaf in the time tree), the probes accounted
for in this way, in the nodes v between the root and the query, are distinct, since, when
                                                                               n log | G |
read, they were last written at different times. Hence there are Ω(log n · w ) probes
in total, and we have done n updates and n queries, so we must have max(tu , tq ) =
            log | G |
Ω(log n · w ). This is the promised lower-bound.
    This suggests the following candidate for a natural property. For the above lower-
bound to work, we√need only consider “top” nodes v in the time-tree at the top 21 log n
levels, so that L ≥ n. The property will state, then, that each top node v in the time tree,
each choice x = x1 , . . . , xn of the initial x, and each choice y(r) of the right-side y j ’s, define
the function ϕv,x,y(r) : G L → G L so that ϕv,x,y(r) (y(ℓ) ) = z(r) equals the the sequence of z j ,
for each position j updated and queried in the right sub-tree of v, such that qi j ,z j ( x ′ ) = 1,
where x ′ equal to x after doing the updates y(ℓ) and the updates y(r) up to position j.
I.e., ϕv,x,y(r) (y(ℓ) ) contains the answers to the queries made by the right-subtree, in the
above update/query sequence (this is the information which I can recover from the small
encoding in the argument). As we have mentioned, the prefix-group-product function
has the property that every single ϕv,x,y(r) is a 1-1 function — indeed, it is a permutation.
We could take this as our hardness-implying property, and the lower-bound will follow,
but this 1-1 property will not hold for a randomly chosen f . So, instead, our natural
  20 Cf. the proof of Lemma 6.1.; the argument does use the fact that the queries are obtained via decision

trees, it does not obviously apply, e.g., to certificates.


                                                         51
property is that, for every v of depth ≤ 21 log n, every x and every y(r) , ϕv,x,y(r) is a few-
                                                                        99
to-1 function, namely, each pre-image ϕ−1 (r) (z(r) ) has size ≤ | G | 100 L . Since each z in the
                                           v,x,y
image is chosen uniformly from G, the probability that any given pre-image has more
                                                             99 L
than k elements is ≤ | G |−k , which in our case is | G |−|G| 100 , much less than the inverse of
the number of v, x, y(r) , y(ℓ) . Hence by a union bound, a random f will have the natural
property. The property is also easily seen to be constructive.
Our candidate PRF. We first explain how to adapt our RLLU PRF to output tables with
the “unique z” property. We consider our PRF over the frame Hn,n,|G|,|G| , so the data is
G n , we have n query trees T1 , . . . , Tn , and the output is an element of G. From each of our
chosen Ti , we then derive the different Ti,zi to be exactly the same decision tree, but have
a binary output which indicates whether the value which Ti would have output is zi .
      We now wish to show that this PRF has the hardness implying property above, i.e.,
                                                                  L
each function ϕv,x,y(r) should have |ϕ−1 (r) (z(r) )| ≤ | G | 10 . For this, let us assume that
                                               v,x,y
                                                                          √
| G | = ω ( L3 ), and recall that we only consider nodes v with L ≥ n.
      Again, each choice of v, x, y(r) defines a subcube (the free variables are the y(ℓ) , let us
denote them by w), and a set Q of | Q| = L queries (namely, we have one query for each
leaf in the left subtree of v). Consider the event, for some fixed w, that |ϕ−1 (ϕ(w))| >
      99                                                           L
| G | 100 L . Then, by the sphere-packing bound (since each 100      -data-Hamming-ball has size
           2                                  97
at most G 100 L points), there are at least G 100 L w′ in ϕ−1 (ϕ(w)) which are ≥ 100  L
                                                                                        -far from
each other (in data-Hamming-distance). Let W be such a large set containing those many
points distant from each other. From Theorem 6.10, applied with v = 10, we conclude
that every w′ , w′′ ∈ W has τ (w) ̸= τ (w′ ) (in fact they are 10
                                                               L
                                                                  -far-apart in query-Hamming-
distance, but we won’t use that here). Let V be the number of distinct leaves of the
                                                                                 97
decision-trees ( Tq )q∈Q , which are touched by the queries in W. Then G 100 L ≤ |W | ≤ V L ,
                97
and so V ≥ G 100 = ω ( L2 ) = ω (n), so in particular we have ω (n) leaves which are not
touched by the query trees on input w.
    For each such distinct leaf, touched by a decision-tree Tq on some input w′ ∈ W, the
output f (q, w′ ) is an independently-chosen elements of G. The condition that f (q, w′ ) =
f (q, w) forces these outputs to be some specified value, and the probability of this event
is hence | G |−ω (n) . This probability is low enough for us to union bound over the choice
of v, x, y(r) and w. And so the bad event never happens.


7.3   Non-adaptive data-structures: Brody and Larsen’s Lower-bounds
We cannot prove static data structure lower-bounds beyond the log |Q| barrier, not
even against non-adaptive data structures. The case is different in the dynamic setting.
Brody and Larsen [BL15] have shown, circa 2015, polynomial lower-bounds against dy-
namic data structures for reachability, against solutions where either (1) the queries are
non-adaptive, or (2) the updates are non-adaptive and memoryless. This result was


                                               52
later expanded upon in a couple of papers, also dealing with the non-adaptive case
[BBK18, LPP+ 24].
The lower-bound for non-adaptive queries. Brody and Larsen first prove a lower-bound
on the dynamic indexing problem, which they then reduce to dynamic reachability. In the
dynamic indexing problem, the goal is to store a set of n binary strings S̄ = (S1 , . . . , Sn ) ∈
({0, 1}n )n , together with an index j ∈ [n]. The sets cannot be changed but the index j can
be, so we have n updates possible, for changing j into each of the possible n values. There
are also n queries, and the table is defined by f (i, (S̄, j)) = Si,j , i.e. we output the j-th bit
of Si .
    The lower-bound is as follows: we will encode S̄ in its entirety by the contents of
some of the cells of E = E(S̄, 1), namely: (a) the cells probed by every possible query,
when run on E, and (b) the cells probed during every possible update of j, when run
on E (all updates are run on the same E, i.e. not in sequence). This totals n(tq + tu )w
bits. Notice that if we know the values of these cells of E, the addresses of the probed
cells can be deduced by running the query and update decision trees, answering probes
with the known contents. Furthermore, we can uniquely decode S̄: to obtain Si,j , we first
run update j to the desired value (we know all the cells involved), thus obtaining E(S̄, j),
and then run the i-th query (we also know all the cells involved because the query is
non-adaptive), to obtain Si,j . Hence n(tq + tu )w ≥ n2 , which proves the lower-bound
tq + tu ≥ wn .
    The claim that the addresses of the probed cells can be derived from the contents is
not true of relaxed solutions, however. The lower-bound argument in this case must
append also the locations (and not just the contents) of the updated cells; the length of the
encoding is then ntq w + ntu (w + log s), which is in the same order of magnitude under the
usual assumption that w = Θ(log s) (i.e. words are big enough to address the memory).
So a small change in the argument will make it valid against relaxed solutions.
    As usual, the proof appears to use specific properties of the indexing gadget, hence
on a first glance does not appear to be natural. What have we used about indexing, how-
ever? We used that S̄ can be uniquely determined by knowing B(S̄) = ( f (i, (S̄, j))i,j∈[n] ∈
       2
{0, 1}n . If f is a randomly chosen table, then the n2 bits of B(S̄) are chosen uniformly
                                                                                             2
and independently at random for each S̄. This random process is the same as tossing 2n
             2
balls into 2n bins (B(S̄) is the bin of S̄), and hence with probability 1 − o (1) the maximum
load of any bin is ≪ n2 . Hence we can append to the values of the cells 2 log n bits to
indicate which S̄ we are encoding, among the fewer than n2 choice of S̄ having the same
B(S̄). We get a marginally weaker lower-bound of n(tq + tu )w + 2 log n ≥ n2 , but now
we have a natural proof: the natural property is that for every choice of S̄, there are fewer
than n2 values of S̄′ with B(S̄) = B(S̄′ ). This is easily checkable by inspecting f , in time
polynomial in the size of f .
The lower-bound for non-adaptive, memoryless updates. Again the lower-bound for
reachability is by reduction, this time from the dynamic set disjointness problem. In this
problem, the task is to encode a pair of sets (S, T ) ∈ ({0, 1}n )2 , under bit-flip updates, and


                                                53
there is a single query q asking whether S ∩ T = ∅. A non-adaptive read-write decision-
tree is called memoryless if, whenever it changes the contents of a cell, the new value is a
function of the current value, i.e. it is independent of the contents of any other probed
cell.
     Again we have an encoding argument. We will encode any set S ∈ {0, 1}n as follows.
Recall that E(S, S′ ) ∈ ({0, 1}w )s denotes the encoding of the pair (S, S′ ). Let I (S) ⊆ [s] be
the addresses of the cells which were probed during by the query decision tree running on
E(S, [n] \ S) (this can be represented by the path traversed by the query tree, hence ≤ tq
bits). Let C (S) = E(S, ∅)| I (S) E1 (S, [n] \ S)| I (S) be the value of those cells in E(S, ∅) and
E(S, [n] \ S). We now claim that S can be decoded by knowing I (S) and C (S), from which
the lower-bound follows: | I (S)| + |C (S)| = tq (1 + 2w) ≥ n. The reason is because, for
any set S′′ , knowing E(S, ∅)| I (S) , we can compute E(S, S′′ )| I (S) , by running the updates
required to transform the second set from ∅ to S′′ : since the updates are memoryless,
we do not need to know any cell outside of I (S) in order to update the cells in I (S). We
then look at E(S, S′′ )| I (S) for all S′′ , and discard all S′′ for which this is different than
E(S, [n] \ S). The remaining S′′ must all be disjoint from S, since the output of the query
is the same for all such S′′ and [n] \ S. It follows that [n] \ S is the largest remaining S′′ , so
we have learned S.
     Again it is not obvious how to naturalize this argument, as it seems to depend on
properties very specific to disjointness. However, consider the map (S, S′ ) 7→ ψ(S, S′ ) =
I (S) E(S, ∅)| I (S) E(S, S′ )| I (S) we just looked at. Suppose that a certain function f (S, S′ )
has a solution with non-adaptive memoryless updates. The memoryless property ac-
tually implies that the inverse images ψ−1 (z) of this map form a rectangle partition of
the communication matrix of f ! Meaning, if ψ(S1 , S1′ ) = ψ(S2 , S2′ ) = z, then actually
ψ(S1 , S2′ ) = ψ(S2 , S1′ ) = z also. Indeed, since I = I (S1 ) = I (S2 ), E(S1 , ∅)| I = E(S2 , ∅)| I ,
and E(S1 , S1′ )| I = E(S2 , S2′ )| I , the updates from E(S1 , ∅) to E(S1 , S1′ ) and from E(S2 , ∅)
to E(S2 , S2′ ) will see identical cell contents in the I-cells, and change those contents in the
same way. Thus, since the updates are non-adaptive they will probe the same cells, which
have the same initial content, and since they are memoryless, they will make the same
changes (within I) when updating E(S1 , ∅) to E(S1 , S2′ ) and when updating E(S2 , ∅) into
E(S2 , S1′ ).
     It follows that f has a large 1-monochromatic rectangle, i.e. containing a fraction of
2 − tq (1+2w)
              of all the 1s of f . And, as we have seen in Section 5.1, the property of not
having a nearly-1-monochromatic rectangle, true of both disjointness and a random func-
tion, can be tested efficiently by Barman’s algorithm (Theorem 5.5). And we have hence
naturalized Brody and Larsen’s proof.
     Our PRF satisfies these properties because for any frame with a single query, the table
will be completely random. (In truth it is not fair to call it a PRF in this case, since there
is more randomness being used to generate the table, than the size of the table itself. The
principle remains that any distinguisher which looks only at a single row will necessarily
fail against our PRF.)



                                                  54
7.4    Semi-adaptive data-structures: Ko and Weinstein’s Lower-bounds
Given Brody and Larsen’s result, one way of looking at the open problem of proving nε
lower-bounds for dynamic data-structures is to see it as if the only issue missing is for
us to understand adaptivity. In this way, Ko and Weinstein [KW20] considered the case
of semi-adaptive data structures. Some technical considerations are necessary to properly
define what that means: the crucial observation is that we may assume, without loss of
generality, that the data structure is organized in two parts ({0, 1}w )s1 × ({0, 1}w )s2 as
follows: some part of the data structure contains the encoding E( x ) ∈ ({0, 1}w )s1 of the
initial data, which is read-only, so the updates are not allowed to write over this part, but
can only write in a distjoint set of specially-designated cells U ( E( x )) ∈ ({0, 1}w )s2 . For
this to be at all possible we must drop the history-independence requirement. Then, it is
not hard to see that this disjoint-data/updates assumption can be made without loss of
generality, up to a logarithmic-factor loss in tq and tu , which we don’t care about if we
are aiming for polynomial lower-bounds. Under this assumption, we may now impose
the following semi-adaptive constraint: every decision tree Tq associated with any query q
must first read the E( x ) cells, and only after read the U ( E( x )) cells. Meaning, on any root-
to-leaf path of Tq , there are some probes to the first s1 cells, followed by some probes to
the last s2 cells. So it is as if we had two adaptive stages, but no cross-adaptivity, meaning
once we learn some of the updates we cannot go back and read more cells in the E( x )
part.                                                                             √
    Ko and Weinstein [KW20] prove a lower-bound of max(tq , tu ) = Ω( n) for the dy-
namic set disjointness problem mentioned in the previous sub-section. In a follow-up
paper, Dvořák and Loff [DL20] have shown that the same technique actually yields a
lower-bound on any table (such as disjointness, or a random table) which has a large cor-
ruption bound21 . As mentioned at the end of Section 5.1, Barman’s algorithm can be used
to efficiently estimate this bound, and hence Ko and Weinstein’s technique also natural-
izes.
    The technique makes no assumption that the cells being updated are obtained by a de-
cision tree, and is applicable whenever updates change few cells (cf. Section 4.5 of [KW20],
on the arXiv version 1910.13543v1). Hence it applies to relaxed solutions.
    Again, our PRF satisfies the property because the lower-bound considers a frame with
a single query.


7.5    Chronogram + Cell Sampling
Building on the Chronogram method for proving lower-bounds against dynamic data struc-
tures, Larsen proved an Ωe (log2 n) lower-bound 22 for 2D Range Counting [Lar12a] and
Polynomial evaluation [Lar12b]. This is the highest known lower bound for Dynamic
Data Structures. However, there’s one caveat, the set of possible answers A is not Boolean,
  21 Under a product distribution, such as the uniform distribution.
  22 n is the dimension of the problem




                                                    55
but rather has a size of |A| = nΩ(1) . In an earlier work, Patrascu [Păt07] had shown an
Ωe (log2 n) lower bound, but for a problem where the set of possible answers A is super-
polynomial in n.
     Let us give the example of polynomial evaluation. Polynomial evaluation is the prob-
lem of storing a polynomial p x (y) = ∏in=1 (y − xi ) over a finite field F p , so here p denotes
a prime power. The data x ∈ Fnp is the roots of the polynomial p x , and the updates are
allowed to change the roots. So, in the corresponding frame, we have pn databases, and
the updates allow us to change any single coordinate to any value. There are |Q| = p
queries and |A| = p possible answers. For concreteness set p = n2 , but the proof works
for any p = nΩ(1) . Let P denote an arbitrary dynamic data-structure problem over this
frame, with table f .
     Suppose there exists a solution for P with storage size s, word size w, query time tq ,
and update time tu . We assume s = nO(1) and w = log s = O(log n). Larsen’s proof in
                                                        log2 n
[Lar12a] shows a lower-bound of tq = Ω( (log t w)(log(t w/ log p)) ).
                                                       u       u
    Recall that in the Chronogram method, we begin by considering the encoding E( x ) of an
arbitrary element x ∈ Fnp 23 . We then perform a sequence of updates, which are divided
into ℓ distinct epochs (U = Uℓ , . . . , U1 ). These epochs are defined such that the number of
updates in each epoch decreases geometrically. Specifically, let β = (tu w)2 = (log n)Θ(1) ,
24 and for the i-th epoch, we make n = βi updates. The total number of epochs is ℓ =
                                             i
                   log n
10 log β n = Θ ( log log n ).
 1

    As in the chronogram method, the partition Sℓ+1 , Sℓ , . . . , S1 of the memory cells [s]
(a random variable), is defined so that ℓ ∈ Si if cell ℓ was last written by an update
performed during epoch i. Locations that were not updated in any of the epochs are
assigned to Sℓ+1 .
    Following all these updates, we choose a random query q ∈ [ p]. Let P(q) be the
random variable representing the set of memory locations probed by the solution when
answering query q. The original Chronogram technique argued that for a 1 − o (1) fraction
of the updates, a random query needs to make at least Ω(1) reads from each color class.
That is, for all i ∈ [ℓ], EU,q [| P(q) ∩ Si |] = Ω(1).
    Larsen strengthened this claim, showing that the expected number of reads from each
Si must be significantly higher, specifically Ω     e (log n). Formally, for all epochs i ∈ [ℓ],
                                                                       !
                                                             log p
                                  E [| P(q) ∩ Si |] = Ω
                                  U,q                      log n sw
                                                                 log p
                                                                 i

    Since the total number of epochs is ℓ = logβ n, this strengthened claim directly leads
to an overall Ωe (log2 n) lower bound.
    The claim is proved by contradiction. Specifically, the existence of an epoch i with
                                                                          n
small expected | P(q) ∩ Si | will imply an impossible compression of F pi to fewer than
  23 In the chronogram write -up p was chosen to be 2
  24 as opposed to β = t
                           u w from [FS89].


                                                   56
ni log p bits. This part of the proof skillfully leverages ideas from Cell Sampling.

                                                                                                                 log p
Encoding (1) Suppose there is an epoch i ∈ [ℓ] such that EU,q [| P(q) ∩ Si |] = o ( log                              sw      ).
                                                                                                                  ni log p
                                    n
Let us abbreviate z = Ui ∈ F pi . Fix a choice of U −i = Uℓ , . . . , Ui+1 , Ui−1 , . . . , U1 such that,
                                                                log p
conditioned on U −i , EUi ,q [| P(q) ∩ Si |] ≤ o ( log              sw      ). By Markov’s inequality (applied
                                                                 ni log p
                            n
twice), some set Ûi ⊆ F pi , containing at least a half fraction of all updates, and some set
                                                                                              log p
Q1 containing at least 12 of all the queries, will have | P(q) ∩ Si | ≤ o ( log                    sw      ) for every
                                                                                                ni log p

z ∈ Ûi , q ∈ Q1 .
   Now cell sampling comes into play. For each z ∈ Ûi , by a probabilistic argument (see
                                                                   n log p      log p
Section 5.3), there exists a set of cells Cz ⊆ [s] of size |Cz | ≤ i 4w + o ( log sw ), and a
                                                                                                      ni log p

set of queries Q2 (z) ⊆ [ p] of size at least p1−o(1) , such that for every query q ∈ Q2 (z),
the decision tree for computing f (q, x (1) ) (where x (1) is the database after all updates,
including Ui = z) probes only cells in Cz .
    The natural property. Up to this point, the entire argument depends only on the
frame. Now we argue in a way which depends on the table. The lower-bound-implying
property is as follows. For every epoch i, every choice U −i of updates in other epochs, for
every z = Ui , and every subset Q′ with ni queries, knowing the answers A = ( f (q, z))q∈Q′
allows us to produce a (“small”) set Z = Z (i, U −i , A) of size | Z | ≤ po(ni ) such that z ∈ Z
(i.e., it gives an encoding of z up to o (ni log p) bits). We will argue later that this is a
natural property. In the case of polynomial evaluation, the property holds with | Z | = 1,
since, having fixed all of the roots except for the ni -many roots updated in the i-th epoch,
evaluating p x (y) on any ni points will further reveal the ni missing roots (i.e., z). For a
random function, it will still be true with slightly larger Z.
    Encoding (continued) So assume the table f has this property. We cannot simply
choose ni queries among Q2 (z) and list them as part of z’s encoding, because this would
                                                                                             √
already cost us ni log p bits. So we do a trick. We break the query set Q = [ p] into ℓ = p
                                                  √
contiguous blocks of (roughly) equal size ≈ p. Since |Q2 (z)| ≥ p1−o(1) , there exists
                                                        1
a “good” block such that Q2 (z) still has p 2 −o(1) ≥ ni queries within it. Let Q3 (z) be ni
queries within this good block. Because all the queries are in the same block, the encoding
of Q3 (z) is now cheaper: we saved 21 log p bits per query.
                                n
So, the encoding of z ∈ F pi proceeds as follows:
   • If z ̸∈ Ûi (it is “expensive”), we encode a bit ‘0’ followed by z itself, requiring 1 +
     ni log p bits.
   • If z ∈ Ûi , its encoding has three parts:

                                                     of the cells in Cz . The size is | E1 (z)| ≤
         1. E1 (z): Encodes thelocations and contents
                                        ni log p      log p
            |Cz |(w + log s) ≤             4w + o ( log n sw    )       (w + log s) = 1+4o(1) ni log p.
                                                          log p
                                                            i


                                                        57
                                                                                        S i −1
        2. E2 (z): Encodes the locations and contents of the cells in S<i =                 j=1 S j . The size
           is | E2 (z)| ≤ ∑ij− 1
                             =1 n j tu ( w + log s ) < 2β
                                                          i −1 t ( w + log s ) = o ( n ).
                                                                u                     i
                                                                                                   1
        3. E3 (z): Encodes the set of queries Q3 (z). The size is | E3 (z)| ≤                      2 log p +
                  √    1+ o (1)
           ni log p = 2 ni log n.
        4. The index of z in the set Z. The size here is o (ni log p).

                                              / Ûi is ( 87 + o (1))ni log p, which will contra-
    The expected length of the encoding for z ∈
                                                                    n
dict the information-theoretic lower bound for encoding z ∈ F pi .
    In the above encoding argument, we have never used that the cells which are modified
in each update are determined by way of a read-write decision tree. One again, the only
property which we use of the updates is that the number of modified cells is at most tu .
Hence the entire argument also applies to relaxed solutions.

Decoding The decoding algorithm proceeds as follows: If the first bit of the encoding
is ‘0’, it directly outputs z. Otherwise, it reconstructs a partial memory state M′ from
the encoded Cz and S>i information, assuming the memory state before epoch i (Mi−1 ) is
known (this is independent of z, hence allowed). By simulating the queries in Q3 (z) on
M′ , the decoder recovers the answers to these queries. Since Q3 (z) is chosen to uniquely
determine z, the original z can then be recovered. Now all that is left to verify is the
largeness and constructivity of the property.
    Recall that the property correspondimg to this proof technique is as follows, For each
i ∈ [logβ n] and for each U −i and each Q′ ⊆ Q of size ni , we consider the map ϕi,U −i ,Q′ :
z 7→ ( f (q, z))q∈Q′ . We want that |ϕ−1 (z)| = po(ni ) .
    For every epoch i, every choice U −i of updates in other epochs, for every z = Ui ,
and every subset Q′ with ni queries, knowing the answers A = ( f (q, z))q∈Q′ allows us to
produce a (“small”) set Z = Z (i, U −i , A) of size | Z | ≤ po(ni ) such that z ∈ Z (i.e., it gives
an encoding of z up to o (ni log p) bits). We will argue later that this is a natural property.

Constructivity: We can compute check if a table f has has this property by going over
all (i, U −i , Q′ ) and doing the following, compute the ϕi,U −i ,Q′ (z), bucket them based on
the output and check if the size each of bucket is at most po(ni ) . So the running time of this
                           logβ n
algorithms is at most ∑i=1 pn−ni (|Q|      ni            n
                                     ni ) p = O (( p |Q|) ) = p
                                                                O(n) when |Q| = p. Hence it

is polynomial in the size of the table pn |Q|.

Largeness: Given a random table f , for a fixed choice of (i, U −i , Q′ ) and the map ϕi,U −i ,Q′
                          n      n
is a random map from F pi → F pi . Bounding the maximum size of the pre-image reduces
to the follows balls and bins problem where have r balls and r bin and each ball is thrown
into a random bin independently and quantity that we are interested in is the maximum
load which is size of the bin with most number of balls.

                                                    58
                                                                k
    The probability that a particular bin ≥ k balls is (kr ) 1r ≤ k!1 . The probability that there
exists a bin with at least k balls ≤ k!r = 2log r−ω (k log k) . Therefore for k = Ω(log r/ log log r ),
this quantity becomes r −Ω(1) .
    This tells us that whp the map ϕi,U −i ,Q′ is k to 1 for k = O(ni log p/ log ni ).
Our candidate PRF. The proof is analogous to the proof that our PRF fools the natural
property of Section 7.2. In this setting, p plays the role of | G | and ni plays the role of L.
Otherwise the argument is identical.


7.6    Chronogram + Weak One-way Simulation
Even after the breakthrough results of Larsen, for several years no technique was known
for proving super-logarithmic lower-bounds against dynamic data-structure problems
with Boolean answers. Eventually Larsen, Weinstein and Yu [LWY18] developed a tech-
nique which we are calling the Chronogram + weak One-way simulation technique. It com-
bines the Chronogram and Cell Sampling technique, as in Section 7.5, with an additional in-
gredient called the Peak-to-Average lemma. This technique is used to prove a lower bound
   e (log3/2 n) on the update and query time for the following dynamic data structure
of Ω
problems (all having boolean answers):

(1) Boolean Polynomial Evaluation [LWY18]

(2) Parity searching in Butterfly graphs [LWY18]

(3) 0-XOR in multiple butterflies [LY23]

    By reduction from the somewhat artificial problems (2) and (3), lower-bounds were
proven for the more natural problems of 2D rectangle stabbing, Range selection and
Range median [LWY18], and Dynamic Reachability [LY23].
    The lower-bounds for problems (1-3), themselves proceed by a series of reductions.
From each of the above dynamic data structure problems P we can define, via a chrono-
gram-type argument, a certain one-way communication problem, denoted GP         i (there will

be one such problem for each epoch i). One then shows that an efficient data structure for
P implies the existence of a one-way protocol which solves GPi with a large advantage
over random guessing. This part of the proof is technically difficult, but it ultimately
depends only on the frame, and applies to relaxed solutions, and so we will not describe
it in detail. The second part of the lower-bound proof proceeds by showing that, if the
table for the problem satisfies a certain property, the game GP    i cannot be solved with

large advantage, and this establishes the lower bound. Our task here will be to show how
this second part of the proof naturalizes, i.e., the property is constructive and holds for a
random table over the same frames.




                                                  59
The lower-bound for Boolean polynomial evaluation
We will overview the lower-bound for Boolean polynomial evaluation [LWY18], and after
we will say a few words on how it may be generalized to problems (2) and (3).

Frame and table. Boolean polynomial evaluation only differs from polynomial evalu-
ation (which we saw in Section 7.5) in that the field size p is assumed to be a power of
2, and each query q ∈ F p should output the last bit of the polynomial evaluation p x (q),
instead of the entire field element. Otherwise the frame is the same.

Chronogram Setup. We begin by assuming the existence of a solution that solves the
problem using worst-case update time tu and expected query time tq . The technique
initially follows the Chronogram method: we consider what happens to the data structure
as we make a sequence of random updates U = Uℓ . . . U1 in epochs of geometrically
decreasing sizes, followed by a random query q. To define the epochs, we split the n roots
                                                   log n
of p into sets Uℓ , . . . , U1 , for some ℓ = Θ( log log n ), so that Ui contains βi -many roots, with
β = (log n)Θ(1) . The bitlength of Ui is thus ni = βi log p.

The game GP  i . For each epoch i ∈ [ℓ], a one-round communication game G i is defined
                                                                               P
as follows. Alice gets all random updates U = Uℓ , . . . , U1 , while Bob gets the updates
in all but the i-th epoch (U −i ) and a random query q ∈ Q. Only a one-round message
from Alice to Bob is allowed, and, after receiving it, Bob is expected to output the correct
answer f (q, U ).

The advantage adv( Gip , C ). So far the setup is similar to Section 7.5. We can think of
that earlier result as a one-way protocol where the goal is for Bob to recover Ui entirely,
given Alice’s message. But now, instead, Bob wishes to output f (q, U ) for a randomly
chosen q. Already, in principle, this could be a lot easier. But furthermore, we do not
require that Bob is always correct. Instead, we want to study the “advantage”, namely
with how much probability over 1/2 can Bob can output the correct answer? Formally,
given a bound C on the number of bits sent from Alice to Bob and a one-way protocol π
which communicates at most C bits, if the output of π is correct with probability 1/2 + ϵ
(where the probability is over the choice of U and q), then the advantage of the protocol
           i , C ) = ϵ. The advantage of the game, adv( G i , C ), is defined as the largest
is advπ ( GP                                               P
advantage possible for any C-bit protocol π.

Weak One-way Simulation. A dynamic data structure lower bound is proven by ob-
taining a one-way protocol with bounded communication for the epoch game GP      i by us-

ing the dynamic data structure that solves problem P , and showing that this protocol has
high advantage. This part of the proof depends only on the frame of the problem P , and
is independent of the specific table f . Formally stated:


                                                 60
Theorem 7.1 (Weak One-way Simulation, see Theorem 1 in Section 4 of [LWY18]). Suppose
P admits a dynamic solution with worst-case update time tu and query time tq , satisfying tq (w ·
tu )O(1) ≤ n1/2 . Suppose we do a sequence Uℓ . . . U1 of n updates, where each epoch Ui does
ni = |Ui | = βi updates, with β = (w · tu ) a for some constant a ≥ 2. And suppose that these
updates are followed by a single random query q ∈ Q.
    Then there exists some epoch i ∈ [ℓ/2, ℓ] for which
                                                                       !!
                                                                  t
                                                  
                              i         n i                         q
                      adv GP    ,                    ≥ exp −Õ p          ,
                                  ( w · t u ) a −1               log n

where the Õ in the exponent hides polylog(w · tu ) factor.
    I.e., existence of a solution to P implies existence                   i with communica-
                                                         of a solution to GP
                                                   p
tion o (|Ui |), and advantage roughly exp(−tq / log n). (By choosing a appropriately we
                                    i|U |
can make the communication polylog    (n)
                                          for any polylog factor we would like.)
   This theorem is also true of relaxed solutions: the only assumption about the updates
which is used in the proof is that they only change tu cells, there is no requirement that
these cells are actually changed using a read-write decision tree.

Low Advantage via Quasi-independence. The lower bound is then completed by
showing that no one-way protocol for GP     i , which communicates o (|U |) bits, can have
                                                                         i
                              − ε
an advantage greater than n , for some ε > 0. Together with Theorem 7.1, this implies
that tq ≥ Ω̃((log n)3/2 ).
    This is the only part of the proof that depends on the problem’s table, and it can be
naturalized. By analyzing the proof in [LWY18], we will define a certain property of the
table, which we will call Γ-closeness to k-wise quasi-independence, which is enough to
carry out the lower bounds in that paper, and which can be shown to hold for random
tables. To cover the lower-bounds for problems (2) and (3), we will later extract a slightly
different property to the same effect.

Moment Norms. Given a random variable X = ( Xq )q∈Q ∈ [−1, 1]Q and a family F ⊆
Qk of multi-sets of size at most k, we define the F -moment norm denoted by ∥ X ∥1F as
follows                                                  
                                1
                     ∥ X ∥1F =     ·      ∑ E  ∏ Xqj  ∈ [0, 1]
                               |F | (q ,...,q
                                            1 )∈F
                                                k   j∈[k]


Γ-closeness to k-wise quasi-independence. Given a real valued random variable X =
( Xq )q∈Q , X and Γ ∈ [0, 1], X is said to be Γ-close to k-wise quasi-independence if
                                                                   
                               k      1
                        ∥ X ∥1Q =       k
                                          ·     ∑        E  ∏ Xi j  ≤ Γ
                                    |Q| (q1 ,...,qk )∈Qk     j∈[k]


                                                    61
The Property. Let z = (i, U −i ) denote the choice of an epoch i and a setting of all the
updates U −i outside of epoch i. Define the {−1, 1}|Q| -valued random variable X z =
(P (q, U ))q∈Q | U −i = z as the sequence of query answers obtained by uniformly picking
updates for the i-th epoch, Ui .25 The property we need for the proof is that, for every i,
for every z, X z is Γ-close to k-wise quasi-independence, where k = Θ(ni ) and Γ ≤ n−Ω(k) .

Upper bound on advantage. Let π be a protocol that sends a message m, and let χm ∈
{±1}Q be the set of Bob’s answers for different q if he receives message m. Let us suppose
that π achieves an advantage of ϵ. Then we have EUi [|⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ (Ui ) ⟩|] = 2ϵ|Q|, where
ψz (Ui ) = (P (q, U ))q∈Q is the vector of query answers for a given Ui and fixed U −i = z.

Claim 7.2. If the protocol π has advantage ϵ, i.e. EUi [|⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ (Ui ) ⟩|] = 2ϵ|Q|, then there
exists a message π̃ such that

   1. EUi [⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ (Ui ) ⟩|π (Ui ) = π̃ ] ≥ ϵ|Q|

   2. PrUi [π (Ui ) = π̃ ] ≥ | supp(π )|−1 ϵ

    (This follows via an averaging argument: we first restrictDto messages with
                                                                           E mass at
least | supp(π (Ui ))|−1 ε. In doing so the expected value of                                       ψz (Ui ), χπ (Ui )   restricted
such heavy messages still remains above ε|Q|. Therefore by averaging, there must be a
message which achieves this advantage.)
    Using this claim, we can upper-bound the advantage by considering the k-th moment
of the dot product ⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ̃ ⟩ for π̃ given by Claim 7.2.
                                                              !                          k

                  Ui
                                       k
                      E [⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ̃ ⟩ ] = E 
                                               Ui
                                                        ∑ P (q, Ui )χπ̃ (q)                    
                                                        q∈Q
                                                                                !          "                     #
                                                                    k                           k
                                           =        ∑           ∏ χπ̃ (q j )        E
                                                                                    Ui
                                                                                               ∏ P (q j , Ui )
                                               q1 ,...,qk ∈Q    j =1                           j =1
                                                                    "                  #
                                                                         k
                                           ≤        ∑          Ez       ∏ X z (q j )       ≤ Γ|Q|k
                                               q1 ,...,qk ∈Q X          j =1

    The last inequality follows from the property of the table that X z is Γ-close to k-wise
  25 Note that we are viewing the entries of the table as coming from −1, 1 by the standard transformation

of 0 7→ 1, 1 7→ −1.




                                                               62
quasi independence. By combining this with the claim, and assuming k is even, we get:

                    Γ|Q|k ≥ E [⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ̃ ⟩k ]
                              Ui

                           ≥ E[⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ̃ ⟩k |π (Ui ) = π̃ ] Pr[π (Ui ) = π̃ ]
                           ≥ E[⟨ψz (Ui ), χπ̃ ⟩|π (Ui ) = π̃ ]k Pr[π (Ui ) = π̃ ]
                                              ϵ
                           ≥ (ϵ|Q|)k ·
                                       | supp(π )|

Rearranging, we get an upper bound on the advantage:

                                   ϵ ≤ (Γ · |supp(π )|)1/(k+1)

Since the protocol is short, | supp(π )| ≤ 2o(|Ui |) = 2o(k) , and since Γ ≤ n−Ω(k) is small, the
advantage ϵ is ultimately ≤ n−Ω(1) , as intended.

Boolean Polynomial evaluation. In the case of polynomial evaluation, |Q| = p and n =
√
  p. The Boolean polynomial evaluation satisfies the property that the random variable
                                         ni                               −i
X is k-wise independent, with k = βi = log
 z
                                            p , for every choice z = (i, U ).


Independence vs Quasi-independence. Let us show that, if a random variable X ∈
{−1, +1}Q is k-wise independent, then it is Γ-close to k-wise independent for Γ =
      ) . For our choice of parameters we have Γ = n−Ω(k) , as desired.
   k k/2
( |Q|
    Observe that if X is indeed k-wise independent, we know that E[∏q∈S Xq ] = 0 for all
subsets S ⊆ Q of size at most k. Therefore, if the Xq are {−1, 1}-valued random variables,
the term corresponding to the tuple (q1 , . . . , qk ) survives and evaluates to 1 in absolute
value only if all indices in the tuple appear an even number of times.
    Therefore, the sum ∑(q1 ,...,qk )∈Qk | E[∏ j∈[k] Xq j ]| is upper bounded by the size of
the set {(q1 , . . . , qk )|each q j appears even number of times}. The size of this set is ≤
                                                                    k/2
|Q|k/2 (k/2)! ≤ (|Q|k)k/2 . Therefore Γ in this case is at most |Q|  k
                                                                          .

                                                      k
Constructivity. For each z = (i, U −i ), ∥ X z ∥1Q can be computed in time Õ(|Q|k · 2|Ui | ).
Since |Q| = nO(1) and k = ni ≤ n/ log n, this is 2O(|U |) . The number of possibilities for
z is O(2|U | ). Therefore, the property can be decided in time 2O(U ) , i.e., polynomial in the
size of the table.

Largeness. If the table is random, since each row is chosen independently, we have
independence across the coordinates of X z . These are not exactly unbiased. Let us show,
however, that with high probability over the choice of f , every z = (i, U −i ) and every


                                                 63
query q will result in the random variable Xqz (whose randomness is given by the random
choice of Ui ) having small bias.
      So fix some choice of z, q. Let k = ni be the degree of quasi-independence. The
                                         n
values ( Xqz (Ui ))Ui ∈ {−1, +1}2 i correspond to different entries in row q of the table
f , and these are all independent random bits. By the Chernoff bound, the probability that
                              1
| 21ni ∑Ui xqz (Ui )| is > 2− 4 ni is exp(−2ni /2 ). This is much less than the number of z and q,
so by a union bound this bad event never happens, and all tuples ( Xqz (Ui ))Ui have bias
      1
≤ 2− 4 n i .
   With this, we can analyze the total moment sum S = ∑q1 ,...,qk ∈Q | EUi [∏kj=1 X z (q j )]| by
partitioning the tuples:
   1. Even Counts: Tuples where every query appears an even number of times. As we
      have already seen, the number of such tuples is ≤ (|Q|k )k/2 , each contributing at
      most 1 to the sum.

   2. Odd/Mixed Counts: Tuples where at least one query q j∗ appears an odd number
      of times. Since each row of the table is picked independently in a random table,
      we have
           h   independence i    across the queries
                                                  h in the randomi variable            X z . Therefore,
                                                                                  1
      EUi ∏ j∈[k] X z (q j ) = EUi X z (q j∗ ) EUi ∏ j∈[k]\{ j∗ } X z (q j ) ≤ 2− 4 ni
                                             

                                                        1
   Combining these, we conclude that Γ = 2− 4 ni + ( |Q| ) = p−k/4 + ( |Q|
                                                      k k/2
                                                                           ) = n−Ω(k) ,
                                                                        k k/2

as desired.

Our PRF. As we have just seen, the property used in the proof is natural. We believe
that our PRF will fool it, and that this should follow from Theorem 6.10 as before, but we
have not been able to show this, yet.

The lower-bound against problems (2) and (3)
We do not wish to go into the technical details of problems (2) and (3). These problems
have the additional difficulty that it is not true, for just any choice of k queries, that the
outputs f (q1 , x ), . . . , f (qk , x ) are quasi-independent when x is chosen at random. How-
ever, it can be shown that there is a large family F ⊆ Qk of k-tuples of queries, such
that any tuple (q1 , . . . , qk ) ∈ F will give quasi-independent outputs f (q1 , x ), . . . , f (qk , x )
for random x. So the hardness-implying property for problem (2) will be that the ran-
dom variable X = f (q1 , x ), . . . , f (q|Q| , x ) ∈ {+1, −1}|Q| , which outputs all the queries
for a random x, has small ∥ X ∥1F for this particular family F . Problem (3) adds the ad-
ditional technical difficulty that f (q, x ) is no longer an unbiased bit (for every q and a
random x). To deal with this, the definition of X is changed so that Xq ∈ {−ε q , 1 − ε q },
where ε q = Prx [ f (q, x ) = 1] is the bias of query q. Under this transformation, we have
Ex [ Xq ] = 0 once again, and we can work with Xq as if it were unbiased. The proof then
proceeds similarly as for problem (2).

                                                   64
A     k-wise independent LDPC code
Theorem A.1. N (s, k, t) ≥ exp((1 − o (1)t) whenever s = ω (kt).

Proof. Suppose s ≥ c · kt for some c = ω (1). We choose a binary N × s matrix M by letting
p = st = ck
          1
            , and setting each entry of M to 1 with probability p.
   For a fixed j ∈ {1, . . . , k }, and for a fixed set J of j rows, the probability that a particular
column has Hamming weight 1 in the rows J is exactly
                                                                         
                                         j −1                           1
                             jp(1 − p)        > jp(1 − jp) > jp 1 −         .
                                                                        c

(On the last inequality we used j ≤ k.) Thus, the probability that no column has Hamming
weight 1 in the rows J is at most
                         s                                         
                         1                          1                      1
             1 − jp 1 −        ≤ exp − jps 1 −           = exp − jt 1 −         .
                         c                          c                      c

   Taking a union bound over all sets of j rows, the probability that there is a set J of j
rows that has no column with exactly one 1 is at most

                                 N j e− jt(1−1/c) = ( Ne−t(1−1/c) ) j .
                                                       −t(1−1/c)
    Summing over all j ≥ 1 this is at most 1−NeNe−t(1−1/c) which will be small provided that
N ≪ et(1−1/c) .
    The expected number of rows with exactly t ones is at least N/t so by Chernoff the
chance of seeing fewer than N/2t such rows is small. The output of our procedure, then, is
precisely the submatrix containing all rows of Hamming weight t. With high probability
this matrix will have at least N/2t ≥ exp((1 − o (1))t) rows.




                                                  65
Bibliography
[ACP08]     Alexandr Andoni, Dorian Croitoru, and Mihai Pătraşcu. Hardness of Nearest
            Neighbor under L-infinity. In Proceedings of the 49th FOCS, pages 424–433.
            IEEE, 2008.

[AHR98]     Stephen Alstrup, Thore Husfeldt, and Theis Rauhe. Marked ancestor prob-
            lems. In Proceedings of the 39th FOCS, pages 534–543. IEEE, 1998.

[Ajt88]     Miklós Ajtai. A lower bound for finding predecessors in Yao’s cell probe
            model. Combinatorica, 8(3):235–247, 1988.

[AS25]      Peyman Afshani and Nodari Sitchinava. A Cell Probe Lower Bound for the
            Predecessor Search Problem in PRAM. In Proceedings of the 36th SODA, pages
            3998–4008. SIAM, 2025.

[AV15]      Amirali Abdullah and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. A Directed Isoperimet-
            ric Inequality with application to Bregman Near Neighbor Lower Bounds. In
            Proceedings of the 47th STOC, pages 509–518. ACM, 2015.

[AW14]      Amir Abboud and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Popular conjectures imply
            strong lower bounds for dynamic problems. In Proceedings of the 55th FOCS,
            pages 434–443. IEEE, 2014.

[BAG01]     Amir M. Ben-Amram and Zvi Galil. A generalization of a lower bound tech-
            nique due to Fredman and Saks. Algorithmica, 30(1):34–66, 2001.

[Bar18]     Siddharth Barman. Approximating nash equilibria and dense subgraphs via
            an approximate version of carathéodory’s theorem. SIAM Journal on Comput-
            ing, 47(3):960–981, 2018.

[BBK18]     Joseph Boninger, Joshua Brody, and Owen Kephart. Non-Adaptive Data
            Structure Bounds for Dynamic Predecessor. In Proceedings of the 37th FSTTCS,
            pages 20:1–20:12. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.

[BCF+ 22]   Michael A. Bender, Alex Conway, Martı́n Farach-Colton, Hanna Komlós,
            William Kuszmaul, and Nicole Wein. Online List Labeling: Breaking the
            Log2 n Barrier. In Proceedings of the 63rd FOCS, pages 980–990. IEEE, 2022.

[BF02]      Paul Beame and Faith E. Fich. Optimal bounds for the predecessor problem
            and related problems. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 65(1):38–72,
            2002.

[BFGK24]    Michael A. Bender, Martı́n Farach-Colton, Michael T. Goodrich, and Hanna
            Komlós. History-independent dynamic partitioning: Operation-order pri-
            vacy in ordered data structures. Proc. ACM Manag. Data, 2(2):108, 2024.


                                          66
[BFS86]    László Babai, Peter Frankl, and János Simon. Complexity classes in commu-
           nication complexity theory (preliminary version). In Proceedings of the 27th
           FOCS, pages 337–347. IEEE, 1986.
[BGS75]    Theodore Baker, John Gill, and Robert Solovay. Relativizations of the p = ?np
           question. SIAM Journal on Computing, 4(4):431–442, 1975.
[BL15]     Joshua Brody and Kasper Green Larsen. Adapt or Die: Polynomial Lower
           Bounds for Non-Adaptive Dynamic Data Structures. Theory of Computing,
           11(19):471–489, 2015.
[BNS19]    Jan Van Den Brand, Danupon Nanongkai, and Thatchaphol Saranurak. Dy-
           namic matrix inverse: Improved algorithms and matching conditional lower
           bounds. In Proceedings of the 60th FOCS, pages 456–480. IEEE, 2019.
[BOR99]    Allan Borodin, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Yuval Rabani. Lower bounds for high
           dimensional nearest neighbor search and related problems. In Proceedings of
           the 31st STOC, pages 312–321. ACM, 1999.
[BR02]     Omer Barkol and Yuval Rabani. Tighter Lower Bounds for Nearest Neighbor
           Search and Related Problems in the Cell Probe Model. Journal of Computer
           and System Sciences, 64(4):873–896, 2002.
[BR17]     Andrej Bogdanov and Alon Rosen. Pseudorandom functions: Three decades
           later. In Yehuda Lindell, editor, Tutorials on the Foundations of Cryptography:
           Dedicated to Oded Goldreich, pages 79–158. Springer, 2017.
[CCGL03]   Amit Chakrabarti, Bernard Chazelle, Benjamin Gum, and Alexey Lvov. A
           Lower Bound on the Complexity of Approximate Nearest-Neighbor Search-
           ing on the Hamming Cube. In Discrete and Computational Geometry: The
           Goodman-Pollack Festschrift, pages 313–328. Springer, 2003.
[CJS13]    Raphaël Clifford, Markus Jalsenius, and Benjamin Sach. Tight Cell-Probe
           Bounds for Online Hamming Distance Computation. In Proceedings of the
           24th SODA, pages 664–674. SIAM, 2013.
[CJS16]    Raphaël Clifford, Markus Jalsenius, and Benjamin Sach. Cell-Probe Lower
           Bounds for Bit Stream Computation. In Proceedings of the 24th ESA, pages
           31:1–31:15. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.
[CKL18]    Diptarka Chakraborty, Lior Kamma, and Kasper Green Larsen. Tight cell
           probe bounds for succinct Boolean matrix-vector multiplication. In Proceed-
           ings of the 50th STOC, pages 1297–1306. ACM, 2018.
[CKLM18] Arkadev Chattopadhyay, Michal Koucký, Bruno Loff, and Sagnik
         Mukhopadhyay. Simulation beats richness: new data-structure lower
         bounds. In Proceedings of the 50th STOC, pages 1013–1020. ACM, 2018.

                                          67
[CP10]     Arkadev Chattopadhyay and Toniann Pitassi. The story of set disjointness.
           ACM SIGACT News, 41(3):59–85, 2010.

[CR10]     Amit Chakrabarti and Oded Regev. An Optimal Randomized Cell Probe
           Lower Bound for Approximate Nearest Neighbor Searching. SIAM Journal
           on Computing, 39(5):1919–1940, 2010.

[CW13]     Timothy M. Chan and Bryan T. Wilkinson. Adaptive and approximate or-
           thogonal range counting. In Proceedings of the 24th SODA, pages 241–251.
           SIAM, 2013.

[DGW19]    Zeev Dvir, Alexander Golovnev, and Omri Weinstein. Static data structure
           lower bounds imply rigidity. In Proceedings of the 51st STOC, pages 967–978.
           ACM, 2019.

[DL20]     Pavel Dvořák and Bruno Loff. Lower bounds for semi-adaptive data struc-
           tures via corruption. In Proceedings of the 40th FSTTCS, pages 20:1–20:15.
           Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.

[DMS03]    Ilya Dumer, Daniele Micciancio, and Madhu Sudan. Hardness of approxi-
           mating the minimum distance of a linear code. IEEE Transactions on Informa-
           tion Theory, 49(1):22–37, 2003.

[FS89]     Michael L. Fredman and Michael E. Saks. The cell probe complexity of dy-
           namic data structures. In Proceedings of the 21st STOC, pages 345–354. ACM,
           1989.

[GL16]     Allan Grønlund and Kasper Green Larsen. Towards Tight Lower Bounds
           for Range Reporting on the RAM. In Proceedings of the 43rd ICALP, pages
           92:1–92:12. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.

[GM07]     Anna Gál and Peter Bro Miltersen. The cell probe complexity of succinct data
           structures. Theoretical Computer Science, 379(3):405–417, 2007.

[HKNS15] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, Danupon Nanongkai, and
         Thatchaphol Saranurak. Unifying and Strengthening Hardness for Dynamic
         Problems via the Online Matrix-Vector Multiplication Conjecture. In Proceed-
         ings of the 47th STOC, pages 21–30. ACM, 2015.

[JMS04]    Joseph F. JáJá, Christian Worm Mortensen, and Qingmin Shi. Space-efficient
           and fast algorithms for multidimensional dominance reporting and counting.
           In Proceedings of the 15th ISAAC, pages 558–568. Springer, 2004.

[Joh87]    David S. Johnson. The np-completeness column: An ongoing guide. Journal
           of Algorithms, 8(2):285–303, 1987.



                                          68
[KN97]      Eyal Kushilevitz and Noam Nisan. Communication complexity. Cambridge
            University Press, 1997.

[KPI25]     Oliver Korten, Toniann Pitassi, and Russell Impagliazzo. Stronger cell probe
            lower bounds via local prgs. In Proceedings of the 66th FOCS. IEEE, 2025. To
            appear.

[KRW95]     Mauricio Karchmer, Ran Raz, and Avi Wigderson. Super-logarithmic depth
            lower bounds via the direct sum in communication complexity. Computa-
            tional Complexity, 5(3):191–204, 1995.

[KW20]      Young Kun Ko and Omri Weinstein. An adaptive step toward the multiphase
            conjecture. In Proceedings of the 61st FOCS, pages 752–761. IEEE, 2020.

[Lar12a]    Kasper Green Larsen. The cell probe complexity of dynamic range counting.
            In Proceedings of the 44th STOC, pages 85–94. ACM, 2012.

[Lar12b]    Kasper Green Larsen. Higher Cell Probe Lower Bounds for Evaluating Poly-
            nomials. In Proceedings of the 53rd FOCS, pages 293–301. IEEE, 2012.

[LLYZ23]    Tianxiao Li, Jingxun Liang, Huacheng Yu, and Renfei Zhou. Tight Cell-Probe
            Lower Bounds for Dynamic Succinct Dictionaries. In Proceedings of the 64th
            FOCS, pages 1842–1862. IEEE, 2023.

[LN18]      Kasper Green Larsen and Jesper Buus Nielsen. Yes, There is an Oblivious
            RAM Lower Bound! In Proceedings of the 38th CRYPTO, pages 523–542.
            Springer, 2018.

[LPP+ 24]   Kasper Green Larsen, Rasmus Pagh, Giuseppe Persiano, Toniann Pitassi,
            Kevin Yeo, and Or Zamir. Optimal Non-Adaptive Cell Probe Dictionaries
            and Hashing. In Proceedings of the 51st ICALP, pages 104:1–104:12. Schloss
            Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024.

[LPPS96]    Hanno Lefmann, Pavel Pudlák, and Petr Petr Savický. On sparse parity check
            matrices. In Proceedings of the 2nd COCOON, pages 41–49. Springer, 1996.

[LPY16]     Mingmou Liu, Xiaoyin Pan, and Yitong Yin. Randomized Approximate
            Nearest Neighbor Search with Limited Adaptivity. In Proceedings of the 28th
            SPAA, pages 23–33. ACM, 2016.

[LWY18]     Kasper Green Larsen, Omri Weinstein, and Huacheng Yu. Crossing the loga-
            rithmic barrier for dynamic Boolean data structure lower bounds. In Proceed-
            ings of the 50th STOC, pages 978–989. ACM, 2018.

[LY23]      Kasper Green Larsen and Huacheng Yu. Super-Logarithmic Lower Bounds
            for Dynamic Graph Problems. In Proceedings of the 64th FOCS, pages 1589–
            1604. IEEE, 2023.

                                          69
[Mil99]    Peter Bro Miltersen. Cell probe complexity - a survey. Advances in Data
           Structures Workshop, 19th FSTTCS, 1999.

[MNSW98] Peter Bro Miltersen, Noam Nisan, Shmuel Safra, and Avi Wigderson. On
         Data Structures and Asymmetric Communication Complexity. Journal of
         Computer and System Sciences, 57(1):37–49, 1998.

[Nav25]    Gonzalo Navarro. (Worst-Case) Optimal Adaptive Dynamic Bitvectors, 2025.
           arXiv:2405.15088.

[NT01]     Moni Naor and Vanessa Teague. Anti-persistence: history independent data
           structures. In Proceedings of the 33rd STOC, pages 492–501. ACM, 2001.

[Păt07]   Mihai Pătraşcu. Lower bounds for 2-dimensional range counting. In Proceed-
           ings of the 39th STOC, pages 40–46. ACM, 2007.

[Păt09]   Mihai Pătraşcu.   A Lower Bound for Succinct Rank Queries, 2009.
           arXiv:0907.1103.

[Păt10]   Mihai Pătraşcu. Towards polynomial lower bounds for dynamic problems.
           In Proceedings of the 42nd STOC, pages 603–610. ACM, 2010.

[PD06]     Mihai Pătraşcu and Erik D. Demaine. Logarithmic Lower Bounds in the Cell-
           Probe Model. SIAM Journal on Computing, 35(4):932–963, 2006.

[PT06a]    Mihai Pătraşcu and Mikkel Thorup. Higher Lower Bounds for Near-
           Neighbor and Further Rich Problems. In Proceedings of the 47th FOCS, pages
           646–654. IEEE, 2006.

[PT06b]    Mihai Pătraşcu and Mikkel Thorup. Time-space trade-offs for predecessor
           search. In Proceedings of the 38th STOC, pages 232–240. ACM, 2006.

[PT07]     Mihai Pătraşcu and Mikkel Thorup. Randomization does not help searching
           predecessors. In Proceedings of the 18th SODA, pages 555–564. SIAM, 2007.

[PT11]     Mihai Pătraşcu and Mikkel Thorup. Don’t rush into a union: take time to
           find your roots. In Proceedings of the 43rd STOC, pages 559–568. ACM, 2011.

[PTW10]    Rina Panigrahy, Kunal Talwar, and Udi Wieder. Lower Bounds on Near
           Neighbor Search via Metric Expansion. In Proceedings of the 51st FOCS, pages
           805–814. IEEE, 2010.

[PY22]     Giuseppe Persiano and Kevin Yeo. Limits of Preprocessing for Single-Server
           PIR. In Proceedings of the 33rd SODA, pages 2522–2548. SIAM, 2022.

[Raz92]    Alexander A. Razborov. On the distributional complexity of disjointness.
           Theoretical Computer Science, 106(2):385–390, 1992.

                                         70
[RR94]    Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. In Proceedings of
          the 26th STOC, pages 204–213. ACM, 1994.

[RR18]    Sivaramakrishnan Natarajan Ramamoorthy and Anup Rao. Lower Bounds
          on Non-Adaptive Data Structures Maintaining Sets of Numbers, from Sun-
          flowers. In Proceedings of the 33rd CCC, pages 27:1–27:16. Schloss Dagstuhl –
          Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018.

[RR20]    Sivaramakrishnan Natarajan Ramamoorthy and Cyrus Rashtchian. Equiva-
          lence of Systematic Linear Data Structures and Matrix Rigidity. In Proceedings
          of the 11th ITCS, pages 35:1–35:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für In-
          formatik, 2020.

[RY20]    Anup Rao and Amir Yehudayoff. Communication complexity: and applications.
          Cambridge University Press, 2020.

[RZ04]    Liam Roditty and Uri Zwick. A fully dynamic reachability algorithm for
          directed graphs with an almost linear update time. In Proceedings of the 36th
          STOC, pages 184–191. ACM, 2004.

[San04]   Piotr Sankowski. Dynamic transitive closure via dynamic matrix inverse. In
          Proceedings of the 45th FOCS, pages 509–517. IEEE, 2004.

[SV08]    Pranab Sen and Srinivasan Venkatesh. Lower bounds for predecessor search-
          ing in the cell probe model. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(3):364–
          385, 2008.

[SW19]    Sandip Sinha and Omri Weinstein. Local decodability of the Burrows-
          Wheeler transform. In Proceedings of the 51st STOC, pages 744–755. ACM,
          2019.

[Vio19]   Emanuele Viola. Lower bounds for data structures with space close to maxi-
          mum imply circuit lower bounds. Theory of Computing, 15(1):1–9, 2019.

[Wil85]   Dan E. Willard. New data structures for orthogonal range queries. SIAM
          Journal on Computing, 14(1):232–253, 1985.

[WY14]    Yaoyu Wang and Yitong Yin. Certificates in Data Structures. In Proceedings of
          the 41st ICALP, pages 1039–1050. Springer, 2014.

[Yao78]   Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. Should tables be sorted? In Proceedings of the 19th
          FOCS, pages 22–27. IEEE, 1978.

[Yin16]   Yitong Yin. Simple Average-Case Lower Bounds for Approximate Near-
          Neighbor from Isoperimetric Inequalities. In Proceedings of the 43rd ICALP,
          pages 84:1–84:13. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016.


                                          71
