A strongly polynomial algorithm for linear programs with
     at most two non-zero entries per row or column

Daniel Dadush1 , Zhuan Khye Koh1 , Bento Natura2 , Neil Olver3 , and László A. Végh3
           1 Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
            2 University of California, Berkeley, USA and Georgia Tech, USA
                  3 London School of Economics and Political Science, UK



                                           November 13, 2023


                                                    Abstract
        We give a strongly polynomial algorithm for minimum cost generalized flow, and hence for opti-
    mizing any linear program with at most two non-zero entries per row, or at most two non-zero entries
    per column. Primal and dual feasibility were shown by Megiddo (SICOMP ’83) and Végh (MOR ’17)
    respectively. Our result can be viewed as progress towards understanding whether all linear programs
    can be solved in strongly polynomial time, also referred to as Smale’s 9th problem.
        Our approach is based on the recent primal-dual interior point method (IPM) due to Allamigeon,
    Dadush, Loho, Natura and Végh (FOCS ’22). The number of iterations needed by the IPM is bounded,
    up to a polynomial factor in the number of inequalities, by the straight line complexity of the central
    path. Roughly speaking, this is the minimum number of pieces of any piecewise linear curve that
    multiplicatively approximates the central path.
        As our main contribution, we show that the straight line complexity of any minimum cost generalized
    flow instance is polynomial in the number of arcs and vertices. By applying a reduction of Hochbaum
    (ORL ’04), the same bound applies to any linear program with at most two non-zeros per column or
    per row.
        To be able to run the IPM, one requires a suitable initial point. For this purpose, we develop a novel
    multistage approach, where each stage can be solved in strongly polynomial time given the result of
    the previous stage. Beyond this, substantial work is needed to ensure that the bit complexity of each
    iterate remains bounded during the execution of the algorithm. For this purpose, we show that one
    can maintain a representation of the iterates as a low complexity convex combination of vertices. Our
    approach is black-box and can be applied to any log-barrier path following method.
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                                  1
    1.1 Background and previous work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          1
    1.2 The Subspace Layered Least Squares Interior Point Method and straight line complexity .                   3
    1.3 Computational models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        4
    1.4 Our contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5
         1.4.1 Straight-line complexity bound for generalized flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             5
         1.4.2 Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
         1.4.3 Implementation in the Turing model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8

2   Preliminaries                                                                                                  9
    2.1 Straight line complexity and circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       10
    2.2 Reducing 2VPI LPs to generalized flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          11

3   Straight line complexity in terms of the circuit imbalance measure                                            11

4   Minimum-cost generalized flow                                                                                 13
    4.1 Reduction to the generalized circulation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          14
    4.2 Simple functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14
    4.3 Some flow-related definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       15
    4.4 SLC bounds via domination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         17
    4.5 Path domination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
    4.6 Weak domination bounds for non-conservative objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               20
    4.7 Dominating simple conservative objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          22
    4.8 Strong domination bounds for non-conservative objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             26
        4.8.1 Dominating objects of path type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           27
        4.8.2 Dominating objects of mixed type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            27
        4.8.3 Dominating objects of cycle type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          28

5   Initialization for generalized flows                                                                          29

6   Background on interior point methods                                                                          31
    6.1 A stronger version of the SLLS IPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        33
    6.2 Straight-line complexity of a subspace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        34

7   An initialization framework for general Linear Programs                                                       34
    7.1 High level description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      35
    7.2 The algorithm and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        36
         7.2.1 Stage I, Strict conic feasibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    36
         7.2.2 Stage II, From strict conic feasibility to analytic centers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38
         7.2.3 Stage III, From analytic centers to optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         39
    7.3 SLC preserving subspace operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          41

8   A strongly polynomial rounding procedure                                                                      42

A Omitted proofs                                                                                                  51

B An Implementation of the SLLS IPM with Strongly Polynomial Iterations                                           53
  B.1 Predictor-Corrector Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           53
  B.2 Subspace Layered Least Squares Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            54
  B.3 The Subspace LLS IPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          57
  B.4 Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       57
  B.5 Iteration Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        60
  B.6 Computing Steps in Strongly Polynomial Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               61
  B.7 A strongly polynomial singular value approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                63
1     Introduction
We consider linear programming (LP) in the following primal-dual form:

                                    min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩              max ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩
                                     A𝑥 = 𝑏              A⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐                                  (LP)
                                       𝑥 ≥ 0𝑛 ,                 𝑠 ≥ 0𝑛 ,

where A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , 𝑏 ∈ R𝑚 , 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 , and rk(A) = 𝑚. Our focus is on LP algorithms that find exact primal
and dual optimal solutions, or conclude infeasibility or unboundedness. We say that the dual progam is
a two variable per inequality (2VPI) linear program if every row of A⊤ includes at most two nonzero entries.
In such a case, we refer to the pair of LPs as a 2VPI primal-dual pair.
    The first polynomial-time algorithms were the ellipsoid method by Khachiyan in 1979 [Kha79] and
interior point methods, introduced by Karmarkar in 1984 [Kar84]. However, it remains an outstanding
open question to find a strongly polynomial algorithm for linear programming. The question was listed by
the Fields medalist Smale as one of the most prominent mathematical challenges for the 21st century
[Sma98]. In such an algorithm, only poly(𝑛) basic arithmetic operations and comparisons are allowed,
and the algorithm uses polynomial space.
    The notion of strongly polynomial algorithms was first formally introduced by Megiddo [Meg83],
under the term ‘genuinely polynomial’. The same paper gave an algorithm for two variable per inequality
feasibility systems, that is, for the dual feasibility problem in (LP) when all rows of A⊤ have at most two
nonzero entries. The corresponding primal feasibility problem can be reduced to the maximum generalized
flow problem. For this, the first strongly polynomial algorithm was given by Végh [Vég17], followed by
a faster and simpler algorithm by Olver and Végh [OV20]. The minimum-cost generalized flow problem is
the dual of a 2VPI LP, where the two nonzero entries in each column of A are a −1 entry and a positive
entry. As discussed below, this naturally corresponds to a network flow model with multipliers on the
arcs. As shown in [Hoc04], all 2VPI LPs are reducible to a dual of a minimum-cost generalized flow
problem. The existence of a strongly polynomial algorithm for this problem has been a longstanding
open question, mentioned e.g. in [AC91, CM94a, CM94b, GPT91, HN94, NPT92, Way02, Vég17, OV20].
Our main result resolves this question.
Theorem 1.1. There is a strongly polynomial algorithm for the minimum-cost generalized flow problem, and for
two variable per inequality primal-dual pairs.

1.1   Background and previous work
Strongly polynomial algorithms for well-conditioned LPs. In a seminal, Fulkerson-prize winning
paper [Tar85], Tardos obtained the first strongly polynomial algorithm for minimum-cost circulations.
A particularly important technique in this paper was variable fixing: by solving an approximate version
of the LP with rounded costs, one can deduce that a certain variable is at the lower or upper capacity
bound in an optimal solution.
    Towards general LP, Tardos [Tar86] extended this approach to obtain a strongly polynomial algorithm
for ‘combinatorial LPs’. More precisely, for (LP) with an integer constraint matrix A ∈ Z𝑚×𝑛 , this algo-
rithm runs in poly(𝑛, log ΔA ) iterations, where ΔA is the maximum subdeterminant of A. The running
time is independent of 𝑏 and 𝑐. In particular, this bound is strongly polynomial if all entries of A are at
most poly(𝑛), such as for multicommodity flows and other combinatorial problems. Using an interior
point approach discussed below, Vavasis and Ye [VY96] obtained an algorithm with poly(𝑛, log 𝜒¯ A ) arith-
metic operations, where 𝜒¯ A is the Dikin–Stewart–Todd condition number of the matrix A. For integer
matrices, 𝜒¯ A = 𝑂(𝑛ΔA ), thus, this strengthens Tardos’s result. A similar dependence, using a black-box
approach extending Tardos’s work [Tar86] was obtained by Dadush, Natura, and Végh [DNV20]. Fur-
ther, Dadush, Huiberts, Natura, and Végh [DHNV23] strengthened this dependence to poly(𝑛, log 𝜒¯ A      ∗
                                                                                                          ),
where 𝜒¯ A is the optimized value of 𝜒¯ A under column rescalings.
         ∗



Prior results on 2VPI and generalized flows. 2VPI LPs are a natural class of LP that does not fall
into the above ‘well-conditioned’ classes: even 𝜒¯ A
                                                   ∗
                                                     may be unbounded for the constraint matrix. At the
same time, they form an interesting intermediate class, as it is easy to see that solving an arbitrary LP is
reducible to solving one with at most three nonzero entries per row in A⊤ .
    For finding a feasible solution to a 2VPI system, Megiddo’s [Meg83] approach relied on parametric
search. A faster parametric search algorithm was given by Cohen and Megiddo [CM94b]. Hochbaum and


                                                     1
Naor [HN94] used an efficient Fourier–Motzkin elimination to obtain what is still the fastest deterministic
approach. Dadush, Koh, Natura, and Végh [DKNV22] used a variant of the discrete Newton method.
Recently, Karczmarz [Kar22] gave an improved randomized strongly polynomial algorithm, also using
parametric search.
    Consider now monotone 2VPI (M2VPI) systems, where each inequality has at most one positive and
at most one negative entry. If such an LP is bounded, then there exists unique pointwise minimal and
a unique pointwise maximal solution. Already the algorithm in [Meg83] can be used to find these
solutions. As noted by Adler and Cosares [AC91], an M2VPI linear program is strongly polynomially
solvable if 𝑏 ≥ 0 or 𝑏 ≤ 0. Norton, Plotkin, and Tardos [NPT92] gave a strongly polynomial algorithm
for a constant number of nonzero demands.
    The generalized flow problem is (after normalization) the dual of the M2VPI problem. In this
problem, we are given a directed graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) with node demands 𝑏 𝑖 , 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 and arc costs 𝑐 𝑒 and
gain factors 𝛾𝑒 > 0 for 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸. While traversing the arc 𝑒 = (𝑖, 𝑗), the flow value 𝑥 𝑒 gets multiplied to 𝛾𝑒 𝑥 𝑒 .
In the minimum-cost generalized flow problem, we need to exactly satisfy all node demands at a minimum
cost. The maximum generalized flow problem is the special case when the objective is to maximize the net
flow reaching a special sink node 𝑡.
    This is a fundamental network optimization model that traces back to Kantorovich’s 1939 paper
[Kan39] introducing linear programming. Generalized flow networks can be used to model transporta-
tion of a commodity through a network with leakage, or conversions between various equities in financial
networks, as well as generalized assignment problems. We refer the reader to [AMO93, Chapter 15] for
further applications.
    Goldberg, Plotkin, and Tardos [GPT91] gave the first weakly polynomial combinatorial algorithm for
the maximum generalized flow problem. This was followed by a significant number of further such
algorithms, such as [CM94a, GJO97, Rad04, RW09, TW98, Way02], see further references in [OV20].
In particular, [CM94a] gave a strongly polynomial approximation scheme, i.e., a strongly polynomial
algorithm that achieves a fixed fraction of the optimum flow value in a capacitated generalized flow
network. The strongly polynomial algorithms by Végh [Vég17] and Olver and Végh [OV20] rely on the
variable fixing technique, however, in a new, ‘continuous’ scaling framework. While the original LP can
be ill-conditioned, variable fixing is still possible, since the dual solutions can be used to ‘relabel’ the
flow to make it ‘locally’ amenable to classical network flow arguments.
    However, relabelling heavily relies on the special cost function of the flow maximization problem, and
does not seem to be extendable to the minimum-cost version. For solving the minimum-cost generalized
flow problem, the only known (weakly polynomial) combinatorial approach is the ratio-circuit cancelling
algorithm by Wayne [Way02]. The fastest previous weakly polynomial algorithms can be obtained using
interior point methods; an early such example is by Vaidya [Vai89]. Daitch and Spielman [DS08], and
Lee and Sidford [LS14] gave fast algorithms for obtaining an additive 𝜀-approximation; however, such
approximation cannot be used to obtain exact optimal solutions. We also note that the latter results only
apply for lossy flows, i.e., with gain factors 𝛾𝑒 ≤ 1.

Interior Point Methods and their limitations Interior point methods (IPMs) give the fastest current
weakly polynomial algorithms for general LP, see [CLS19, vdB20, vdBLSS20, JSWZ21] as well as for special
classes such as minimum-cost circulations [CKL+ 22, BCK+ 23] and multicommodity flows [vdBZ23].
They are also potent approach in the context of strongly polynomial computability, and form the basis
of our result.
    The algorithms discussed next fall into the class of primal-dual path following algorithms.     A key
concept here is the central path, the algebraic curve formed by minimizers of ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ − 𝜇 𝑛𝑖=1 log(𝑥 𝑖 ) for
                                                                                            Í
𝜇 > 0. As 𝜇 → 0, the limit of the central path is an optimal solution. Path following methods maintain
iterates in a certain neighborhood of the central path while geometrically decreasing 𝜇, and thus, the
optimality gap. The logarithmic barrier function above can be replaced by more general barrier functions.
The affine scaling step is a standard way to find a movement direction. This can be interpreted as a least
square computation in the local norm induced by the Hessian of the logarithmic barrier function.
    Layered least squares (LLS) IPMs were introduced in the influential work of Vavasis and Ye [VY96]. The
LLS step in the Vavasis–Ye algorithm decomposes the variables into different layers based on the values
of the current iterate. The step direction is determined as a sequence of least squares computations
that prioritizes decreasing variables at lower layers. Roughly speaking, such steps enable to traverse
arbitrarily long but relatively straight segments of the central path in a single iteration. Combinatorial
progress is measured by crossover events, where two variables get reordered consistently with their order
in the limit optimal solution. This is very different from the variable fixing technique prevalent in the


                                                        2
combinatorial approaches discussed above. In particular, while we can infer the occurrence of a new
crossover event within a certain number of iterations, the argument only shows existence and we cannot
identify the participating variables. The condition number 𝜒¯ A appearing in the running time is a bound
on the norms of oblique projections.
     This led to a line of research on improved combinatorial IPMs [MMT98, MT03, MT05, LMT09]. The
paper [DHNV23] revealed that 𝜒¯ A is closely related to the circuit imbalance measure 𝜅 A that bounds the
maximum ratio of two nonzero entries of an elementary vector in the kernel of A. Moreover, they
obtained an LLS algorithm invariant under column rescaling, thus improving the dependence to the best
𝜅 ∗A value achievable under column rescalings.
     The above results may raise hopes to finding a strongly polynomial IPM. However, the papers by
Allamigeon, Benchimol, Gaubert, and Joswig [ABGJ18], Allamigeon, Gaubert, and Vandame [AGV22],
and Zong, Lee, and Yue [ZLY23] yield a surprising negative answer. By analyzing the tropical limits of
linear programs, these papers exhibit parametric families of LPs such that for suitably large parameter
values, no path-following method can be strongly polynomial. This was first shown for the standard
logarithmic barrier [ABGJ18], and later for arbitrary self-concordant barriers [AGV22].

1.2   The Subspace Layered Least Squares Interior Point Method and straight line
      complexity
The primal central path has a natural dual counterpart. The primal-dual central path point (𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠 cp (𝜇))
is the unique pair of primal and dual feasible solutions to (LP) such that 𝑥 𝑖 (𝜇)𝑠 𝑖 (𝜇) = 𝜇 for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛.
                                                                             cp     cp

Thus, the duality gap between 𝑥 (𝜇) and 𝑠 (𝜇) is 𝑛𝜇.
                                  cp         cp

    The lower bounds in [ABGJ18, AGV22] are ultimately based on the following insight. The trajectory
of any path following argument is a piecewise linear curve in the neighborhood of the central path; the
number of pieces correspond to the number of iterations. Thus, a lower bound on the number of any
piecewise linear curve in the neighborhood provides a lower bound on the number of iterations. For the
examples in these papers, exponential lower bounds are shown.
    The recent result by Allamigeon, Dadush, Loho, Natura, and Végh [ADL+ 23] complements these
negative results by a positive algorithmic bound. Namely, they provide an IPM whose number of
iterates matches such a lower bound within a strongly polynomial factor. Let us elaborate on the lower
bound.
    Assume (LP) is feasible and bounded with optimum value 𝑣★. Given 𝑔 ≥ 0, we denote by

                         𝒫𝑔 B {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 : A𝑥 = 𝑏 , 𝑥 ≥ 0 , ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ ≤ 𝑣★ + 𝑔} ,
                                                                                                                       (1)
                        𝒟 𝑔 B {𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 : ∃𝑦 ∈ R𝑚 A⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐 , 𝑠 ≥ 0 , ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩ ≥ 𝑣★ − 𝑔}

the feasible sublevel sets. They correspond to the sets of the primal and dual feasible points (𝑥, 𝑠) with
objective value within 𝑔 from the optimum 𝑣★, respectively.
   Assuming that (LP) has strictly feasible primal and dual solutions, the max-central path is defined as
the parametric curve 𝑔 ↦→ 𝑧 𝔪 (𝑔) B (𝑥 𝔪 (𝑔), 𝑠 𝔪 (𝑔)) ∈ R2𝑛
                                                          + , where

                𝑥𝔪
                 𝑖 (𝑔) B max{𝑥 𝑖 : 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫𝑔 }         and     𝑠 𝑖𝔪 (𝑔) B max{𝑠 𝑖 : 𝑠 ∈ 𝒟 𝑔 } ,        ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] .         (2)

The max-central path can be seen as a combinatorial proxy to the central path. In particular, for
𝑔 = 𝑛𝜇, 𝑥 cp (𝜇) ∈ 𝒫𝑔 and 𝑠 cp (𝜇) ∈ 𝒟 𝑔 , and it is easy to see that 𝑥 𝔪 (𝑔)/𝑛 ≤ 𝑥 cp (𝜇) ≤ 𝑥 𝔪 (𝑔) and
𝑠 𝔪 (𝑔)/𝑛 ≤ 𝑠 cp (𝜇) ≤ 𝑠 𝔪 (𝑔).
     For each 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛, the function 𝑔 ↦→ 𝑥 𝔪
                                             𝑖
                                               (𝑔) is a piecewise linear concave function. It corresponds to
trajectory of the shadow simplex algorithm that interpolates between the objective functions ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ and
−𝑥 𝑖 . The breakpoints correspond to basic feasible solutions, and therefore the number of linear pieces is
at most the number of vertices, that is, at most 2𝑛 . We will use the following definition.1
Definition 1.2. Let 𝑓 : R+ → R+ be a function and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). The straight line complexity of 𝑓 with
respect to 𝜂, denoted SLC𝜂 ( 𝑓 ), is the infimum number of pieces of a continuous piecewise linear function
ℎ : R+ → R+ where 𝜂 𝑓 ≤ ℎ ≤ 𝑓 .
    The number of iterations in the Subspace Layered Least Squares (SLLS) IPM in [ADL+ 23] can be bounded
by the total straight line complexity of the (primal) max-central path curves.2
  1We remark that our convention on the parameter 𝜂 differs from [ADL+ 23], which uses (1 − 𝜃) 𝑓 ≤ ℎ ≤ 𝑓 instead.
  2The condition on the starting point asserts that it is near the central path; 𝑥 ◦ 𝑠 denotes the Hadamard product.



                                                               3
Theorem 1.3 ([ADL+ 23]). There is an interior-point method that given an instance of (LP) and strictly feasible
solutions 𝑥, 𝑠 > 0 such that ∥ 𝑛𝑥◦𝑠
                               ⟨𝑥,𝑠⟩
                                     − 1𝑛 ∥ ≤ 𝛽 for a fixed 0 < 𝛽 < 1/6, finds a pair of primal and dual optimal
solutions in
                                                              𝑛
                                                                            !
                                                  √       𝑛
                                                          Õ
                                      𝑂 min 𝑛 log                       𝔪
                                                                SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝑖 )                                  (3)
                                          𝜂∈(0,1]         𝜂
                                                           𝑖=1

many iterations.
    The SLLS IPM requires at most a 𝑂(𝑛    ˜ 1.5 ) factor more iterations than any path-following IPM for any
self-concordant barrier function. This is because it can be shown that each SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪  𝑖
                                                                                         ) gives a lower bound
on the number of piecewise linear segments traversing a corresponding wide neighborhood. Moreover,
as noted above, SLC1 (𝑥 𝔪 𝑖
                            ) ≤ 2𝑛 , thus, the number of iterations is always at most singly exponential.
    We note that the theorem could be equivalently written in terms of the dual straight line complexities.
The equivalence of these can be shown using arguments from [ADL+ 23]. Further, we note that the
neighborhood parameter 𝜂 is not important for the overall bound. It is not difficult to show that for
0 < 𝜂 < 𝜂′ < 1, SLC𝜂′ ( 𝑓 ) = 𝑂(log(1/𝜂)/log(1/𝜂′)) SLC𝜂 ( 𝑓 ); we do not include the proof.
    According to Theorem 1.3, the number of iterations of SLLS boils down to estimating straight-line
complexities of the variables. Note that this is a purely combinatorial question about understanding the
structure of univariate piecewise linear functions 𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                                            (𝑔).
    We also note that the SLLS algorithm does not have access to approximations of the max-central path
curves attaining the minimum. Rather, the algorithm exploits the special ‘polarized’ structure of a piece
of the central path with a straight line in the neighborhood.

1.3   Computational models
There are multiple related, yet distinct notions of a strongly polynomial computational model. Smale’s
question was posed in the Blum–Shub–Smale (BSS) real model of computation [BSS89]. In this model, the
input can be given by arbitrary real numbers, and one step may compute a rational polynomial function of
the previously computed quantities with real coefficients, or make comparisons between two quantities.
In the more restrictive real RAM model, one can perform a sequence of elementary arithmetic operations
(+, −, ×, /) and comparisons (≥) on real numbers. In this paper, we say that an algorithm is polynomial
in the real RAM model if the number of elementary arithmetic operations and comparisons is bounded
polynomially in the dimension of the input; in the case of LP, this is 𝐾 = 𝑛 × 𝑚 + 𝑛 + 𝑚.
    We now turn to the Turing model. Consider a problem where the input is given by 𝐾 integers;
for LP, the input (A, 𝑏, 𝑐) is described by 𝐾 = 2(𝑛 × 𝑚 + 𝑛 + 𝑚) integers representing the rational
entires. An algorithm is strongly polynomial in the Turing model (see [GLS88]), if it only performs poly(𝐾)
(in the LP case, this means poly(𝑚, 𝑛)) elementary arithmetic operations and comparisons as in the
real model. Additionally, the bit-complexity of the numbers during the computations must remain
polynomially bounded in the encoding length of the input. Equivalently, the algorithm must be PSPACE.
The model has an ambiguity regarding how divisions can be implemented, see discussion of variants
in [GLS88, Section 1.3]. The results of this paper work with the most restricted setting: we maintain
                                                                                        𝑝 𝑝′
rational representations (𝑝, 𝑞) of all numbers during the computation, and division 𝑞 / 𝑞′ corresponds to
computing the representation (𝑝𝑞 ′ , 𝑝 ′ 𝑞).
    While a strongly polynomial algorithm in the Turing model implies a polynomial algorithm in the real
RAM model, the converse is not necessarily the case: enforcing PSPACE may be challenging. For example,
Gaussian elimination needs to be done carefully to keep the sizes of numbers under control, see [Edm67]
and [GLS88, Section 1.4]. The LLS interior point methods are (strongly) polynomial in the real RAM
model whenever log( 𝜒¯ A ) = poly(𝑛), yet we are not aware of any strongly polynomial implementation
of such algorithms in the Turing model prior to this work. The situation is even worse regarding the
SLLS IPM algorithm in [ADL+ 23]. The special SLLS step requires an (approximate) singular value
decomposition, and the algorithm used in the paper also relies on squareroot computations. Hence, it is
                                                                   √
only strongly polynomial in the extended real model (+, −, ×, /, .)
    In the weakly polynomial model, i.e., when running time dependence on the total encoding length is
allowed, the bit complexity of the algorithms can be controlled by approximately solving linear systems
and roundings. In recent work, Ghadiri, Peng, and Vempala [GPV23] developed general tools that
enable to keep the bit complexity of recent fast IPMs under control. However, these techniques are not
applicable in the strongly polynomial model. In particular, it requires estimates on parameters such
as the total bit length of the input or the condition number of the matrix. They also require rounding


                                                       4
to a fixed number of bits depending on such numerical parameters; in the most stringent definition of
strongly polynomial, this cannot be done.
    We note that the algorithms presented in this paper are fully deterministic.

1.4     Our contributions
We prove Theorem 1.1, i.e., give a strongly polynomial algorithm for the minimum-cost generalized
flow problem by showing that the total number of iterations of the SLLS IPM by [ADL+ 23] is strongly
polynomially bounded, and that the SLLS IPM can be implemented in strongly polynomial time in the
Turing model. Our result has three main ingredients:
  (1) Straight line complexity bound: We establish in Theorem 4.1 a strongly polynomial bound SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                      𝑒 )=
      𝑂(𝑛𝑚) on the straight line complexities of the variables in the minimum-cost generalized flow
      problem, with 𝜂 = Ω(1/(𝑚 2 𝑛)), where 𝑚 is the number of arcs and 𝑛 is the number of nodes of the
      graph. This bound applies for the uncapacitated version of the problem as described above; if in
      addition arcs have capacities, the bound becomes 𝑂(𝑚 2 ).
  (2) Initialization: IPMs require a strictly feasible and well centered starting point (𝑥 0 , 𝑠 0 ), even though
      a strictly feasible (or even a feasible) solution may not exist. We present a careful initialization
      scheme that solves Linear Programs in three stages, and preserves the straight line complexity
      bounds.
  (3) Implementation in the Turing model: We show that the bit-length of the computations can be controlled
      in a model using only basic arithmetic operations and comparisons. Further, we show that the
      square-root computations in [ADL+ 23] can be avoided.

The straight line complexity is established via a combinatorial argument using structural properties of
generalized flows. In contrast, the initialization and implementation tasks are applicable for general LP,
and can be seen as a direct strengthening of the result in [ADL+ 23]. We now elaborate on each of these
parts, and highlight the main technical ideas.

1.4.1   Straight-line complexity bound for generalized flows
Theorem 1.3 enables to bound the number of iterations in SLLS by bounding the straight-line complexities
SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
        𝑖
          ) for a suitable 𝜂 > 0. In the first step, we reduce this to an even more concrete combinatorial
question of circuit covers as explained next.

Circuit covers. For the purposes of analyzing straight-line complexities, we can assume that a pair of
primal and dual optimal solutions ( 𝑥,      ¯ 𝑠¯ ) to (LP) is provided.
      For any vector ℎ ∈ ker(A), with ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0 we can define the function 𝑥¯ ℎ (𝑔) : R+ → R+𝑛 by moving
from 𝑥¯ in the direction of ℎ; this is called the ℎ-curve from 𝑥.    ¯ Namely, we define 𝑥¯ ℎ (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ + 𝛼(𝑔)ℎ, where
                                          ℎ
𝛼(𝑔) is chosen maximally so that 𝑥¯ (𝑔) is feasible, and has cost at most 𝑔 larger than the cost of 𝑥.              ¯ For
every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], the 𝑖-th coordinate 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) can easily be seen to be a piecewise linear concave function with
two pieces, the first with slope ℎ 𝑖 /⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ and the second constant.
      Given ℎ, ℎ ′ ∈ ker(A), ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ , ⟨𝑐, ℎ ′⟩ ≥ 0, 𝛼 > 0 and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], we say that ℎ 𝛼-dominates ℎ ′ on 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] if
𝑥¯ 𝑖 (𝑔) ≥ 𝛼 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) for all 𝑔 ≥ 0.
   ℎ              ′


      In the linear space ker(A), an elementary vector is a support minimal nonzero vector, and the support
of an elementary vector is called a circuit. Note that the latter coincides with the notion of circuits of the
linear matroid of A; each circuit corresponds to a one-dimensional subspace of elementary vectors. We
let ℰ(A) denote the set of all elementary vectors.
      Given an optimal solution 𝑥,    ¯ let us consider the augmentations from 𝑥¯ by an elementary vector
ℎ. Noting that 𝑥¯ ℎ (𝑔) is invariant under rescaling ℎ to 𝛼ℎ for 𝛼 > 0, this gives one function per
circuit. For any coordinate 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], let us now consider the pointwise maximum at the 𝑖-th coordinate
𝑥ˆ 𝑖 (𝑔) = max{ 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) : ℎ ∈ ℰ(A)}. This is a piecewise linear function, but is not concave. Note also that the
number of pieces can be exponential. Nevertheless, using standard circuit decomposition techniques, it
is not difficult to show that 𝑥ˆ 𝑖 (𝑔) approximates 𝑥 𝔪     𝑖
                                                              (𝑔) up to a factor 𝑛: 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                      𝑖
                                                                                        (𝑔)/𝑛 ≤ 𝑥ˆ 𝑖 (𝑔) ≤ 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                             𝑖
                                                                                                               (𝑔).
      Our strategy to obtain SLC bounds is by constructing circuit covers. Given a primal optimal solution
𝑥,
 ¯ an index 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝛼 > 0, we say that a set of vectors 𝑆 ⊆ ker(A) is an 𝛼-circuit cover of 𝑖 with respect
to 𝑥¯ if for every ℎ ′ ∈ ℰ(A), there is a ℎ ∈ 𝑆 that 𝛼-dominates ℎ ′ on 𝑖. Then, the piecewise-linear function



                                                           5
𝑥¯ 𝑖𝑆 (𝑔) = max{ 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) : ℎ ∈ 𝑆} satisfies 𝛼𝑥 𝔪
                                                 𝑖
                                                   (𝑔)/𝑛 ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑖𝑆 (𝑔) ≤ 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                         𝑖
                                                                           (𝑔). The upper convex envelope of this
function has at most |𝑆| + 1 linear pieces, and consequently, SLC𝛼/𝑛 (𝑥 𝔪        𝑖
                                                                                   ) ≤ |𝑆| + 1.
    As a simple demonstration of this technique, in Section 3 we give a simple straight-line complexity
bound in terms of 𝜅 A , the circuit imbalance of A. This is defined as the maximum absolute value of the
ratio of two nonzero entries of an elementary vector in ℰ(A). In particular, it is known that 𝜅A = 1 if and
only if there exists a totally unimodular matrix B such that ker(A) = ker(B). The LLS IPM algorithms
such as [VY96] and [DHNV23] run in time poly(𝑛, log 𝜅 A ). We refer the reader to the survey [ENV22]
for background and more applications of circuit imbalances.
    Whereas the results in [ADL+ 23] together with [VY96] already imply a poly(𝑛, log 𝜅 A ) bound on the
straight line complexity, we give simple direct bounds using the circuit cover approach. For each circuit,
we identify a ‘combinatorial signature’ comprising two critical indices. We select an ‘undominated’ family
of signatures and pick a single circuit for each signature. These circuits will then 1/(𝑛𝜅2A )-dominate
all other circuits. In fact, using that the straight line complexities are invariant under column scaling
(Lemma 2.2), we can replace the 𝜅 A dependence by 𝜅★A dependence, the optimal circuit imbalance
achievable under column scaling.

Circuit covers for generalized flows. We primarily work with minimum-cost generalized flow in its
capacitated form, where arcs may have capacities, and all demands are zero; this reduction yields only
𝑛 capacitated arcs when starting from the demand form. The circuits in this version of the generalized
flow problem correspond to simple combinatorial structures: namely, a circuit either corresponds to a
conservative directed cycle, where the product of the gain factors is one, or a ‘bicycle’, namely, a flow
generating cycle connected by a path to a flow absorbing cycle. The latter are cycles where the product
of the gain factors is greater and less than one, respectively. These structures played a fundamental
role in all prior works on generalized flows, see e.g., [GPT91, Way02, Vég17, OV20], as well as for 2VPI
algorithms, e.g., [Meg83, CM94b, DKNV22, Kar22].
    We construct a circuit cover of size 𝑂(𝑚𝑛) to bound the straight line complexity of the variables in
the generalized flow problem. Similarly to the 𝜅A bound discussed above, we associate a combinatorial
signature with each circuit that forms the basis of the cover. However, we need a much more careful
construction to obtain this cover. In particular, the cover will not consist of circuits but more complicated
objects.
    The basis of our construction is path domination. Let us fix two nodes 𝑠 and 𝑡 in the graph. We
demonstrate a small collection of 𝑠-𝑡 walks that “dominate” the collection of all 𝑠-𝑡 paths in a certain
sense. The general cover will be constructed by combining such walks and extending this argument. We
now highlight the main ideas of path domination.
    Consider an 𝑠–𝑡 walk 𝑊; this induces an 𝑠–𝑡 flow 𝑥¯ 𝑊 on the walk. We define the function 𝑓®𝑊 : R2+ →
R+ such that 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑟) denotes the maximum amount of flow that can be sent from 𝑠 to 𝑡 if there are 𝑟
units available at 𝑠, each step of the walk satisfies the capacity bound, and the cost incurred in any step
of the walk is at most 𝜆. This corresponds to a certain maximal scaling of 𝑥¯ 𝑊 . (This scaling may have
total cost larger than 𝜆, and moreover since an arc of the graph can be used multiple times, it may also
violate arc capacities; but as long as the walk is 𝑛-recurrent, meaning it uses each edge at most 𝑛 times,
scaling down by 𝑛𝑚 will yield such a feasible and cheap flow.) There are two possible bottleneck arcs
that prevent a larger scaling of 𝑥¯ 𝑊 from being used: a cost bottleneck arc 𝑒c where 𝑐 𝑒c 𝑥¯ 𝑊
                                                                                              𝑒c is maximal, and
a flow bottleneck arc 𝑒f where 𝑥¯ 𝑊
                                  𝑒f /𝑢 𝑒 f
                                            is maximal, where 𝑐 𝑒 and 𝑢 𝑒 denote the cost and   capacity of arc 𝑒,
respectively. We associate the combinatorial signature (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯) or (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻) with 𝑊, where ⪯ means
that 𝑒c precedes or equals 𝑒f on the walk 𝑊, and ≻ means that 𝑒f precedes 𝑒c .
    We say that the 𝑠-𝑡 walk 𝑊 ′ dominates 𝑊, if 𝑓®𝑊 ′ ≥ 𝑓®𝑊 . Our goal in this context is to show that
there is a small family of 𝑠-𝑡 walks that dominates all 𝑠-𝑡 paths. The key insight is the following path
monotonicity property: consider a path 𝑃 with signature (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯), and take the subpath 𝑄 of 𝑃 starting
with 𝑒c and ending in 𝑒f . Let 𝑄 ′ be the highest gain path (i.e., one that maximizes the product of gain
factors) starting with 𝑒c and ending in 𝑒f whose cost bottleneck is 𝑒c and flow bottleneck is 𝑒f . After
replacing 𝑄 by 𝑄 ′ in 𝑃, the obtained walk 𝑃 ′ will dominate 𝑃. Moreover, if the signature changes, then
the flow bottleneck of 𝑃 ′ remains 𝑒f′ = 𝑒f , and the cost bottleneck 𝑒c′ will be on the part of 𝑃 ′ after 𝑒f . An
analogous replacement can be made for the signature type (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻). Starting from any path 𝑃, using
a sequence of such operations, we can reach a walk 𝑊 whose subpath between the bottleneck arcs is
already highest gain in the above sense.
    Denoting the number of finite capacity arcs by 𝑚,     ¯ this argument enables to show the existence of a
𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)¯ sized family of 𝑛-recurrent 𝑠–𝑡 walks that dominate all 𝑠–𝑡 paths. The family is constructed by


                                                        6
fixing the signature, and from each signature, selecting the best walk for the three segments defined by
𝑠, 𝑡, and the two bottleneck arcs, such that each segment is highest gain subject to recurrence bounds
and not having other bottlenecks.
    Once we have this path domination result, we can use this to demonstrate domination of more
complicated collections of objects with small dominating sets, and eventually all circuits. For instance: it
easily follows that there is a small collection of 𝑠-𝑠 walks with the property that for any flow-generating
cycle 𝐶 containing 𝑠, there is a walk 𝑅 in this collection that dominates 𝐶, in the sense that for every
choice of cost bound 𝜆 ∈ R+ , at least as much excess can be created using 𝑅 than 𝐶. From this, by
“composing” dominating sets for cycles and paths, we obtain a small dominating set for the collection of
“simple flow-generating objects at 𝑡” consisting of a flow-generating cycles along with a path from this
cycle to 𝑡.

1.4.2   Initialization
A strongly polynomial straight line complexity bound implies a strongly polynomial iteration bound of
the SLLS IPM method; however, it requires an initial point (𝑥 0 , 𝑠 0 ) ∈ 𝒫++ × 𝒟++ near the central path.
Such a point may not even exist; in fact, the primal or dual programs in (LP) may be infeasible. Whereas
one could use the combinatorial algorithms to decide primal [OV20] and dual [HN94] feasibility, these
algorithms do not directly yield strictly feasible solutions (which may again not exist).
    The situation is analogous to Simplex, where Stage I can be used to find a feasible solution by solving
an auxiliary LP. Various initialization methods have been developed for IPMs, but none of these is directly
applicable for our purposes: only solving auxiliary systems with small straight line complexity, while
remaining in the strongly polynomial model.
    A common initialization technique is the self-dual homogenous formulation [YTM94]. However,
writing the self-dual formulation of a generalized flow LP results in a more complicated problem and it
is not clear if the straight line complexity admits a similar bound. (Note also that in the simpler case of
(standard) network flows, the constraint matrix is totally unimodular, while the combined matrix does
not have this property.)
    We present two initialization methods. Our first approach in Section 5 uses a ‘big-𝑀’ method, as in
[VY96]. Let us create a negative copy of each variable with a large penalty cost. That is, one can replace
the primal system using variables (𝑥, 𝑥 ′ , 𝑥 ′′) ∈ R3𝑛 in the form

              min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ + 𝑀 ⟨1𝑛 , 𝑥 ′⟩   s.t.   A𝑥 − A𝑥 ′ = 𝑏 ,    𝑥 + 𝑥 ′′ = 2𝑀1𝑛 ,    𝑥, 𝑥 ′ , 𝑥 ′′ ≥ 0 .       (4)

Here, 𝑥 ′ represents a negative copy of each variable and 𝑥 ′′ corresponds to a slack variable for the box
constraint 0 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 2𝑀1𝑛 . Such a system, along with its dual, is easy to initialize for sufficiently large
𝑀. Moreover, the constraint matrix remains ‘nice’, e.g., it can be still interpreted as a (capacitated)
generalized flow problem, where the 𝑥 ′ variables correspond to expensive reverse arcs. As long as there
exists a pair of primal and dual optimal solutions (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★) to (LP) with ∥𝑥★ ∥ ∞ , ∥𝑠 ★ ∥ ∞ < 𝑀1𝑛 , then these
will also be optimal solutions to the extended formulation.
    However, finding a suitable large 𝑀 becomes challenging. In [VY96], such a bound is derived based
on 𝜒¯ A . This is hard to compute in general; one could use a repeated guessing of this condition number,
but this would lead to a log log 𝜒¯ A running time dependence. Bounds on the norms of optimal solutions
are routinely derived using bit-complexity arguments, see e.g. [GLS88]; however, this is also not possible
in the strongly polynomial model.
    In Section 5, we use the deterministic combinatorial algorithms of e.g., [OV20] and [HN94] to solve
up to 𝑛 primal and dual feasibility problems to first obtain maximum support primal and dual solutions
available. We then reduce the problem to a system with a pair of strictly positive primal and dual
solutions. The reduction is achieved by deleting some variables and projecting out some others. In
the generalized flow problem, these amount to graphical operations of deletions and contractions, and
thus preserve the generalized flow structure. Given the strictly positive primal and dual solutions ( 𝑥,        ˆ 𝑠ˆ ),
choosing 𝑀 larger than ⟨ 𝑥,                                         ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) guarantees that ∥𝑥★ ∥ ∞ , ∥𝑠 ★ ∥ ∞ < 𝑀1𝑛
                          ˆ 𝑠ˆ ⟩ divided by the smallest entry of ( 𝑥,
for any pair of primal and dual optimal solutions.
   Whereas the above approach can implement the big-𝑀 method, it is only applicable to the particular
minimum-cost generalized flow setting as it requires feasibility solvers. Also, it needs to solve 2𝑛 systems
as preprocessing. In Section 7, we develop a more principled, multistage initialization strategy that is
applicable to general LP, preserves straight line complexity, and only requires solving four IPM problems.
Since we will need to solve different LPs derived from (LP), one needs to clarify what ‘preserving straight


                                                          7
line complexity’ means. We define SLC𝜂 (A) as the maximum value of SLC(𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                                                                ) for any variable 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]
                                                                                                    𝑚
                                                                                      side 𝑏 ∈ R and
in any LP of the form (LP) with constraint matrix A, but taking any possible right hand                
                                                                                       A −A 0𝑚×𝑛
cost 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 . All our auxiliary LPs will have SLC bounded by SLC𝜂 (B), where B =                         is
                                                                                      I𝑛 0𝑛×𝑛      I𝑛
the matrix also used in the big-M formulation (4).
    Our strategy can be interpreted as a facial reduction strategy, where we carefully fix or project out
variables that yield an equivalent LP to the original one, and where strictly feasible primal and dual
solutions in fact exist. Throughout the process, the solutions from a previous stage provide a starting
point near the central path.

1.4.3   Implementation in the Turing model
As discussed in Section 1.3, to obtain a strongly polynomial algorithm in the Turing model, one needs
to avoid the square-root computations in [ADL+ 23], and also devise a new rounding approach, as
the previous ones rely on bit-complexity information and rounding that are not implementable in the
strongly polynomial model.
    In Appendix B, we present a version of the SLLS IPM only using basic arithmetic operations and
comparisons, and where every iteration can be carried out in strongly polynomial time. Theorem 6.10
presents the version of Theorem 1.3 proved here. For the sake of strong polynomiality and simplicity, the
IPM is slower by a factor of 𝑛 in terms of iteration count when compared to Theorem 1.3. This additional
factor is immaterial for our general results, as we do not aim to optimize the running times. At a technical
level, the slowdown in the above IPM is entirely due to the use of a strongly polynomial 2𝑂(𝑛) -approximate
singular value decomposition (SVD) that we present in Appendix B.7. This SVD algorithm is very simple:
it corresponds to a single Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization applied to a suitable permutation of the
columns of the input matrix. By using more sophisticated strongly polynomial SVD algorithms, such as
the randomized SVD by Diakonikolas, Tzamos and Kane [DTK23] or a recent deterministic “bicriteria”
SVD of Dadush and Ramachandran [DR24], this additional factor of 𝑛 can be removed. These algorithms
are relatively complicated , and thus, for the sake of being self contained and easily verifiable, we prefer
to rely on a weaker SVD subroutine in the present paper.
     The second main ingredient is a general strongly polynomial technique to keep the bit-complexity of
all iterations polynomially bounded in the input encoding length. This technique is not particular to the
SLLS algorithm but can be used for any path-following method. The main subroutine takes an iterate
(𝑥, 𝑠) in the central path neighborhood, and computes (𝑥,   ˜ 𝑠˜ ) that is in a slightly larger neighborhood, may
have slightly worse optimality gap, but its size is polynomially bounded in the input encoding length.
     To argue about the encoding length, we ‘anchor’ the point ( 𝑥,       ˜ 𝑠˜ ) to vertices of the primal and dual
polytopes. In strongly polynomial time, we can write a Minkowski–Weyl decomposition of 𝑥 and 𝑠 using
vertices and extreme rays. However, we cannot simply round the coefficients. In particular, it is possible
that 𝑥 is written as a ‘highly unstable’ convex combination of primal and dual vertices such that either
⟨𝑣, 𝑢⟩ < ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /2𝑛 or ⟨𝑣, 𝑢⟩ < 2𝑛 ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ for each pair of primal and dual vertices (𝑣, 𝑢). We proceed in two
stages. First, we try to find a value 𝜇★ ≈ ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /𝑛 such that 𝜇★ has small encoding length. This is easy
as long as the combination contains primal and dual vertices (𝑣, 𝑢) with ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /2𝑛 ≤ ⟨𝑣, 𝑢⟩ ≤ 2𝑛 ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩.
In the ‘highly unstable’ situation as above, it turns out that the direction from (𝑥, 𝑠) pointing towards
a pair of primal and dual vertices (𝑣, 𝑢) with much better gap is a very good movement direction of
the IPM. Hence, we can replace (𝑥, 𝑠) during the rounding step by a much better iterate that is also
numerically more stable. In the second stage, we add a cost bound to our feasible region according to
𝜇★. On this bounded polytope, we can now find a Minkowski–Weyl decomposition and simply round
the coefficients. The guarantees of this rounding are based on the near-monotonocity property of the
central path.

Organization. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces some necessary
background, in particular, regarding straight line complexity and circuits. Section 2.1 proves the straight
line complexity bound in terms of the circuit imbalance 𝜅 A . Section 4 analyzes the straight line complexity
of minimum cost generalized flows. Section 5 gives the simpler initialization method for generalized
flows, using existing feasibility solvers. Section 6 introduces some necessary concepts and results for
interior point methods. Section 7 presents the general initialization procedure, starting with a high level
overview. Section 8 describes the rounding procedure needed to control the bit-complexity. Appendix B
describes a variant of the SLLS IPM needed for our purposes, with a simple new SVD procedure in
Section B.7.


                                                        8
2    Preliminaries
Notation. We let R++ denote the set of positive reals, and R+ the set of nonnegative reals; similarly
for Z++ , Z+ , Q++ and Q+ . For 𝑛 ∈ N, we let [𝑛] B {1, 2, . . . , 𝑛}. We let 0𝑛 , 1𝑛 ∈ R𝑛 denote the all 0s
and all 1s vectors, respectively. For 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , we let supp(𝑥) ⊆ [𝑛] denote its support. For 𝛼 ∈ R, we let
𝛼 + = max{𝛼, 0} and 𝛼 − = max{−𝛼, 0}; for a vector 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , we use 𝑥 + and 𝑥 − coordinatewise.               We let
supp+ (𝑥) = supp(𝑥 + ) and supp− (𝑥) = supp(𝑥 − ). For functions 𝑓𝑖 : R𝑛 → R𝑚 , 𝑖 ∈ ℐ, we let 𝑖∈ℐ 𝑓𝑖 denote
                                                                                                     Ô
the pointwise maximum.
    We let ker(A) denote the kernel of the matrix A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 . The standard inner product of the two
vectors 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 is denoted as ⟨𝑥, 𝑦⟩ = 𝑥 ⊤ 𝑦. For 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 , we let 𝑥 ◦ 𝑦 = (𝑥 1 𝑦1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 𝑦𝑛 ) denote the
                                   𝑛
Hadamard-product, and if 𝑦 ∈ R++     , we let 𝑥/𝑦 = (𝑥1 /𝑦1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 /𝑦𝑛 ).
    We let
                 𝒫 B {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 | A𝑥 = 𝑏, 𝑥 ≥ 0} , 𝒟 B {𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 | ∃𝑦 : A⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐 , 𝑠 ≥ 0}
                                                                                       𝑛                     𝑛
denote the primal and dual feasible regions of (LP). We let 𝒫++ B 𝒫 ∩ R++                  and 𝒟++ B 𝒟 ∩ R++
denote the strictly feasible regions. Interior point methods require 𝒫++ , 𝒟++ ≠ ∅. We do not make this
assumption in general. In Section 7, we show how one can use a sequence of reductions to simpler IPM
problems to first either find a suitable initial point (𝑥 0 , 𝑠 0 ), or conclude infeasibility or unboundedness
of the input LP.

The sublevel sets. Assume 𝒫, 𝒟 ≠ ∅, in which case (LP) admits a pair of primal and dual optimal
solutions ( 𝑥,
            ¯ 𝑦,
               ¯ 𝑠¯ ) with optimum value ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩          ¯ = 𝑣★. Recall that this holds precisely if these two
                                                ¯ = ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩
solutions are complementary: ⟨𝑥,  ¯ 𝑠¯ ⟩ = 0; in particular, 𝑥¯ 𝑖 𝑠¯ 𝑖 = 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].
   Recall the definitions of the sublevel sets 𝒫𝑔 , 𝒟 𝑔 in (1) as the set of primal and dual solutions with
objective value within 𝑔 from the optimum value 𝑣★.
   The duality gap of any pair (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠) of primal-dual feasible points of (LP) fulfills ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ − ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩ = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩.
In particular, we have ⟨𝑥, 𝑠¯ ⟩ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ − 𝑣★ and ⟨𝑥, ¯ 𝑠⟩ = 𝑣★ − ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩. Thus, the two sets 𝒫𝑔 and 𝒟 𝑔 are
equivalently given by
                        𝒫𝑔 = {𝑥 ∈ 𝒫 : ⟨𝑥, 𝑠¯ ⟩ ≤ 𝑔}      and    𝒟 𝑔 = {𝑠 ∈ 𝒟 : ⟨ 𝑥,
                                                                                 ¯ 𝑠⟩ ≤ 𝑔} .

These expressions are in fact independent of the choice of optimal solutions ( 𝑥,
                                                                               ¯ 𝑦,
                                                                                  ¯ 𝑠¯ ). The following is
immediate.
Proposition 2.1. Assume that 𝒫++ and 𝒟++ are nonempty. Then, for all 𝑔 ≥ 0, the sets 𝒫𝑔 and 𝒟 𝑔 are bounded.
    In (2), we defined the primal and dual max central path for the strictly feasible case. We extend the
definition of the max central path 𝑥 𝔪  𝑖
                                            (𝑔) for the case when max{𝑥 𝑖 : 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫𝑔 } is unbounded. It is easy to
see that this is equivalent to the existence of an unbounded direction 𝑣 ∈ ker(A), ⟨𝑐, 𝑣⟩ ≤ 0, 𝑣 𝑖 > 0. If such
a direction exists, then the program is unbounded for all values, including the set of optimal solutions
for 𝑔 = 0. In this case, we define 𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                             (𝑔) = ∞ for all 𝑔 ≥ 0, and use the convention that SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                                                                                               )=1
for all 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). Note that whenever 𝑥 𝔪     𝑖
                                                 (𝑔) = ∞, then either ⟨𝑐, 𝑣⟩ < 0 for the above vector 𝑣   in  which
case the dual program is infeasible; or ⟨𝑐, 𝑣⟩ = 0 in which case 𝑠 𝑖 = 0 for every dual feasible 𝑠 ∈ 𝒟, and
therefore 𝑠 𝑖𝔪 (𝑔) = 0 for all 𝑔 ≥ 0. We use a similar convention for defining 𝑠 𝑖𝔪 (𝑔) and SLC𝜂 (𝑠 𝑖𝔪 ).
    The following lemma asserts that column rescalings do not affect the straight line complexity bounds.


Lemma 2.2. Given an instance of (LP) with data (A, 𝑏, 𝑐), let D ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 be a positive diagonal matrix, and
consider the LP with data (AD, 𝑏, D𝑐). Let (𝑥 𝔪 , 𝑠 𝔪 ) and ( 𝑥¯ 𝔪 , 𝑠¯ 𝔪 ) denote the max central paths of the two LPs.
Then, SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
              𝑖
                ) = SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                              𝑖
                                ) and SLC𝜂 (𝑠 𝑖𝔪 ) = SLC𝜂 (¯𝑠 𝑖𝔪 ) for any 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1) and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].
Proof. We only prove for the primal max central paths; the proof for the dual case is analogous. Note
that there is a one-to-one mapping 𝑥 → D−1 𝑥 between the feasible solutions of the two systems, with
⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = D𝑐, D−1 𝑥 . This implies that 𝑥¯ 𝔪 (𝑔) = D−1 𝑥 𝔪 (𝑔) for all 𝑔 ≥ 0. It is now easy to see that the two
functions 𝑥 𝔪
            𝑖
              and 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                     𝑖
                       have the same straight line complexities.                                              □

Elementary vectors and conformal circuit decompositions.
Definition 2.3 (Elementary vectors and circuits). Let A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 and assume ker(A) ≠ {0𝑛 }. A vector
𝑧 ∈ ker(A) is an elementary vector in ker(A) if 𝑧 is a support-minimal nonzero vector in ker(A). We let
ℰ(A) denote the set of all elementary vectors. A set 𝐶 ⊆ [𝑛] is a circuit of A if it is the support of some
elementary vector; we let 𝒞(A) ⊆ 2[𝑛] denote the set of circuits.


                                                           9
   We say that a vector 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 conforms to 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 if 𝑥 𝑖 𝑦 𝑖 > 0 whenever 𝑦 𝑖 ≠ 0. A conformal circuit
decomposition of a vector 𝑧 ∈ ker(A) is a decomposition of the form
                                                               ℓ
                                                               Õ
                                                       𝑧=            𝑔 (𝑖) ,
                                                               𝑖=1

where 𝑔 (1) , . . . , 𝑔 (ℓ ) ∈ ℰ(A), ℓ ≤ 𝑛, and each 𝑔 (𝑖) conforms to 𝑧. This notion can be seen as a generalization
of cycle decompositions of circulations of networks flows. The existence of such a decomposition is well-
known, see e.g., [Ful68, Roc69].
Proposition 2.4. For every A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , every vector 𝑧 ∈ ker(A) admits a conformal circuit decomposition.

2.1    Straight line complexity and circuits
In this section, we establish an intimate connection between the SLC of an LP and its circuits. Recall the
definition (2) of the max-central path (𝑥 𝔪 , 𝑠 𝔪 ) from the introduction.
Definition 2.5 (ℎ-curve). Let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP). Given a vector ℎ ∈ ker(A) where
⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0, the ℎ-curve from 𝑥¯ is the function 𝑥¯ ℎ : R+ → (R+ ∪ {∞})𝑛 that maps 𝑥¯ ℎ (𝑔) to 𝑥¯ + 𝛼ℎ, for
𝛼 ∈ R+ ∪ {∞} chosen maximally such that 𝑥¯ + 𝛼ℎ ≥ 0 and ⟨𝑐, 𝛼ℎ⟩ ≤ 𝑔.
    Note that 𝑥¯ ℎ = 𝑥¯ 𝛽ℎ for all 𝛽 > 0. It is easy to see that

                                                                𝑔                  𝑥¯ 𝑗
                                                                                         
                                    𝑥¯ ℎ (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ + min             , min                ℎ,                                     (5)
                                                              ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ 𝑗∈supp− (ℎ) | ℎ 𝑗 |

with the convention that we omit the first term from the minimum if ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ = 0 ( 𝑥¯ ℎ is a constant function
in this case). We will call functions of this form — linear on some interval starting from 0, and then
constant — 1-simple functions, a notion we will expand on in Section 4.2. The next lemma shows that for
every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝑔 ≥ 0, the 𝑖th coordinate of the max-central path at 𝑔 is upper bounded by a circuit
augmentation from an optimal solution, up to a factor 𝑛.
Lemma 2.6. Let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP) and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. For every 𝑔 ≥ 0 where 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                            𝑖
                                                                                                (𝑔) > 𝑥¯ 𝑖 , there exists
                                                                                               ℎ
an elementary vector ℎ ∈ ℰ(A) such that ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0, ℎ 𝑖 > 0, ℎ 𝑗 ≥ 0 whenever 𝑥¯ 𝑗 = 0, and 𝑥¯ 𝑖 (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥 𝔪 𝑖
                                                                                                              (𝑔)/𝑛.
Proof. Let 𝑥ˆ be a primal feasible solution to (LP) such that 𝑥ˆ 𝑖 = 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                       𝑖
                                                                         (𝑔). Consider a conformal circuit
decomposition of 𝑥ˆ − 𝑥¯ = ℓ𝑗=1 ℎ (𝑗) as in Proposition 2.4. Note that ⟨𝑐, ℎ (𝑗) ⟩ ≥ 0 for all 𝑗 ∈ [ℓ ] because
                            Í
                                                                                   (𝑗)          (𝑘)
𝑥¯ is a primal optimal solution to (LP). Let 𝑘 ∈ arg max 𝑗∈[ℓ ] ℎ 𝑖 . Then, ℎ 𝑖                       > 0 due to 𝑥ˆ 𝑖 > 𝑥¯ 𝑖 . Since
 𝑐, 𝑥¯ + ℎ (𝑘)   ≤ ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩
                       ¯ + ⟨𝑐, 𝑥ˆ − 𝑥⟩
                                    ¯ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩
                                            ˆ ≤ 𝑔, we obtain
                                                               Íℓ      (𝑗)
                                                                 𝑗=1 ℎ 𝑖                        𝑥 (𝑔)
                                                                                                𝔪
                                                                                   𝑥ˆ 𝑖   𝑥ˆ 𝑖
                            𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 + ℎ 𝑖 ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 +                                    = 𝑖
                                 (𝑘)             (𝑘)
                                                                               ≥        ≥             .
                                                                     ℓ              ℓ      𝑛       𝑛
                 (𝑘)
Note also that ℎ 𝑗 ≥ 0 whenever 𝑥¯ 𝑗 = 0 since 𝑥¯ + ℎ (𝑘) ≥ 0.                                                                    □

Definition 2.7 (Dominance). Let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP). Let 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝛼 ≥ 0. Given
vectors ℎ, ℎ ′ ∈ ker(A) where ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ , ⟨𝑐, ℎ ′⟩ ≥ 0, we say that ℎ 𝛼-dominates ℎ ′ on 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥¯ if
𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ ≥ 𝛼 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ . More generally, given sets 𝑆, 𝑆′ ⊆ 𝑊, we say that 𝑆 𝛼-dominates 𝑆′ on 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥¯ if
               ′


⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0 for all ℎ ∈ 𝑆, and for every ℎ ′ ∈ 𝑆′ with ⟨𝑐, ℎ ′⟩ ≥ 0, there exists ℎ ∈ 𝑆 such that ℎ 𝛼-dominates
ℎ ′ on 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥.¯
Definition 2.8 (Circuit cover). Let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP). Let 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] and 𝛼 ≥ 0. An
𝛼-primal circuit cover of 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥¯ is a set 𝑆 ⊆ ker(A) which 𝛼-dominates ℰ(A) on 𝑖 with respect to
𝑥.
¯
    The utility of a circuit cover is illustrated by the following lemma. Note that 𝑥 𝔪  𝑖
                                                                                           (0) is the maximum of
the 𝑖-th coordinate of an optimal solution. Assuming 𝑥 𝔪      𝑖
                                                                (0) < ∞, there exists a (basic)   optimal solution
𝑥¯ such that 𝑥 𝔪
               𝑖
                 (0) = 𝑥
                       ¯ 𝑖 .
Lemma 2.9. Fix 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] such that 𝑥 𝔪   𝑖
                                         (0) < ∞, and let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP) such that 𝑥¯ 𝑖 = 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                                     𝑖
                                                                                                                       (0).
If 𝑆 is a 𝛼-primal circuit cover of 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥,
                                                      ¯ then SLC𝛼/𝑛 (𝑥 𝔪 𝑖
                                                                           ) ≤ |𝑆| + 1.


                                                                10
Proof. We may assume that 𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                   is not constant, as otherwise SLC𝛼/𝑛 (𝑥 𝔪    𝑖
                                                                                  ) = 1. Consider the function
   𝑆                          𝑆
𝑥¯ 𝑖 : R+ → R+ defined by 𝑥¯ 𝑖 (𝑔) B max ℎ∈𝑆 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔). It is piecewise-linear with at most 2|𝑆| pieces, and its
upper convex envelope has at most |𝑆| + 1 pieces. So, it is left to show that 𝛼𝑥 𝔪   𝑖
                                                                                       /𝑛 ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑖𝑆 ≤ 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                      𝑖
                                                                                                        . The upper
bound is immediate by Definition 2.5. For the lower bound, let 𝑔 > 0. By Lemma 2.6, there exists an
elementary vector ℎ ′ ∈ ℰ(A) such that ⟨𝑐, ℎ ′⟩ ≥ 0 and 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                 ′
                                                                         𝑖
                                                                           (𝑔)/𝑛. Since 𝑆 is an 𝛼-primal circuit
cover of 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥,
                           ¯ there exists a vector ℎ ∈ 𝑆 such that ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0 and
                                                                                      𝛼 𝔪
                                              𝑥¯ 𝑖𝑆 (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) ≥ 𝛼 𝑥¯ 𝑖ℎ (𝑔) ≥
                                                                          ′
                                                                                       𝑥 (𝑔).                                            □
                                                                                      𝑛 𝑖

2.2     Reducing 2VPI LPs to generalized flows
As already noted, solving 2VPI linear programs strongly polynomially reduces to solving minimum-
cost generalized flow problems. We observe that the reduction by Hochbaum [Hoc04] also preserves
the straight line complexities up to a constant factor. Hence, our straight line complexity bound for
generalized flows is directly applicable to 2VPI linear programs. We first state Hochbaum’s reduction.
Theorem 2.10 ([Hoc04]). Given an instance of (LP) with data (A, 𝑏, 𝑐), A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 such that every column of
A contains at most two nonzero entries, one can in strongly polynomial time construct another instance of (LP)
with data (Ā, 𝑏,      ¯ 𝑐¯) such that Ā ∈ R(2𝑚)×(2𝑛) , 𝑐¯ = (𝑐, 𝑐), and every column of Ā contains at most one positive and
at most one negative entry such that the following hold: For every feasible solution 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 to the original system,
𝑥¯ = (𝑥, 𝑥) ∈ R2𝑛 is a feasible solution to the new system with ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩;                ¯ and for every feasible solution
𝑥¯ = ( 𝑥¯ ′ , 𝑥¯ ′′) to the modified system, ( 𝑥¯ ′′ , 𝑥¯ ′) is also a feasible solution to the modified system, while 𝑥 = ( 𝑥¯ ′ + 𝑥¯ ′′)/2
is a feasible solution to the original system with ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩.           ¯
                                                      ¯ 𝑐¯), we obtain a minimum-cost generalized flow
   After rescaling the columns in the new system (Ā, 𝑏,
problem (with possible loops). According to Lemma 2.2, rescaling columns does not affect the SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                     𝑖
                                                                                                       )
values. The reduction immediately shows that the SLC values of the two systems are within a factor
two. Thus, we obtain:
                                     ¯ 𝑐¯) as in Theorem 2.10, let 𝑥 𝔪 and 𝑥¯ 𝔪 denote the respective max central
Lemma 2.11. Given (A, 𝑏, 𝑐) and (Ā, 𝑏,                              𝑖        𝑖
path curves. Then,
                                   𝑥𝔪𝑖 ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 = 𝑥¯ 𝑛+𝑖 ≤ 2𝑥 𝑖
                                            𝔪      𝔪        𝔪
                                                               ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] .
Consequently, SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥 𝔪
                        𝑖
                          ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                                        𝑖
                                          ), for any 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1) and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛].


3      Straight line complexity in terms of the circuit imbalance measure
In this section, we show how the straight-line complexities can be bounded for (LP) in terms of the circuit
imbalance 𝜅A . While this is not needed for our main result on generalized flows, where 𝜅A may be
arbitrarily large, it gives a simple demonstration of our approach using circuit covers. Let us start with
the definition of 𝜅A .
Definition 3.1 (Circuit imbalances). Let A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 . If ker(A) = {0𝑛 } we define the circuit imbalance of A
as 𝜅 A = 1. Otherwise, we let

                                                          ℎ𝑖
                                                                                                
                                       𝜅 A B max             : ℎ ∈ ℰ(A) , 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ supp(ℎ) .
                                                          ℎ𝑗

Theorem 3.2. Assume 𝒫, 𝒟 ≠ ∅ for an instance of (LP) given by (A, 𝑏, 𝑐). For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], we have
SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
        𝑖
          ) ≤ min{𝑚, 𝑛 − 𝑚} + 1 for 𝜂 = 1/(𝑛 2 𝜅 2A ).
      Using Lemma 2.9, the theorem follows from the following lemma.
Lemma 3.3. Fix 𝑘 ∈ [𝑛] with 𝑥 𝔪  𝑘
                                   (0) < ∞ and let 𝑥¯ be a primal optimal solution to (LP) with 𝑥¯ 𝑘 = 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                         𝑘
                                                                                                           (0). Then,
there exists an 1/(𝑛𝜅A )-primal circuit cover 𝑆 of 𝑘 with respect to 𝑥 with |𝑆| ≤ min{𝑚, 𝑛 − 𝑚} + 1.
                     2                                               ¯
Proof. Let us denote 𝜅 = 𝜅 A . We can clearly pick the primal optimal solution 𝑥¯ as in the statement to
be a basic solution.let 𝑠¯ be any dual basic optimal solution. Thus, supp( 𝑥)      ¯ ≤ 𝑚 and supp(¯𝑠 ) ≤ 𝑛 − 𝑚.
By the complementarity of 𝑥¯ and 𝑠¯ , we can reorder the index set such that 𝑥¯ 1 ≥ 𝑥¯ 2 ≥ · · · ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑛 and
𝑠¯1 ≤ 𝑠¯2 ≤ · · · ≤ 𝑠¯ 𝑛 . Let 𝑝 B max{𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑥¯ 𝑖 > 0} and 𝑑 B min{𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑠¯ 𝑖 > 0}. Clearly, 𝑝 < 𝑑. By the
basic choice of 𝑥¯ and 𝑠¯ , 𝑝 ≤ 𝑚 and 𝑑 ≥ 𝑛 − 𝑚 + 1.


                                                                     11
   We now construct the circuit cover 𝑆 of 𝑘. Note that for any circuit 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞(A) and any elementary
vector ℎ ∈ ℰ(A) such that ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0 and supp(ℎ) = 𝐶, the ℎ-curve 𝑥¯ ℎ is the same. Given a circuit 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 ′,
we define ℎ 𝐶 ∈ ℰ(A) as a fixed elementary vector with supp(ℎ 𝐶 ) = 𝐶 normalized such that ℎ 𝑘 ∈ {0, 1}.
Further, let
                     𝒞 ′ B {𝐶 ∈ 𝒞(A) : 𝑐, ℎ 𝐶 ≥ 0 , ℎ 𝐶𝑘 = 1 , ℎ 𝐶𝑗 ≥ 0 ∀𝑝 < 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛} .
Note that if 𝒞 ′ = ∅ then Lemma 2.6 implies 𝑥 𝔪  𝑘
                                                   (𝑔) = 𝑥 𝔪𝑘
                                                              (0) for every 𝑔 ≥ 0 and hence SLC1 (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                    𝑘
                                                                                                      ) = 1. For
                        ′
the rest, we assume 𝒞 ≠ ∅.
    We will define the cover 𝑆 in terms of the support circuits. As the first step, let us define a ‘combina-
torial signature’ of circuits. Given a circuit 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 ′, let

                𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶) B max{1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝 : ℎ 𝑖𝐶 < 0}                      and     𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) B max{𝑑 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛 : ℎ 𝐶𝑗 > 0}.

We define 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶) = 0 if the first set is empty and 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) = 0 if the second set is empty. We say that a circuit
𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 ′ is dominated if there exists a circuit 𝐶 ′ ∈ 𝒞 ′ such that
                                                  𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶) ≥ 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶 ′) and        𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) ≥ 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶 ′) ,
and at least one of the two inequalities above is strict. Let 𝒟 ⊆ 𝒞 ′ be a maximal collection of undominated
circuits with distinct (𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶), 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶)), and define
                                                               𝑆 B {ℎ 𝐶 : 𝐶 ∈ 𝒟} .
Clearly, |𝑆| = |𝒟 | ≤ min(𝑝 + 1, 𝑛 − 𝑑 + 2) ≤ min{𝑚, 𝑛 − 𝑚} + 1. We show that 𝑆 is an 1/(𝑛𝜅 2 )-circuit cover
of 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥.    ¯
       To see this, consider any ℎ ∈ ℰ(A) with ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ ≥ 0. After normalization, either ℎ = ℎ 𝐶 or ℎ = −ℎ 𝐶
for a circuit 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞(A). We can assume the first case, as in the latter case 𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑘 for 𝑔 ≥ 0. Hence,
𝑥¯ ℎ would be 1-dominated by ℎ 𝐶 on 𝑘 for any 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 ′. Moreover, we can assume 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 ′, as otherwise
𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ 𝑘 for all 𝑔 ≥ 0.
       By definition, there is a 𝐶 ′ ∈ 𝒟 such that 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶) ≥ 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶 ′) and 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) ≥ 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶 ′). For ℎ = ℎ 𝐶 and ℎ ′ = ℎ 𝐶 ,
                                                                                                                         ′


our goal is to show that
                                            𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) ≤ 𝑛𝜅 2 𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) ∀𝑔 ≥ 0 .
                                                                  ′
                                                                                                                       (6)
Let 𝑖 ′ = 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶 ′) ≤ 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶) = 𝑖 and 𝑗 ′ = 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶 ′) ≤ 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) = 𝑗. By the definition of 𝜅 = 𝜅A , we have
                                                      1
                                                        ≤ |ℎℓ |, | ℎℓ′ | ≤ 𝜅 ,          ∀ℓ ∈ [𝑛] .                                                            (7)
                                                      𝜅
Noting that ⟨𝑐, ℎ⟩ = ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ⟩ and ⟨𝑐, ℎ ′⟩ = ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ ′⟩ because of ℎ, ℎ ′ ∈ ker(A) and 𝑐 − 𝑠¯ ∈ ker(A)⊥ . Using
ℎ 𝑘 = ℎ ′𝑘 = 1, we can write
                                        𝑔                   𝑥¯ℓ                                                         𝑔                     𝑥¯ℓ
                                                                                                                                                   
       𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ 𝑘 + min                                                    𝑥¯ 𝑘ℎ (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ 𝑘 + min
                                                                                    ′
                                            , min                       and                                                  , min                        .
                                    ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ⟩ ℓ ∈supp− (ℎ) | ℎℓ |                                                   ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ ′⟩ ℓ ∈supp− (ℎ′ ) |ℎℓ′ |
We show that
                                                                                        𝑥¯ℓ                               𝑥¯ℓ ′
                         ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ ′⟩ ≤ 𝑛𝜅 2 ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ⟩           and         min                 ≤ 𝑛𝜅 2         min            ′ .                               (8)
                                                                       ℓ ∈supp− (ℎ) |ℎℓ |              ℓ ′ ∈supp− (ℎ ′ ) |ℎℓ ′ |

Let us start by showing the first inequality. If 𝑗 ′ = 0, then ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ ′⟩ = 0 and this trivially holds.Otherwise,
by the definition of 𝑗 = 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶) ≥ 𝑗 ′ = 𝐼 𝑑 (𝐶 ′) ≥ 𝑑 and using (7), we get
                                                      𝑗
                                                      Õ
                                                        ′

                                              ′
                                        ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ ⟩ ≤          𝑠¯ℓ ℎℓ′ ≤ 𝑛𝜅¯𝑠 𝑗′ ≤ 𝑛𝜅 2 𝑠¯ 𝑗 ℎ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑛𝜅2 ⟨¯𝑠 , ℎ⟩
                                                      ℓ =𝑑

whenever 𝑗 ′ ≥ 𝑑; the last inequality follows since ℎℓ ≥ 0 for all ℓ > 𝑝 since 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 .
                                                                                    ′

    Let us now verify the second inequality in (8). Let ℓ and ℓ denote the minimizers, respectively. Since
                                                                ′

𝐶 ∈ 𝒞, it follows that either 𝑖 = 0, that is, supp− (ℎ) = ∅ or 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ 𝑖 = 𝐼 𝑝 (𝐶); similarly for ℎ ′. If 𝑖 ′ = 0
then the expression for ℎ ′ is ∞. Hence, we can assume 1 ≤ ℓ ′ ≤ 𝑖 ′ ≤ 𝑖. We get
                                                𝑥ℓ ′     𝑥ℓ ′   𝑥𝑖   1   𝑥𝑖    1   𝑥¯ℓ
                                                       ≥      ≥    ≥ 2 ·     ≥ 2 ·     ,
                                              | ℎℓ ′ |   𝜅      𝜅   𝜅 |ℎ 𝑖 |  𝜅 | ℎℓ |
where the first inequality uses (7); the second inequality uses ℓ ′ ≤ 𝑖 and the ordering of the indices; the
third inequality uses again (7); and the last inequality uses the choice of ℓ as the minimizer, noting that
ℎ 𝑖 < 0.                                                                                                   □

                                                                           12
Remark 3.4. We note that, together with Theorem 1.3, we obtain a bound 𝑂(min{𝑚, 𝑛−𝑚}𝑛 1.5 log(𝜅A +𝑛))
on the number of iterations of the SLLS Algorithm in [ADL+ 23]. In comparison, the crossover analysis
in [VY96] yields an 𝑂(𝑛 3.5 log(𝜅A + 𝑛)) iteration bound. In [DHNV23], an amortized version of the
crossover analysis yields an 𝑂(𝑛 2.5 log(𝑛) log(𝜅A + 𝑛)) bound; this is also applicable to earlier LLS
algorithms such as the one in [VY96]. Thus, our iteration bound improves on the state of the art,
even if the time complexity per iteration of the SLLS steps is higher than for the LLS steps. Further,
using the scale-invariance of straight line complexities (Lemma 2.2), the bound immediately becomes
𝑂(min{𝑚, 𝑛 − 𝑚}𝑛 1.5 log(𝜅★A + 𝑛)), where 𝜅★A is the smallest value of 𝜅 AD taken over positive diagonal
matrices D ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 .


4     Minimum-cost generalized flow
                                                                                                         𝐸
Let 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸) be a directed multigraph with arc capacities 𝑢 ∈ (R++ ∪ {∞})𝐸 and gain factors 𝛾 ∈ R++     .
                                               𝐸
A flow in 𝐺 is any nonnegative vector 𝑥 ∈ R+ . Note that a flow is allowed to violate arc capacities. For a
node 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉, we denote 𝛿in (𝑖) and 𝛿 out (𝑖) as the set of incoming and outgoing arcs of 𝑖 respectively. The
net flow of 𝑥 at node 𝑖 is defined as
                                                         Õ                       Õ
                                              ∇𝑖 𝑥 B                𝛾𝑒 𝑥 𝑒 −                 𝑥𝑒 .
                                                       𝑒∈𝛿 in (𝑖)              𝑒∈𝛿 out (𝑖)

A flow 𝑥 is a circulation if ∇𝑖 𝑥 = 0 for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉. For 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑉, we denote by 𝐸 𝑖,𝑗 ⊆ 𝐸 the subset of arcs with
tail 𝑖 and head 𝑗.
    An instance of the minimum-cost generalized flow problem is given by a directed multigraph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸)
                                                                                                            𝐸
with node demands 𝑏 ∈ R𝑉 , arc costs 𝑐 ∈ R𝐸 , capacities 𝑢 ∈ (R++ ∪ {∞})𝐸 and gain factors 𝛾 ∈ R++            . It
can be formulated as the following LP:

                                                  min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩
                                                      ∇𝑖 𝑥 = 𝑏 𝑖           ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉                                (MGF)
                                                  0 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢.

Throughout this section, we will use 𝑛 for the number of nodes of 𝐺 and 𝑚 for the number of arcs; note
that applied to (MGF), this is the reverse of the convention used for general LPs. Let 𝐸 𝑐 ⊆ 𝐸 denote the subset
of arcs with finite capacities. We define 𝑚 𝑐 := |𝐸 𝑐 | for the number of finite capacity arcs.
    We assume that (MGF) has a finite optimum, since otherwise the max central path does not exist. Let
𝑟 and 𝑠 be the dual slack variables corresponding to the upper bound and nonnegativity constraints in
(MGF) respectively. For every 𝜆 ≥ 0, the primal max central path is given by

                              ∀𝑒 ∈ 𝐸,                         𝑥𝔪
                                                               𝑒 (𝜆) B max 𝑥 𝑒
                                                                                 ∇𝑖 𝑥 = 𝑏 𝑖         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉
                                                                               0≤𝑥≤𝑢
                                                ⟨𝑟 , 𝑢𝐸𝑐 − 𝑥 𝐸𝑐 ⟩ + ⟨𝑠 ∗ , 𝑥⟩ ≤ 𝜆
                                                  ∗

                                                                                                             (MCP-Flow)
                             ∀𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 ,                       𝑥←𝔪 (𝜆) B max 𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒
                                                                𝑒
                                                                                 ∇𝑖 𝑥 = 𝑏 𝑖         ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉
                                                                               0≤𝑥≤𝑢
                                                ⟨𝑟 ∗ , 𝑢𝐸𝑐 − 𝑥 𝐸𝑐 ⟩ + ⟨𝑠 ∗ , 𝑥⟩ ≤ 𝜆 ,

where (𝑟 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ) ≥ 0 is any dual optimal solution to (MGF). Our goal in this section is to prove the following
bound on the SLC of each coordinate of the primal max-central path.
Theorem 4.1. Given an instance of minimum-cost generalized flow with a finite optimum,

                                       𝑒 ) = 𝑂(𝑚(𝑚 𝑐 + 𝑛))
                               SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪                                         for every arc 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸

and
                               SLC𝜂 (𝑥←𝔪 ) = 𝑂(𝑚(𝑚 𝑐 + 𝑛))                       for every arc 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐
                                          𝑒

for some 𝜂 = Ω(1/(𝑚 2 𝑛)).


                                                                    13
    We can reduce to the case where 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 𝑢𝑒 for all supp− (𝑐) and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 0 for all 𝑒 ∈ supp+ (𝑐), for every
primal optimal solution 𝑥 ∗ to (MGF). This is achieved by replacing 𝑐 with 𝑐 𝑒 = 𝑠 𝑒∗ − 𝑟 𝑒∗ for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 , and
𝑐 𝑒 = 𝑠 𝑒∗ for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 \ 𝐸 𝑐 , where (𝑟 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ) is any dual optimal solution to (MGF). Note that ⟨𝑟 ∗ , 𝑠 𝐸∗ 𝑐 ⟩ = 0.
This has no impact on 𝑥 𝔪 because (𝑟 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ) remains a dual optimal solution. Summarizing, without loss
of generality we assume the following going forward.
Assumption 4.2. Every primal optimal solution 𝑥 ∗ to (MGF) satisfies 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 𝑢𝑒 for all 𝑒 ∈ supp− (𝑐) and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 0
for all 𝑒 ∈ supp+ (𝑐).

4.1    Reduction to the generalized circulation problem
It will be convenient for our purposes to work not with the original minimum cost generalized flow
problem, but a derived instance of minimum-cost generalized circulation. The latter problem is a special
case of the former problem in which all the node demands are zero. The goal is to find a minimum-cost
circulation, which has net flow zero everywhere, satisfying the capacities.

                                                     min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩
                                                       ∇𝑖 𝑥 = 0       ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑉                                    (MGC)
                                                     0 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢.

For our purposes, we will convert to a trivial instance of the minimum-cost generalized circulation
problem where all costs are nonnegative, meaning that the optimal solution is 𝑥 ∗ = 0. The straight line
complexity of the max-central path cannot decrease, however. We will make use of the residual graph:

Definition 4.3 (Residual graph). Let 𝑥 ∗ be any primal feasible solution to (MGF). The residual graph with
                                                                                             ←
respect to 𝑥 ∗ is the multigraph 𝐺 𝑥 ∗ with vertex set 𝑉 and arc set {𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 : 𝑥 ∗𝑒 < 𝑢𝑒 } ∪ { 𝑒 : 𝑒 ∈ supp(𝑥 ∗ )},
        ←
where 𝑒 is an arc from 𝑗 to 𝑖 whenever 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑖,𝑗 . Every arc 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺 𝑥 ∗ ) ∩ 𝐸 retains the same gain factor
                                                                                         ←
𝛾𝑒 and cost 𝑐 𝑒 , but has capacity 𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 ∗𝑒 . For every 𝑒 ∈ supp(𝑥 ∗ ), its reverse arc 𝑒 receives gain factor
𝛾←𝑒 B 1/𝛾𝑒 , cost 𝑐←𝑒 B −𝑐 𝑒 /𝛾𝑒 , and capacity 𝑢←𝑒 B 𝛾𝑒 𝑥 ∗𝑒 .
   Note that given an instance of (MGF) satisfying Assumption 4.2, and choosing 𝑥 ∗ to be a primal
optimal solution, the resulting instance of (MGC) on 𝐺 𝑥 ∗ has the property that all costs are nonnegative,
and 0 is an optimal solution. The proof is deferred to Appendix A.
Lemma 4.4. Let (𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸), 𝛾, 𝑐, 𝑢, 𝑏) be an instance of minimum-cost generalized flow as given by (MGF)
satisfying Assumption 4.2, and let 𝑥 ∗ be any primal optimal solution. Let 𝑥 𝔪 be the corresponding primal max-
central path as given by (MCP-Flow). Consider the instance of minimum-cost generalized circulation on the
residual graph 𝐺 𝑥 ∗ , and let 𝑥ˆ 𝔪 be the corresponding primal max-central path. For any 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1),

  (i) If 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 𝑢𝑒 , then SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                  𝑒 ) = 1.

  (ii) If 𝑥 ∗𝑒 < 𝑢𝑒 , then SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥 𝔪
                                     𝑒 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ).
                                                     𝔪


 (iii) If 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 > 0, then SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥←𝔪 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ).
                                                 𝑒                𝑒

 (iv) If 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 0, then SLC𝜂 (𝑥←𝔪 ) = 1.
                                            𝑒

    We consider the generalized circulation problem obtained from the described reduction from now
on. As such, we use (𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸), 𝛾, 𝑐, 𝑢) to refer to this instance, which has nonnegative costs and where
0 is an optimal solution. As already mentioned, we write 𝑛 = |𝑉 | and 𝑚 = |𝐸|. Let 𝐹 denote the set of
finite capacity arcs in this instance, and define 𝑚¯ B |𝐹|. Note that if we begin with an instance of (MGF)
with 𝑚 𝑐 finite capacity arcs, and apply the reduction using a basic optimal solution 𝑥 ∗ to (MGF), then
| supp(𝑥 ∗ )| ≤ |𝑉 |, and so 𝑚
                             ¯ ≤ 𝑚 𝑐 + 𝑛.

4.2    Simple functions
Recalling the definition of an ℎ-curve, and particularly (5), we see that these curves have a particularly
simple form: they are linear for some interval starting at 0, and then constant for the remainder. The
following definition is a multivariate extension of this simple functional form.




                                                              14
Definition 4.5. Fix some 𝑛 ≥ 1. We say that a function 𝑓 : R+𝑛 → R+ is 1-simple if it can be written as

                                          𝑓 (𝑥) = min(𝑣0 , 𝑣1 𝑥1 , 𝑣2 𝑥2 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 𝑥 𝑛 )

for some 𝑣0 , 𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 ∈ R+ ∪ {∞}. Say that 𝑓 is 𝑘-simple if it is the maximum of at most 𝑘 1-simple
functions (and just “simple” if it is 𝑘-simple for some 𝑘).
    Let us connect univariate 𝑘-simple functions to the general approach discussed in Section 2.1. Given
an optimal primal solution Ô    𝑥,
                                ¯ coordinate 𝑖, and an 𝛼-primal circuit cover 𝑆 of 𝑖 with respect to 𝑥,        ¯
consider the function 𝑥¯ 𝑆 := ℎ∈𝑆 𝑥¯ ℎ ; this is a |𝑆|-simple function by construction. Lemma 2.9 shows
that (𝛼/𝑛)𝑥 𝔪
            𝑖
              ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑆 ≤ 𝑥 𝔪
                         𝑖
                           . The bound on SLC𝛼/𝑛 (𝑥 𝔪 𝑖
                                                        ) that results is abstractly a consequence of 𝑥¯ 𝑆 being
|𝑆|-simple.
    The primary reason we introduce the notion of simple functions here is that we will make use of the
following “composition” lemma. It shows that a bivariate simple function composed with a univariate
simple function in a certain way yields another univariate simple function. We will later apply this with
simple functions obtained from dominating collections of walks and other objects.
Lemma 4.6. Suppose 𝑓 : R2+ → R+ is 𝑘1 -simple and 𝑔 : R+ → R+ is 𝑘2 -simple. Then ℎ : R+ → R+ defined by
ℎ(𝑥) = 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑔(𝑥)) is 𝑂(𝑘1 + 𝑘2 )-simple.
    We postpone the proof of this statement, and the further basic statements about simple functions that
follow, to Appendix A.
Lemma 4.7. Given 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑟 : R+𝑛 → R+ , with 𝑓𝑖 being 𝑘 𝑖 -simple for each 𝑖, then           𝑖 𝑓 𝑖 is (𝑘 1 +𝑘 2 +. . .+𝑘 𝑟 )-simple.
                                                                                               Ô

Proof. Immediate.                                                                                                                      □

Lemma 4.8. Given 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑟 : R+ → R+ , with 𝑓𝑖 being 𝑘 𝑖 -simple for each 𝑖, then            𝑖 𝑓 𝑖 is (𝑘 1 +𝑘 2 +. . .+𝑘 𝑟 )-simple.
                                                                                               Ó

  The following essentially says that there is a unique minimal description of any simple function as the
maximum of 1-simple functions.
Lemma 4.9. Suppose 𝑓 : R+𝑛 → R+ is 𝑘-simple but not (𝑘 − 1)-simple, with 𝑓 = 𝑖≤𝑘 𝑓 (𝑖) for 1-simple functions
                                                                                               Ô
𝑓 (𝑖) . Then for any description of 𝑓 as 𝑓 = 𝑖≤ℓ 𝑔 (𝑖) for 1-simple functions 𝑔 (𝑖) , there is a set 𝑆 ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , ℓ } with
                                               Ô
|𝑆| = 𝑘 so that { 𝑓 (𝑖) : 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘} = {𝑔 (𝑖) : 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆}.

4.3    Some flow-related definitions
Definition 4.10 (Walk, trail, path and cycle). A walk is a sequence 𝑊 = (𝑣0 , 𝑒1 , . . . , 𝑒ℓ , 𝑣ℓ ) where 𝑒 𝑖 is an
arc from 𝑣 𝑖−1 to 𝑣 𝑖 for all 𝑖 ∈ [ℓ ]. It is closed if 𝑣0 = 𝑣ℓ , and open otherwise. If 𝑒 𝑖 ≠ 𝑒 𝑗 for all 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗, then it is
called a trail. If 𝑣0 = 𝑣ℓ and 𝑣 𝑖 ≠ 𝑣 𝑗 for all 0 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑗 ≤ ℓ , then it is called a cycle at 𝑣0 .
    The gain of 𝑊 is
                                                                   ℓ
                                                                   Ö
                                                       𝛾(𝑊) B               𝛾𝑒 𝑖 ,
                                                                      𝑖=1

with the convention 𝛾(𝑊) B 1 if ℓ = 0. We call 𝑊 flow-generating if 𝛾(𝑊) > 1, conservative if 𝛾(𝑊) = 1,
and flow-absorbing if 𝛾(𝑊) < 1.
    For an 𝑟-𝑠 walk 𝑄 and an 𝑠-𝑡 walk 𝑊, we denote 𝑄 ⊕ 𝑊 as the concatenated 𝑟-𝑡 walk. If 𝑊 ′ is a prefix
or suffix of 𝑊, we denote 𝑊 \ 𝑊 ′ as the subwalk obtained by removing 𝑊 ′ from 𝑊.
Definition 4.11 (Objects). A flow-generating object at 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 is a pair (𝐶, 𝑊) where 𝐶 is a flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠
walk for some 𝑠 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝑊 is an 𝑠-𝑡 walk. It is simple if 𝐶 is a cycle, 𝑊 is a path, and 𝑉(𝐶) ∩ 𝑉(𝑊) = {𝑠}.
   A flow-absorbing object at 𝑠 ∈ 𝑉 is a pair (𝑊 , 𝐷) where 𝑊 is an 𝑠-𝑡 walk for some 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝐷 is a
flow-absorbing 𝑡-𝑡 walk. It is simple if 𝑊 is a path, 𝐷 is a cycle, and 𝑉(𝑊) ∩ 𝑉(𝐷) = {𝑡}.
   A conservative object is a triple (𝐶, 𝑊 , 𝐷) where either
  (i) for some 𝑠, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, 𝐶 is a flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠 walk, 𝑊 is an 𝑠-𝑡 walk, and 𝐷 is a flow-absorbing 𝑡-𝑡
      walk; or
  (ii) 𝐶 is a conservative closed 𝑠-𝑠-walk for some 𝑠, 𝑊 is the trivial path at 𝑠, and 𝐷 = 𝐶.
The object is simple in case (ii) if 𝐶 is a cycle, and in case (i) if (𝐶, 𝑊) and (𝑊 , 𝐷) are simple, and


                                                                 15
     - 𝑉(𝐶) ∩ 𝑉(𝐷) = ∅ in the case that 𝐸(𝑊) ≠ ∅; or
     - the intersection of 𝐶 and 𝐷 is a path, in the case that 𝐸(𝑊) = ∅.

    (Case (ii) for a conservative object may look somewhat strange, but it essentially views a conservative
cycle as a degenerate bicycle; this will be convenient in covering all cases with a single argument.)
    We extend the concatentation operator ⊕ to objects in the natural way. For a flow-generating object
𝑈1 = (𝐶1 , 𝑊1 ) at 𝑠 and an 𝑠-𝑡 walk 𝑄, we use 𝑈1 ⊕ 𝑄 to denote the flow-generating object at 𝑡 obtained by
combining 𝑈1 and 𝑄, i.e., the object (𝐶1 , 𝑊1 ⊕ 𝑄). Similarly, for a flow-absorbing object 𝑈2 = (𝑊2 , 𝐶2 ) at
𝑡, 𝑄 ⊕ 𝑈2 := (𝑄 ⊕ 𝑊2 , 𝐶2 ). And if 𝑈1 = (𝐶1 , 𝑊1 ) and 𝑈2 = (𝐶2 , 𝑊2 ) are respectively flow-generating and
flow-absorbing objects at the same node 𝑠, then 𝑈1 ⊕ 𝑈2 is the conservative object (𝐶1 , 𝑊1 ⊕ 𝑄 ⊕ 𝑊2 , 𝐶2 ).
Definition 4.12 (Recurrence). A walk 𝑊 is called 𝑘-recurrent if every arc appears at most 𝑘 times as a
step in 𝑊. Similarly, an object 𝑈 is 𝑘-recurrent if every arc appears at most 𝑘 times in total as a step in
some constituent walk of 𝑈.

    Note that 𝑘-recurrent only upper bounds the number of repetitions of an arc; for 𝑘 ≤ ℓ , any 𝑘-recurrent
walk is also ℓ -recurrent. When considering flows supported on the arc set of a walk, it will be important
to be able distinguish between flow on different “steps” of the walk that involve the same arc of the
graph. We do this formally by defining the “splitting” of a walk, which simply makes parallel copies of
arcs to turn the walk into a corresponding trail.

Definition 4.13 (Splitting). Let 𝐺˜ = (𝑉 , 𝐸)              ˜ be the directed multigraph with the same node set as 𝐺, but
with 10𝑛 parallel copies of each arc, each with the same gain factor, cost and capacity as the corresponding
arc in 𝐺. (The choice of 10𝑛 is just to be sufficiently large for our purposes.) For each 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸, we use
𝑒 1 , 𝑒 2 , . . . , 𝑒 10𝑛 to index the corresponding copies in 𝐸.       ˜
      Given a 10𝑛-recurrent walk 𝑊 = (𝑣0 , 𝑒1 , 𝑣1 , 𝑒2 , . . . , 𝑒 𝑟 , 𝑣 𝑟 ) in 𝐺, we define a splitting of 𝑊 to be a trail
𝑊˜ = (𝑣0 , 𝑒 𝜎1 , 𝑣2 , 𝑒 𝜎2 , . . . , 𝑒 𝑟𝜎𝑟 , 𝑣 𝑟 ) in 𝐺,
                                                       ˜ where for each 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 with 𝑒 𝑖 = 𝑒 𝑗 , 𝜎𝑖 ≠ 𝜎 𝑗 .
                   1         2
      Given an object 𝑈, a splitting of 𝑈 is a tuple of trails in 𝐺,          ˜ each being a splitting of the corresponding
walk in 𝑈, and where in addition the trails are arc-disjoint.
    Note that up to trivial relabelling of copies of arcs, the splitting of a walk or object is unique.
    For an object or walk 𝑈, we use 𝑉(𝑈) and 𝐸(𝑈) to denote its node set and arc set respectively, and
            ˜ ⊆ 𝐸˜ to denote the arc set of a splitting 𝑈.
also use 𝐸(𝑈)                                            ˜

                                                                               ˜ we say that 𝑥˜ ∈ R+𝐸 is a flow            ˜
Definition 4.14 (Induced flows). Given an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 with splitting 𝑊,
induced by 𝑊  ˜ if 𝑥˜ is nonzero, supported on 𝐸(𝑊),˜ and 𝛾𝑒 𝑥˜ 𝑒 = 𝑥˜ 𝑓 for any pair of consecutive arcs
          ˜                              ˜                       𝐸
𝑒 , 𝑓 ∈ 𝐸(𝑊) where 𝑒 comes before 𝑓 in 𝑊. We say that 𝑥¯ ∈ RÍ    + is a flow induced by 𝑊 if 𝑥¯ is the projection
onto 𝐺 of a flow 𝑥˜ induced by a splitting of 𝑊, that is, 𝑥¯ 𝑒 = 𝑗 𝑥˜ 𝑒 𝑗 .
     Given a flow-generating object 𝑈 = (𝐶, 𝑊) at 𝑡, a flow induced by a splitting 𝑈    ˜ = (𝐶, ˜ 𝑊)˜ is a vector
        ˜
        𝐸                                                        ˜                             ˜
𝑥˜ ∈ R+ that can be written as a sum of a flow induced by 𝐶 and a flow induced by 𝑊, and where in
addition ∇𝑣 𝑥˜ = 0 for all 𝑣 ≠ 𝑡. The definition for flow-absorbing objects is completely analogous; and
for a conservative object 𝑈 = (𝐶, 𝑊 , 𝐷), 𝑥˜ should satisfy ∇ 𝑥˜ = 0, and be a sum of flows induced by the
components of a splitting of 𝑈.

   We remark that all flows induced by an object are the same up to scaling3.
   Induced flows have no particular scaling. The following will be a crucial notion: it is the largest
possible flow induced by a walk (or object), with the property that on each step of the walk or object,
the flow does not exceed the capacity of the arc, and the cost of that step (flow times arc cost) does not
exceed a given bound 𝜆.

Definition 4.15. Let 𝑊 be a walk, with 𝑊    ˜ a splitting of 𝑊 and 𝑥˜ a flow induced by 𝑊.         ˜     Define
 𝑊˜          𝐸˜                              ˜
                                             𝑊
𝑥 : R+ → R+ to be the function that maps 𝑥 (𝜆) to the largest scaling of 𝑥˜ so that 𝑥˜ 𝑎 ≤ 𝑢𝑎 and 𝑐 𝑎 𝑥˜ 𝑎 ≤ 𝜆
                ˜ Then let 𝑥 𝑊 : R+ → R+𝐸 be the projection of 𝑥 𝑊˜ onto 𝐺, i.e., 𝑥 𝑊       Í 𝑊˜
for each 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝑊).                                                                  𝑒 (𝜆) =  𝑗 𝑥 𝑒 𝑗 (𝜆).
                ˜
                𝑈        𝑈                                   ˜
    We define 𝑥 (𝜆) and 𝑥 (𝜆) for an object 𝑈 with splitting 𝑈 in identical fashion.
    Note that 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆) and 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆) do not depend on the choice of splitting, and so are well-defined.
                                                                                                                                        ˜
    3Specifically for the case of a conservative object 𝑈 = (𝐶, {𝑠}, 𝐶) for a conservative 𝑠-𝑠-walk 𝐶, a flow 𝑥˜ induced by a splitting 𝑈
is exceptionally not unique up to scaling, in that flow can be arbitrarily shifted between the two copies of 𝐶. But this is unimportant,
and moreover the flow induced by 𝑈 is still unique up to scaling.



                                                                  16
Remark 4.16. This definition is closely related to the definition of ℎ-curves for general LPs provided in
Definition 2.5. It is more general, in that we define 𝑥 𝑈 for objects that are not conservative, and hence
which do not lie in the kernel. If we consider a conservative object 𝑈, and take ℎ to be a flow induced
by 𝑈, then 𝑥 𝑈 and the ℎ-curve 0 ℎ are “close”: if 𝑈 is 𝑘-recurrent, then 𝑘𝑚1 𝑈
                                                                              𝑥 (𝜆) ≤ 0 ℎ (𝜆) ≤ 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆). The
reason that they are not identical, only within a factor 𝑘𝑚, is simply because of the per-step nature of the
capacity bounds (meaning 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆) might overload an arc by a factor 𝑘) and cost bounds (meaning 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆)
could have total cost 𝑘𝑚𝜆, given each arc could in principle contribute a cost of 𝑘𝜆).

4.4   SLC bounds via domination
We will follow exactly the general plan discussed in Section 2.1: we demonstrate the existence of a small
primal circuit cover. Recall the notion of an elementary vector from Definition 2.3. The following is
precisely this same notion, in the context of generalized circulations.

Definition 4.17 (Elementary circulation). A nonzero circulation 𝑓 in 𝐺 is elementary if supp( 𝑓 ) is inclusion-
wise minimal, i.e., there is no nonzero circulation 𝑓 ′ in 𝐺 with supp( 𝑓 ′) ⊊ supp( 𝑓 ).
   The following motivates our definitions of simple objects, and in particular simple conservative
objects. We postpone the proof to the appendix.

Lemma 4.18. A flow is an elementary circulation if and only if it is induced by a simple conservative object.
   Let ℰ denote the collection of simple
                                       Ô conservative      objects. For any 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and collection 𝒰 of
conservative objects, we define 𝑥 𝒰           𝑈
                                  𝑒 :=  𝑈∈𝒰 𝑥 𝑒 . The following is essentially Lemma 2.9 for this setting,
taking into account the scaling necessary to make 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆) feasible for cost bound 𝜆.

Lemma 4.19. Fix any edge 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸. Suppose that 𝒟 is a collection of 𝑘-recurrent conservative objects that dominate
ℰ at 𝑒, in that 𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ≥ 𝛼𝑥 𝑒ℰ for some constant 𝛼. Then SLC𝛼/(𝑚 2 𝑘) (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                       𝑒 ) ≤ |𝒟 |.


                                                               Í theorem. For any 𝜆, 𝑥 (𝜆) can be decom-
Proof. Consider the collection 𝒟 guaranteed by the previous                                  𝔪

posed into at most 𝑚 elementary circulations: 𝑥 𝔪 (𝜆) = 𝑟𝑖=1 𝑥 (𝑖) , for some 𝑟 ≤ 𝑚. Each elementary
circulation 𝑥 (𝑖) is a flow induced by a simple object 𝐶 (𝑖) ∈ ℰ, and 𝑥 (𝑖) ≤ 𝑥 𝐶 (𝜆) (it is an inequality rather
                                                                                 (𝑖)


than an equality due to the ℓ∞ cost bound in the definition of 𝑥 𝐶 (𝜆)). Hence 𝑥 𝑒ℰ ≥ 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                         (𝑖)
                                                                                                  𝑒 /𝑚. Since all
circuits in 𝒟 are 𝑘-recurrent, 𝑥 𝐶 (𝜆)/(𝑚 𝑘) is a feasible generalized circulation of cost at most 𝜆, for every
𝐶 ∈ 𝒟. Thus 𝑚1𝑘 𝑥 𝑒𝒟 (𝜆) ≤ 𝑥 𝔪 𝑒 (𝜆) for all 𝜆.
    So
                                           𝛼 𝔪      𝛼 ℰ       1 𝒟
                                               𝑥 ≤    𝑥 ≤       𝑥 ≤ 𝑥𝔪 𝑒 ,
                                         𝑚2 𝑘 𝑒    𝑚𝑘 𝑒      𝑚𝑘 𝑒
showing that SLC𝛼/(𝑚 2 𝑘) (𝑥 𝔪
                             𝑒 ) ≤ |𝒟 | + 1.                                                                     □
    As such, our goal is now to demonstrate such a dominating collection 𝒟; we will do this with
|𝒟 | = 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)
           ¯ and 𝑘 = 𝑂(𝑛).

4.5   Path domination
The results in this section are the core of our analysis. They concern a strong “bivariate” notion of
domination.
Definition 4.20. Given two distinct nodes 𝑠 and 𝑡, and an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊, let

                                       𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑟) := min ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆), 𝛾(𝑊)𝑟 .
                                                                          
                                                                                                                (9)

In other words, 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑟) is the maximum amount of flow that can be sent to 𝑡 with a flow induced by 𝑊,
given that each step respects the cost and capacity bounds, and that there are only 𝑟 units available at 𝑠
to be sent.
    Similarly, let
                                    ←
                                    𝑓𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑟) := min −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆), 𝛾(𝑊)−1 𝑟 ;
                                                                          

this is the maximum amount of flow we can send from 𝑠 subject to the cost and capacity bounds, given
that at most 𝑟 units arrive at 𝑡.



                                                        17
   The function 𝑓®𝑊 for a given 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 is a 1-simple function. We can write

                                 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑟) = min{𝜆/cost(𝑊), 𝛾(𝑊)𝑟, limit(𝑊)},

where cost(𝑊) is the largest cost of a step of the walk per unit of flow measured at 𝑡; 𝛾(𝑊) is the gain of
the walk; and limit(𝑊) is the maximum amount of flow that can arrive at 𝑡 given that each step respects
                         ←
the capacity. Similarly, 𝑓𝑊 is 1-simple.
Definition 4.21. We say that an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 ′ dominates an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 if 𝛾(𝑊 ′) ≥ 𝛾(𝑊) and ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑊 ≥ ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑊 .
                                                                                                       ′


We say that 𝑊 ′ strongly dominates 𝑊 if in addition, −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 .
                                                            ′




   If 𝑊 ′ dominates 𝑊, then by (9), clearly 𝑓®𝑊 ′ ≥ 𝑓®𝑊 ; indeed this is equivalent.
   Write 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡) for the set of all 𝑠-𝑡-paths for any distinct 𝑠, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉. Given a collection 𝒲 of 𝑠-𝑡-walks,
define                                                  Ü
                                               𝑓®𝒲 :=        𝑓®𝑊 ,
                                                             𝑊 ∈𝒲
                  ←
and similarly for 𝑓𝒲 . The main theorem of this section is the following. It shows that the collection of
𝑠-𝑡-paths can be dominated by a small collection of 𝑛-recurrent 𝑠-𝑡-walks: for any 𝑠-𝑡-path 𝑃, any cost
bound 𝜆, and any amount of flow 𝑟 available at 𝑠, there is a walk in the collection that does a better job
at sending flow to 𝑡 under the same cost and flow restrictions.

Theorem 4.22. Fix distinct nodes 𝑠 and 𝑡. Then there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                                 ¯       collection 𝒲 of 𝑛-recurrent 𝑠-𝑡-walks
such that for every 𝑃 ∈ 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡), there is a walk 𝑊 ∈ 𝒲 that strongly dominates 𝑃. Hence

                                                       𝑓®𝒲 ≥ 𝑓®𝒫(𝑠,𝑡) .

    The additional strength of strong domination over domination is not needed to deduce 𝑓®𝒲 ≥ 𝑓®𝒫(𝑠,𝑡)
in the above, but will be of utility in Section 4.8.
    We also have the following complementary statement; this will follow easily from Theorem 4.22.
Theorem 4.23. Fix distinct nodes 𝑠 and 𝑡. Then there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                               ¯        collection 𝒲 of 𝑛-recurrent 𝑠-𝑡-walks
such that                                       ←      ←
                                                𝑓𝒲 ≥ 𝑓𝒫(𝑠,𝑡) .

   The remainder of this subsection will be devoted to proving Theorem 4.22 and Theorem 4.23.
Definition 4.24 (Bottlenecks, signature and backbone of a walk). Consider an 𝑠-𝑡 walk 𝑊 with at least
one step, and let 𝑥˜ be a flow induced by a splitting 𝑊.˜
                                        ˜                      ˜ for which 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c is maximal, breaking ties
    Define the cost bottleneck step of 𝑊 to be the arc 𝑎c ∈ 𝐸(𝑊)
towards steps closer to 𝑡. The cost bottleneck of 𝑊 is then the arc 𝑒c ∈ 𝐸 that corresponds to 𝑎 c . Similarly,
define the flow bottleneck step of 𝑊 ˜ to be the arc 𝑎f ∈ 𝐸(𝑊)
                                                             ˜ for which 𝑥˜ 𝑎 /𝑢𝑎 is maximal, breaking ties
                                                                             f      f
towards arcs closer to 𝑡; exceptionally, if all arcs of 𝑊 have infinite capacity, set 𝑎f = 𝑎c . Again the flow
bottleneck of 𝑊 is the arc 𝑒f ∈ 𝐸 that corresponds to 𝑎f .
    The signature of 𝑊 is
                             (
                                 (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯),   if 𝑎c is earlier in the walk than 𝑎f , or 𝑎c = 𝑎 f
                    𝜎(𝑊) B
                                 (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻),   otherwise.

The backbone of 𝑊, denoted 𝛽(𝑊), is the subwalk of 𝑊 that starts and ends with the bottleneck steps
(including the bottleneck steps). We also write 𝜏(𝑊) for the subwalk of 𝑊 before 𝛽(𝑊), and 𝜂(𝑊) for the
subwalk after 𝛽(𝑊); that is,
                                       𝑊 = 𝜏(𝑊) ⊕ 𝛽(𝑊) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑊).
   ˜ is a splitting of 𝑊, we also define the precisely corresponding partition into subtrails,
If 𝑊
                                              ˜ = 𝜏(𝑊)
                                              𝑊     ˜ ⊕ 𝛽(𝑊)
                                                          ˜ ⊕ 𝜂(𝑊).
                                                                ˜

   For any walk 𝑊, it is easy to verify that 𝜎(𝛽(𝑊)) = 𝜎(𝑊).
Definition 4.25. We say that a path 𝑃 is 𝜎-capped if 𝜎(𝑃) = 𝜎 and 𝛽(𝑃) = 𝑃.


                                                             18
    For each signature 𝜎, let 𝑆(𝜎) be any highest gain path amongst all 𝜎-capped paths.
    Given an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 with signature 𝜎, define patch(𝑊) to be the 𝑠-𝑡-walk obtained from 𝑊 by
replacing 𝛽(𝑊) with 𝑆(𝜎). (Note that we do not care about computing patch(𝑊); all of this is purely
existential.)
Lemma 4.26 (Patching a walk). Suppose 𝑊 is an 𝑠-𝑡 walk whose backbone 𝛽(𝑊) is a path, and let 𝑊 ′ =
patch(𝑊). Then 𝑊 ′ strongly dominates 𝑊. Furthermore, if 𝜎(𝑊 ′) ≠ 𝜎(𝑊), then 𝜂(𝑊 ′) is a strict suffix of 𝜂(𝑊).
Proof. Let 𝜎 = 𝜎(𝑊), and suppose that 𝜎 = (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯); the case 𝜎 = (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻) will be completely analogous,
swapping the roles of the cost and flow bottlenecks. We may assume that 𝑒c ≠ 𝑒f , since otherwise there
is a unique path with first arc 𝑒c and final arc 𝑒f , ensuring that 𝑆(𝜎) = 𝛽(𝑊) and hence 𝑊 ′ = 𝑊, meaning
that there is nothing to prove. Recalling that 𝑒f = 𝑒c whenever there is no finite capacity arc, we in
particular can assume that 𝑊 contains a finite capacity arc going forward.
    Let 𝑊˜ be a splitting of 𝑊, and 𝑊˜ ′ a corresponding splitting of 𝑊 ′, in the sense that each step of 𝑊
not on the backbone is represented by the same arc in 𝑊      ˜ and 𝑊˜ ′. Let 𝑊 ˜ = 𝜏˜ ⊕ 𝛽˜ ⊕ 𝜂˜ and 𝑊˜ ′ = 𝜏˜ ⊕ 𝑆˜ ⊕ 𝜂,
                                                                                                                     ˜
where 𝜂,˜ 𝜏, ˜     ˜
          ˜ 𝛽 and 𝑆 are splittings of 𝜂(𝑊), 𝜏(𝑊), 𝛽(𝑊) and 𝑆(𝜎) respectively. Write 𝑎c and 𝑎f for the cost
and flow bottleneck steps of 𝑊 ˜ (so 𝑎 c is a copy of 𝑒c in 𝐺,
                                                            ˜ and 𝑎f a copy of 𝑒f ). Similarly, let 𝑎c′ and 𝑎 ′ be the
                                                                                                              f
                                     ˜
cost and flow bottleneck steps of 𝑊 . Since 𝑆(𝜎) has signature 𝜎, 𝑎c′ ∉ 𝐸(𝑆)
                                       ′                                         ˜ \ {𝑎c } and 𝑎 ′ ∉ 𝐸(𝑆)˜ \ {𝑎f }. As
                                                                                                  f
𝛽(𝑊) is a 𝜎-capped path, the definition of 𝑆(𝜎) implies that 𝛾(𝑆(𝜎)) ≥ 𝛾(𝛽(𝑊)), and hence 𝛾(𝑊 ′) ≥ 𝛾(𝑊).
                                                      ˜                     ˜′
  Consider some fixed 𝜆 ≥ 0. Let 𝑥˜ := 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆) and 𝑦˜ := 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆). We wish to show that ∇𝑡 𝑦˜ ≥ ∇𝑡 𝑥˜ and
−∇𝑠 𝑦˜ ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥.      ˜ and 𝑊˜ ′ have identical trails from 𝑠 to 𝑎c , and from 𝑎 f to 𝑡, it suffices to show that
             ˜ Since 𝑊

                                                𝑦˜ 𝑎f ≥ 𝑥˜ 𝑎f   and   𝑦˜ 𝑎c ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎c .                                        (10)

        Define 𝑧˜ to be the flow induced by 𝑊˜ ′ scaled so that 𝑧˜ 𝑎f = 𝑥˜ 𝑎f . Since 𝛾(𝑆)          ˜ ≥ 𝛾(𝛽),
                                                                                                            ˜ 𝑧˜ 𝑎c ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎c . This
means that in addition 𝑧˜ 𝑎 ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎 for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝑊˜ ′) \ 𝐸(𝑆).              ˜ In particular this holds on 𝑎c′ and 𝑎 ′, and so
                                                                                                                       f
𝑐 𝑎c′ 𝑧˜ 𝑎c′ ≤ 𝑐 𝑎c′ 𝑥˜ ≤ 𝜆 and 𝑧˜ 𝑎f′ ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎f′ ≤ 𝑢𝑎f′ . Hence 𝑧˜ ≤ 𝑦;
                                                                    ˜ 𝑧˜ satisfies the capacity and cost bounds, so 𝑦˜ can only
be an induced flow with larger scaling.
    We consider two cases:
   • Suppose 𝑥˜ is constrained by the flow bottleneck 𝑎 f , i.e., 𝑥˜ 𝑎f = 𝑢𝑎f . Then since 𝑦˜ ≥ 𝑧˜ and 𝑧˜ 𝑎f = 𝑢𝑎f ,
     𝑦˜ = 𝑧˜ . So (10) holds: 𝑦˜ 𝑎f = 𝑥˜ 𝑎f and 𝑦˜ 𝑎c ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎c . Further, 𝑎f must be the flow bottleneck step of 𝑊˜ ′; it
     is at capacity, and 𝑦˜ 𝑎 = 𝑥˜ 𝑎 < 𝑢𝑎 for all arcs 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝜂).   ˜

   • Suppose 𝑥˜ is constrained by the cost bottleneck 𝑎c , i.e., 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c = 𝜆. Since 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑦˜ 𝑎c ≤ 𝜆, 𝑦˜ 𝑎c ≤ 𝑥˜ 𝑎c . We
     also have 𝑦˜ 𝑎f ≥ 𝑧˜ 𝑎f = 𝑥˜ 𝑎f . So (10) holds. Further, 𝑎 c′ cannot be an arc of 𝜏,
                                                                                        ˜ since 𝑐 𝑎 𝑦˜ 𝑎 ≤ 𝑐 𝑎 𝑥˜ 𝑎 ≤ 𝜆 for
     all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝜏),
               ˜ with a strict inequality if 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑦˜ 𝑎c < 𝜆 (since then 𝑦˜ 𝑎 < 𝑥˜ 𝑎 for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝜏).
                                                                                                 ˜
     The first of the above cases must occur for sufficiently large 𝜆, since 𝑊 has a finite capacity arc. Thus
𝑎f′ = 𝑎f . If at least one arc of 𝑊 has strictly positive cost, then for sufficiently small positive 𝜆, the cost
bottleneck constrains the flow, and the second case occurs. Then we have the claim that 𝑎 c′ ∈ 𝐸(𝜂)   ˜ ∪ {𝑎c }.
But if all arcs of 𝑊 have zero cost, then all arcs of 𝑊 ′ also have zero cost, and so 𝑒c′ and 𝑒c are both
the last arcs in 𝑊 and 𝑊 ′, and hence the same. Either way, we deduce that if 𝜎(𝑊 ′) ≠ 𝜎(𝑊), then
𝜎(𝑊 ′) = (𝑎c′ , 𝑎f , ≻), and hence 𝜂(𝑊 ′) is a strict suffix of 𝜂(𝑊).                                         □
Proof of Theorem 4.22. For any signature 𝜎, say that a walk 𝐿¯ is a left 𝜎-extension if it starts from 𝑠, contains
𝑆(𝜎) as a suffix, has signature 𝜎, and 𝐿¯ = 𝜏(𝐿)¯ ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎). In other words, if we consider a splitting 𝐿˜ of 𝐿,  ¯ it
                      ˜
contains a splitting 𝑆 of 𝑆(𝜎) as its suffix, and the cost and flow bottleneck steps are the first and last arcs
of 𝑆˜ (in the order specified by the signature). We similarly define a walk 𝑅¯ to be a right 𝜎-extension if it
ends at 𝑡, contains 𝑆(𝜎) as a prefix, has signature 𝜎, and 𝑅¯ = 𝑆(𝜎) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑅).¯
    Now define, for any signature 𝜎, 𝐿(𝜎) to be a highest-gain (𝑛 − 2)-recurrent walk such that 𝐿(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎)
is a left 𝜎-extension, as long as at least one such walk exists; if not, 𝐿(𝜎) is undefined. Similarly, let 𝑅(𝜎)
be a highest-gain path such that 𝑆(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑅(𝜎) is a right 𝜎-extension, or undefined if there are none such.
Let Σ be the collection of all signatures for which 𝐿(𝜎) and 𝑅(𝜎) are both defined; note that

                                     Σ ⊆ (𝐸 × 𝐹 × {⪯, ≻}) ∪ {(𝑒 , 𝑒 , ⪯) : 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 \ 𝐹},

taking into account the possibility of walks consisting only of infinite capacity arcs.
   Now define
                              𝑊(𝜎) := 𝐿(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑅(𝜎) for each 𝜎 ∈ Σ,                                                     (11)


                                                                19
and
                                              𝒲 := {𝑊(𝜎) : 𝜎 ∈ Σ}.
It is easy to see that 𝜎(𝑊(𝜎)) = 𝜎. Clearly, |𝒲| ≤ |Σ| ≤ 𝑚(2𝑚¯ + 1).
     Call an 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊 stable if 𝜂(𝑊) is a path and 𝜎(patch(𝑊)) = 𝜎(𝑊).
Claim 4.27. Let 𝑊 be a stable 𝑠-𝑡 walk, with 𝜏(𝑊) being (𝑛 − 3)-recurrent. Then there exists a walk 𝑊 ′ ∈ 𝒲
which strongly dominates 𝑊.
Proof. Let 𝜎 = 𝜎(𝑊). Since 𝜏(𝑊)⊕𝛽(𝑊) = 𝜏(𝑊)⊕𝑆(𝜎) is itself a left 𝜎-extension, and similarly 𝛽(𝑊)⊕𝜂(𝑊)
a right 𝜎-extension, 𝜎 ∈ Σ. So choose 𝑊 ′ = 𝑊(𝜎); note that 𝜎(𝑊 ′) = 𝜎. Let 𝑄 = patch(𝑊); since 𝑄
strongly dominates 𝑊 by Lemma 4.26, it suffices to show that 𝑊 ′ strongly dominates 𝑄. Since 𝜏(𝑊) is
(𝑛 − 3)-recurrent, 𝜏(𝑄) is (𝑛 − 2)-recurrent, and since 𝑊 is stable, 𝜎(𝑄) = 𝜎.
    Comparing 𝑄 to 𝑊 ′, we observe that 𝛾(𝜏(𝑊 ′)) ≥ 𝛾(𝜏(𝑄)), 𝛾(𝜂(𝑊 ′)) ≥ 𝛾(𝜂(𝑄)), and they share 𝑆(𝜎).
This all follows by the definition of 𝑊(𝜎), the definition of patching, and the fact that 𝜏(𝑄) is (𝑛 − 2)-
recurrent and 𝜂(𝑄) is a path. Let 𝑄˜ and 𝑊˜ ′ be splittings of 𝑄 and 𝑊 ′ respectively, chosen so that their
common part 𝑆(𝜎) has the same splitting 𝑆.  ˜
                                                  ˜                 ˜′
    Fix any 𝜆, and consider the flows 𝑥˜ := 𝑥 𝑄 (𝜆) and 𝑦˜ := 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆). Then 𝑥˜ 𝑎 = 𝑦˜ 𝑎 for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝑆),
                                                                                                        ˜
given that the bottleneck steps are identical and form the endpoints of the common path 𝑆. Since  ˜
𝛾(𝜂(𝑊˜ ′)) ≥ 𝛾(𝜂(𝑄)),
                 ˜ ∇𝑡 𝑦˜ ≥ ∇𝑡 𝑥.˜ Since 𝛾(𝜏(𝑊˜ ′)) ≥ 𝛾(𝜏(𝑄)),
                                                         ˜ −∇𝑠 𝑦˜ ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥. ˜ So 𝑊 ′ strongly dominates 𝑄,
and hence 𝑊.                                                                                             □
   Now consider any path 𝑊 (1) ∈ 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡). If 𝛽(𝑊 (1) ) has at most 2 arcs, then necessarily 𝑆(𝜎(𝑊 (1) )) =
𝛽(𝑊 (1) ), since there is a unique 𝜎(𝑊 (1) )-capped path. So in this case, 𝑊 (1) is stable. Otherwise,
|𝐸(𝜂(𝑊 (1) ))| ≤ 𝑛 − 4. Construct the sequence 𝑊 (1) , 𝑊 (2) , . . . , 𝑊 (ℓ ) by setting 𝑊 (𝑖+1) = patch(𝑊 (𝑖) ), stop-
ping once we reach a stable walk. If 𝑊 (𝑖) is not stable, then 𝜂(𝑊 (𝑖+1 )) is a strict subwalk of 𝜂(𝑊 (𝑖) ); this
means that we maintain the property that 𝜂(𝑊 (𝑖) ) is a path, and furthermore, |𝐸(𝜂(𝑊 (𝑖) ))| ≤ 𝑛 − 𝑖 − 3. So
we must reach a stable walk, and in fact ℓ ≤ 𝑛 − 3.
   If 𝜏(𝑊 (𝑖) ) is 𝑘-recurrent, then 𝜏(𝑊 (𝑖+1) ) is (𝑘 + 1)-recurrent, since it is obtained by appending some
part of 𝛽(𝑊 (𝑖) ) to 𝜏(𝑊 (𝑖) ). Since 𝜏(𝑊 (1) ) is 1-recurrent and ℓ ≤ 𝑛 − 3, 𝜏(𝑊 (ℓ ) ) is (𝑛 − 3)-recurrent.
   By Claim 4.27 applied to 𝑊 (ℓ ) , the walk 𝑊 ′ = 𝑊(𝜎(𝑊 (ℓ ) )) ∈ 𝒲 strongly dominates 𝑊 (ℓ ) . By
Lemma 4.26, 𝑊 (𝑖+1) strongly dominates 𝑊 (𝑖) for each 𝑖 < ℓ . Strong domination is clearly transitive, and
so 𝑊 ′ does indeed strongly dominate 𝑊 (1) .

    For each 𝑃 ∈ 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡), there is a 𝑊 ∈ 𝒲 which dominates 𝑃, meaning 𝑓®𝑊 ≥ 𝑓®𝑃 . Hence 𝑓®𝒲 ≥ 𝑓®𝒫(𝑠,𝑡) . □
      Finally, we deduce the complementary version.
                             ←
Proof of Theorem 4.23. Let 𝐺 be the instance obtained from 𝐺 by replacing each arc 𝑒 with the reverse arc
←
𝑒, where 𝛾←𝑒 = 1/𝛾𝑒 , 𝑢←𝑒 = 𝛾𝑒 𝑢𝑒 and 𝑐←𝑒 = 𝑐 𝑒 /𝛾𝑒 ; note that we do not flip the sign of the costs, which remain
                                                 ←                       ←                            ←
nonnegative. Now apply Theorem 4.22 to 𝐺 and the collection 𝒫 of paths from 𝑡 to 𝑠 in 𝐺, obtaining a
                      ←                                                 ←
dominating collection 𝒲; let 𝒲 consist of the reversals of all walks in 𝒲.
                                            ←   ←                        ← ←
   Then for every 𝑃 ∈ 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡), its reversal 𝑃 ∈ 𝒫 is dominated by some 𝑊 ∈ 𝒲. Let 𝑊 be the reversal
   ←
of 𝑊. Then                                     ←        ←
                                    𝛾(𝑊) = 𝛾(𝑊)−1 ≤ 𝛾(𝑃)−1 = 𝛾(𝑃).
                                  ←
Further, it is easy to see that 𝑥←𝑊 (𝜆) = 𝛾𝑒 𝑥 𝑊
                                               𝑒 (𝜆) for every 𝑒 and 𝜆. Thus
                                  𝑒
                                                     ←             ←
                                 ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆) = −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆) ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑃 (𝜆) = ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑃 (𝜆)
                 ←      ←                            ←               ←       ←
for every 𝜆. So 𝑓𝑊 ≥ 𝑓𝑃 , from the definition of 𝑓 , and hence 𝑓𝒲 ≥ 𝑓𝒫(𝑠,𝑡) .                                        □

4.6     Weak domination bounds for non-conservative objects
While our goal is to dominate simple conservative objects, we build up to this in stages. Our next
step will be building small collections that dominate flow-generating objects and flow-absorbing objects;
these will become building blocks in the next section.




                                                          20
   Given 𝑈, a flow-generating object at 𝑡, we will be interested in ∇𝑥 𝑈
                                                                       𝑡 (𝜆), the maximum amount of flow
that can be generated at 𝑡 using 𝑈, subject to the cost and capacity bounds. So define

                                            𝑓𝑈+ (𝜆) := ∇𝑥 𝑈
                                                          𝑡 (𝜆)          for all 𝜆 ≥ 0,
and as usual, 𝑓𝒰 +
                   := 𝑈 ∈𝒰 𝑓𝑈+ for a collection of flow-generating objects at 𝑡. Given two flow-generating
                      Ô
objects at 𝑡, 𝑈 and 𝑈 ′, we will say that 𝑈 ′ dominates 𝑈 if 𝑓𝑈+′ ≥ 𝑓𝑈+ ; and similarly for collections of objects.
   For 𝑈 a flow-absorbing object at 𝑠 and 𝒰 a collection of such, we define the analogous notion
                                                                                       Ü
                                   𝑓𝑈− (𝜆) := −∇𝑥 𝑈
                                                  𝑠 (𝜆)                and      −
                                                                               𝑓𝒰 :=          𝑓𝑈− .
                                                                                       𝑈 ∈𝒰


Flow-generating cycles through 𝑠. Given an 𝑠-𝑠-walk 𝑊, define 𝑓𝑊+ (𝜆) := ∇𝑥 𝑊
                                                                            𝑠 (𝜆); that is, 𝑓𝑊 = 𝑓(𝑊 ,{𝑠}) .
                                                                                             +     +

Define 𝑓𝒲 for a collection of 𝑠-𝑠-walks 𝒲 in the usual way as 𝑓𝒲 := 𝑊 ∈𝒲 𝑓𝑊 . Let 𝒞 (𝑠) denote the
         +                                                     +              +          +
                                                                    Ô
collection of flow-generating cycles at 𝑠.
Theorem 4.28. There is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                              ¯        collection 𝒲 of (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠-walks such that
                                                          +
                                                         𝑓𝒲 ≥ 𝑓𝒞++ (𝑠) .

Proof. Let 𝐺′ be the instance obtained from 𝐺 by adding a new node 𝑠 ′ and redirecting all the incoming
arcs of 𝑠 to 𝑠 ′; so 𝑉(𝐺′) = 𝑉(𝐺) ∪ {𝑠}, and we can identify 𝐸(𝐺′) with 𝐸(𝐺). The latter provides a natural
correspondence between 𝑠-𝑠 walks in 𝐺 and 𝑠-𝑠 ′ walks in 𝐺′.
    By Theorem 4.22 applied to 𝐺′ and the collection 𝒫 ′ of 𝑠-𝑠 ′ paths, there exists an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                                                                   ¯
collection 𝒲 ′ of (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent 𝑠-𝑠 ′ walks that strongly dominate 𝒫 ′ in 𝐺′. Let 𝒲 be the collection of
(𝑛 + 1)-recurrent 𝑠-𝑠 walks in 𝐺 corresponding to 𝒲 ′.
    Given any 𝐶 ∈ 𝒞 + (𝑠), consider the path 𝑃 ∈ 𝒫 ′ corresponding to 𝐶. Choosing 𝑊 ′ ∈ 𝒲 ′ that strongly
dominates 𝑃, we have that ∇𝑠 ′ 𝑥 𝑊 ≥ ∇𝑠 ′ 𝑥 𝑃 and −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑃 (all flows viewed in 𝐺′). With 𝑊 ∈ 𝒲
                                    ′                     ′


corresponding to 𝑊 ′, it follows that

                                 ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 = ∇𝑠 ′ 𝑥 𝑊 + ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 ≥ ∇𝑠 ′ 𝑥 𝑃 + ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑃 = ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝐶 ,
                                                    ′              ′



and so 𝑓𝑊+ ≥ 𝑓𝐶+ .                                                                                               □

Flow-generating objects at 𝑡. For given nodes 𝑠 and 𝑡, let 𝒢(𝑠, 𝑡) denote the collection of simple flow-
       Ð objects at 𝑡 consisting of a flow-generating cycle through 𝑠, followed by an 𝑠-𝑡-path. Let
generating
𝒢(𝑡) := 𝑠∈𝑉 𝒢(𝑠, 𝑡), be the collection of all simple flow-generating objects at 𝑡.
Lemma 4.29. For any 𝑠, 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                   ¯        collection ℋ of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent objects, each consisting
of a flow-generating cycle at 𝑠 along with an 𝑠-𝑡 walk, such that
                                                         𝑓ℋ+ ≥ 𝑓𝒢(𝑠,𝑡)
                                                                +
                                                                       .

Proof. Assume 𝑠 ≠ 𝑡, since otherwise the claim is immediate from Theorem 4.28.
    Let ℛ be the collection of flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠 walks guaranteed by Theorem 4.28. Let 𝒲 be the
collection of 𝑠-𝑡-walks guaranteed by Theorem 4.22, applied to 𝒫(𝑠, 𝑡). Let 𝒰 := {(𝑅, 𝑊) : 𝑅 ∈ ℛ, 𝑊 ∈
𝒲} be the collection of flow-generating objects obtained by taking all possible combinations; so |𝒰 | =
𝑂(𝑚 2 𝑚¯ 2 ).
    We now observe that for any flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠-walk 𝑅 and any 𝑠-𝑡-walk 𝑊, if we define the
flow-generating object 𝑈 = (𝑅, 𝑊) we have

                                                   𝑓𝑈+ (𝜆) = 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑓𝑅+ (𝜆)).
As a consequence,
                       +
                      𝑓𝒢(𝑠,𝑡) (𝜆) = 𝑓®𝒫(𝑠,𝑡) 𝜆, 𝑓𝒞++ (𝑠) (𝜆)                      +
                                                                                 𝑓𝒰 (𝜆) = 𝑓®𝒲 𝜆, 𝑓ℛ+ (𝜆) .
                                                                                                       
                                                                        and

It follows that 𝑓𝒰
                 +
                   ≥ 𝑓𝒢(𝑠,𝑡)
                      +
                             .
    This shows a |𝒰 | = 𝑂(𝑚 2 𝑚¯ 2 )-sized dominating set. We now improve this to 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚).
                                                                                        ¯ By Lemma 4.6,
using that 𝑓®𝒲 and 𝑓ℛ are both 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-simple,
                     +                  ¯        𝑓𝒰
                                                  +
                                                    is 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-simple.
                                                            ¯         The existence of the desired ℋ ⊆ 𝒰
follows by Lemma 4.9. Note that since the objects in ℛ and 𝒲 are (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent and 𝑛-recurrent
respectively, the objects in ℋ are (2𝑛 + 1)-recurrent.                                                 □

                                                                   21
   This immediately gives us a dominating set of size 𝑂(𝑛𝑚 𝑚)
                                                           ¯ for 𝒢(𝑡).

Theorem 4.30. For any 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, there is an 𝑂(𝑛𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                              ¯        collection ℋ of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent flow-generating objects
at 𝑡 such that
                                                𝑓ℋ+ ≥ 𝑓𝒢(𝑡)
                                                       +
                                                            .

Proof. Immediate from the previous theorem; simply take the union of the dominating collections for
𝒢(𝑠, 𝑡) for each 𝑠 (or in other words, apply Lemma 4.7).                                         □
   The above, along with the next section, suffices to obtain a polynomial SLC bound for 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                           𝑒 , but not for
the claimed 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚) ¯ bound. For this we need the following stronger result, the proof of which we delay
until Section 4.8.
Theorem 4.31. For any 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                             ¯        collection ℋ of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent flow-generating objects
at 𝑡 such that
                                               𝑓ℋ+ ≥ 𝑓𝒢(𝑡)
                                                      +
                                                           .

Absorbing versions. A completely symmetric version of the above concerns, instead of the maximum
excess we can generate at 𝑡, the maximum deficit we can create at 𝑡. Let 𝒜(𝑡) the collection of all simple
flow-absorbing objects at 𝑡.
Theorem 4.32. For any 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, there is an 𝑂(𝑛𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                              ¯        collection ℬ of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent flow-absorbing objects
at 𝑡 such that
                                              𝑓ℬ− ≥ 𝑓𝒜(𝑡)
                                                      −
                                                          .

Proof. Just as with the proof of Theorem 4.23, the claim can be obtained simply by applying Theorem 4.30
                          ←
to the reversed instance 𝐺.                                                                            □

4.7   Dominating simple conservative objects
We are now ready to prove the main domination theorem for an arc.

Theorem 4.33. Suppose that 𝐾 is such that for every node 𝑠, there exist dominating collections of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent
flow-generating objects at 𝑠, and 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent flow-absorbing objects at 𝑠, each of size at most 𝐾.
     Then for any arc 𝑒, there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚
                                         ¯ + 𝐾)-sized collection 𝒟 of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent conservative objects such that
𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒ℰ /8.

    Combined with Theorem 4.30 and Theorem 4.32 this gives a bound of 𝑂(𝑛𝑚 𝑚)             ¯ on the SLC. The final
ingredient for the stronger 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)      ¯ follows in the next section.
    Before giving the full proof, let us give a high-level overview, only discussing what is needed to get
a strongly polynomial bound.
    Fix an arc 𝑒, with tail 𝑠 and head 𝑡. Consider first the collection ℰ 𝑝 ⊆ ℰ of simple conservative
objects 𝐶 = (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) in which 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑝 ). Then 𝐶 can be viewed as the composition of a flow-
generating object 𝑈 𝑔 = (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝑃1 ) at 𝑠, the arc 𝑒, and a flow-absorbing object 𝑈 𝑎 = (𝑃2 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) at 𝑡 (so
𝐶 𝑝 = 𝑃1 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑃2 ). But this suggests a straightforward choice of a dominating collection: take ℋ to
be a small collection of flow-generating objects at 𝑠 dominating all simple flow-generating objects at
𝑠; similarly take ℬ to be a small collection of flow-absorbing objects at 𝑡 dominating (in the sense of
Theorem 4.32) all simple flow-absorbing objects at 𝑡; and define a collection 𝒬 (1) of conservative objects
by 𝒬 (1) = {𝑈 𝑔′ ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎′ : 𝑈 𝑔′ ∈ ℋ , 𝑈 𝑎′ ∈ ℬ}. This does the job; for any cost bound 𝜆, there is some 𝑈 𝑔′ ∈ ℋ
that can create at least as much excess at 𝑠 as 𝑈 𝑔 ; similarly some 𝑈 𝑎′ ∈ ℬ can get rid of at least as much
flow at 𝑡 as 𝑈 𝑎 ; and so 𝑈 𝑔′ ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎′ ∈ 𝒬 (1) can send at least as much flow through 𝑒 as 𝐶.
    The case where 𝑒 lies on the flow-generating or flow-absorbing cycle is more involved. In general,
the flow-generating and flow-absorbing cycles of a circuit may overlap (recall Definition 4.11), but let us
ignore this complication here. Further, the place where the flow-generating cycle and connecting path
of a conservative object meet turns out not to be too important. So just for concreteness, let ℰ 𝑔 ⊆ ℰ be
the collection of simple conservative objects 𝐶 = (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) in which 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑔 ), 𝑒 ∉ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑎 ), and 𝐶 𝑝 and
𝐶 𝑔 overlap at 𝑠. We consider how to dominate ℰ 𝑔 .
    The dominating set 𝒬 (1) described above does not suffice, for the following reason. Suppose 𝐶 =
(𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) ∈ ℰ 𝑔 has the property that the flow-generating cycle 𝐶 𝑔 has gain very close to 1. Then,
for some value of 𝜆, it may be possible to send a very large amount of flow through 𝑒 using 𝐶 𝑔 , while


                                                        22
creating only a very small amount of excess at 𝑠. Perhaps getting rid of excess is very expensive: we can
only get rid of some small amount of flow at 𝑠, far less than the amount of flow 𝐶 𝑔 sends through 𝑒. So
we cannot hope to dominate 𝐶 by an object that generates lots of excess at 𝑠, sends it through 𝑒, and then
gets rid of it.
   Instead, let us look more carefully at cycles through 𝑒. If we remove 𝑒 from any cycle through 𝑒,
what remains is a 𝑡-𝑠 path 𝑃. Theorem 4.22 provides us with a small dominating collection 𝒲1 of 𝑡-𝑠
walks — dominating in the sense that 𝑓®𝒲1 ≥ 𝑓®𝒫(𝑡,𝑠) . The complementary version Theorem 4.23 provides
                                                                                        ←       ←
us with a second collection 𝒲2 of 𝑡-𝑠 walks that dominate 𝒫(𝑡, 𝑠) in the sense that 𝑓𝒲2 ≥ 𝑓𝒫(𝑡,𝑠) . We can
construct a collection of closed walks through 𝑒 by adding 𝑒 to each of the walks in 𝒲1 and 𝒲2 . Some
of these may be flow-generating walks; we can collect all these together into a small collection ℋ2 of
flow-generating objects at 𝑠. We can also collect together those that are flow-absorbing walks, and hence
construct a small collection ℬ2 of flow-absorbing objects at 𝑡. Some could also yield conservative cycles;
these turn out to be even better for us, so assume there are none.
    Now for our fixed 𝐶 = (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) ∈ ℰ 𝑔 , with 𝐶 𝑔 = 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑃, two things can happen. If we are
                                     ←     ←
lucky, the walk 𝑊2 ∈ 𝒲2 with 𝑓𝑊2 ≥ 𝑓𝑃 has the property that 𝑅 2 := 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊2 is a flow-generating cycle.
Complementary domination works perfectly for us; it tells us that on 𝑊2 , can always send flow such that
the same amount of flow arrives at the head 𝑠 of the path as with a flow on 𝑃, but the same or more leaves
from 𝑡 compared to the flow on 𝑃. This yields the same amount of flow on 𝑒, but with less excess at 𝑡 to
dispose of. This excess we can dispose of using one of our flow-absorbing objects in ℬ2 .
   The more difficult case is that 𝑅 2 is a flow-absorbing cycle. In this case, we look also at the walk
𝑊1 ∈ 𝒲1 with 𝑓®𝑊1 ≥ 𝑓®𝑃 ; then 𝑅 1 := 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊1 is certainly a flow-generating cycle, since 𝛾(𝑊1 ) ≥ 𝛾(𝑃). It
turns out that the conservative object (𝑅 1 , {𝑠}, 𝑅2 ) does the job.
   We now proceed with the detailed proof.
Proof of Theorem 4.33. Let 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸, with tail 𝑠 and head 𝑡, and ℰ ′ ⊆ ℰ the collection of simple conservative
objects containing 𝑒. We will proceed in two stages. In the first stage, we will construct an 𝑂((𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)
                                                                                                       ¯ 2 )-
                                                                                           𝒬
sized collection 𝒬 of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent conservative objects that dominates ℰ, in that 𝑥 𝑒 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒 /4. In the
                                                                                                ℰ

second stage, we will choose a smaller 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                               ¯       collection 𝒟 ⊆ 𝒬, and show that 𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒𝒬 /2.
    We first describe 𝒬. We will construct an 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                        ¯         collection ℋ of flow-generating objects at
𝑠, an 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-sized
               ¯        collection ℬ of flow-absorbing objects at 𝑡, and an 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                                                         ¯        collection 𝒬2
of conservative cycles through 𝑒. The collection 𝒬 is constructed from 𝒬2 , along with all possible ways
of combining an object in ℋ with arc 𝑒 and an object in ℬ to obtain a conservative object.
    The collections ℋ and ℬ each consist of two parts. For ℋ , the first part ℋ1 is a 𝐾-sized collection
of 𝑂(𝑛)−recurrent flow-generating objects dominating 𝒢(𝑠), as we assume to exist. Similarly, ℬ1 is a
𝐾-sized collection of 𝑂(𝑛)−recurrent flow-absorbing objects dominating 𝒜(𝑡).
    To describe the second parts of these collections, we proceed as follows. Let 𝒲1 be a collection of 𝑛-
                             ¯ that dominate 𝒫(𝑡, 𝑠), in that 𝑓®𝒲1 ≥ 𝑓®𝒫(𝑡,𝑠) , as guaranteed by Theorem 4.22.
recurrent walks of size 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)
(Note that we consider 𝑡-𝑠-paths, not 𝑠-𝑡-paths.) Similarly, let 𝒲2 be a collection of 𝑛-recurrent walks of
                        ←      ←
size 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)
          ¯ for which 𝑓𝒲2 ≥ 𝑓𝒫(𝑡,𝑠) . Now define

                              𝒲 + := {𝑊 ∈ 𝒲1 ∪ 𝒲2 : 𝛾(𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊) > 1},
                              𝒲 − := {𝑊 ∈ 𝒲1 ∪ 𝒲2 : 𝛾(𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊) < 1},          and
                              𝒲 := {𝑊 ∈ 𝒲1 ∪ 𝒲2 : 𝛾(𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊) = 1}.
                                 =


Then
            ℋ2 := {(𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊 + , {𝑠}) : 𝑊 + ∈ 𝒲 + }       and     ℬ2 = {({𝑡}, 𝑊 − ⊕ 𝑒) : 𝑊 − ∈ 𝒲 − },
with ℋ := ℋ1 ∪ ℋ2 and ℬ := ℬ1 ∪ ℬ2 .
   Define
                             𝒬1 := {𝑈 𝑔 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎 : 𝑈 𝑔 ∈ ℋ , 𝑈 𝑎 ∈ ℬ}.
Also define
                                     𝒬2 := {(𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊 , {𝑠}, 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊) : 𝑊 ∈ 𝒲 = },
and finally, 𝒬 := 𝒬1 ∪ 𝒬2 .
                                 ′
   We now show that 𝑥 𝑒𝒬 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒ℰ /4, already providing a polynomial-sized collection dominating ℰ. Fix
any 𝐶 ∈ ℰ ′ and 𝜆 ≥ 0. Our goal is to find some 𝑈 ∈ 𝒬 for which 𝑥 𝑈         𝐶
                                                                  𝑒 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥 𝑒 (𝜆)/4.



                                                       23
    Write 𝐶 = (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ), where 𝐶 𝑔 is a flow-generating cycle, 𝐶 𝑎 a flow-absorbing cycle, and 𝐶 𝑝 a path
(or possibly 𝐶 𝑔 = 𝐶 𝑎 is a conservative cycle), with 𝐶 𝑔 intersecting 𝐶 𝑝 in a single node, and 𝐶 𝑝 intersecting
𝐶 𝑎 in a single node. Let 𝑥¯ = 𝑥 𝐶 (𝜆). We can split 𝑥¯ as

                                                   𝑥¯ = 𝑥¯ 𝑔 + 𝑥¯ 𝑝 + 𝑥¯ 𝑎 ,

where 𝑥¯ 𝑔 , 𝑥¯ 𝑝 and 𝑥¯ 𝑎 are flows induced by 𝐶 𝑔 , 𝐶 𝑝 and 𝐶 𝑎 respectively, all appropriately scaled.
                                                                                                          𝑔
   Either 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑝 ), or 𝑒 lies on one or both of 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 . We consider three cases: 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝑃), 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 21 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ,
and 𝑥¯ 𝑒𝑎 > 12 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .

Case 1: 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑝 ). Write 𝐶 𝑝 = 𝑃1 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑃2 . Then 𝑈 𝑔 := (𝐶 𝑔 , 𝑃1 ) ∈ 𝒢(𝑠), and 𝑈 𝑎 := (𝑃2 , 𝐶 𝑎 ) ∈ 𝒜(𝑡).
Choose 𝑈 𝑔′ ∈ ℋ with 𝑓𝑈+′ (𝜆) ≥ 𝑓𝑈+𝑔 (𝜆), and 𝑈 𝑎′ ∈ ℬ with 𝑓𝑈−′ (𝜆) ≥ 𝑓𝑈−𝑎 (𝜆). Then let 𝑍 := 𝑈 𝑔′ ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎′ ; this
                           𝑔                                             𝑎
is in 𝒬. Observe that
                                 𝑥¯ 𝑒 = 𝑥 𝑒𝐶 (𝜆) = min{ 𝑓𝑈+𝑔 (𝜆), 𝑓𝑈−𝑎 (𝜆)/𝛾𝑒 , 𝑢𝑒 , 𝜆/𝑐 𝑒 };                        (12)

the largest a flow induced by 𝐶 can be scaled, while satisfying the capacity and cost bounds, is either
determined by the step over 𝑒 itself, or by the amount we can generate at 𝑠, or the amount we can destroy
at 𝑡. Similarly,
                                𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) = min{ 𝑓𝑈+′ (𝜆), 𝑓𝑈−′ (𝜆)/𝛾𝑒 , 𝑢𝑒 , 𝜆/𝑐 𝑒 }.                (13)
                                                        𝑔          𝑎


Since each term in (13) is at least as large as its corresponding term in (12), 𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , as needed.

          𝑔
Case 2: 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 12 𝑥¯ 𝑒 . In this case, 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐶 𝑔 ) (𝑒 might lie on 𝐶 𝑎 as well). Let 𝑖 be the common node of 𝐶 𝑔
and 𝐶 𝑝 ., from the definition of Let 𝐶 𝑔 = 𝑃1 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑃2 , where 𝑃1 is the path in 𝐶 𝑔 from 𝑖 to 𝑠, and 𝑃2 the
path in 𝐶 𝑔 from 𝑡 to 𝑖.
     Also let 𝑃 := 𝑃2 ⊕ 𝑃1 , i.e., the 𝑡-𝑠-path obtained by removing 𝑒 from 𝐶 𝑔 . Let 𝑊1 ∈ 𝒲1 dominate 𝑃,
                                                 ←      ←
i.e., 𝑓®𝑊1 ≥ 𝑓®𝑃 . Similarly let 𝑊2 ∈ 𝒲2 with 𝑓𝑊2 ≥ 𝑓𝑃 . Let 𝑅 1 := 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊1 and 𝑅 2 := 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑊2 .
     Since 𝑊1 dominates 𝑃, 𝛾(𝑊1 ) ≥ 𝛾(𝑃), and so 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) ≥ 𝛾(𝐶 𝑔 ) ≥ 1. Similarly, 𝛾(𝑅 2 ) ≤ 𝛾(𝐶 𝑔 ). We
distinguish a few subcases.

   • 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) = 1 or 𝛾(𝑅 2 ) = 1. Suppose 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) = 1. If 𝑥 𝑒𝑅1 (𝜆) = 𝑢𝑒 or 𝑐 𝑒 𝑥 𝑅1 (𝜆) = 𝜆, then of course 𝑥 𝑒𝑅1 (𝜆) ≥
        𝑔
     𝑥¯ 𝑒 . Otherwise, 𝑥 𝑎𝑅1 (𝜆) = 𝑥 𝑊                                                             𝑊1
                                     𝑎 (𝜆) for all 𝑎 ∈ 𝐸(𝑊1 ). Domination tells us that ∇ 𝑠 𝑥 (𝜆) ≥ ∇𝑠 𝑥 (𝜆).
                                      1                                                                            𝑃
                    𝑅                                                      𝑅1           𝑔
     All flow in 𝑥 (𝜆) arriving at 𝑠 through 𝑊1 enters 𝑒, and so 𝑥 𝑒 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .
                      1

                                                                                                 𝑔
      Similarly, if 𝛾(𝑅 2 ) = 1, using that ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑊2 (𝜆) ≥ ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑃 (𝜆), one obtains 𝑥 𝑒𝑅2 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 . So choosing 𝑗 such
      that 𝛾(𝑅 𝑗 ) = 1 and defining the conservative object 𝑍 := (𝑅 𝑗 , {𝑠}, 𝑅 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝒬, we have that
                                                             𝑅𝑗              𝑔
                                                𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) = 𝑥 𝑒 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 /2.

   • 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) ≥ 𝛾(𝑅 2 ) > 1. First, if 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 overlap, so that 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 are both cycles at 𝑖, we may
     choose 𝑖 to be any common vertex of 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑖 ; this has no effect on the flows induced by 𝐶. So if
     𝑒 lies on both 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 , we may assume that 𝑖 = 𝑠; and otherwise, that 𝑖 is the last node on the
     path on which 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 overlap.
      Consider the flow-absorbing object 𝑈 𝑎 := (𝑃2 ⊕ 𝐶 𝑝 , 𝐶 𝑎 ). We observe that this object is simple. This
      is clear if 𝐶 𝑔 and 𝐶 𝑎 are disjoint, given that 𝐶 is simple. If on the other hand they overlap, then 𝑃2
      only shared the vertex 𝑖 with 𝐶 𝑎 , by our choice of 𝑖.
      Since 𝑈 𝑎 ∈ 𝒜(𝑡), we can choose 𝑈 𝑎′ = (𝑃𝑎′ , 𝐶 ′𝑎 ) ∈ ℬ dominating 𝑈 𝑎 . Then 𝑍 := (𝑅 2 , 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑃𝑎′ , 𝐶 ′𝑎 ) ∈ 𝒬.
                                  𝑔
      We claim that 𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .
      First, we split 𝑥¯ 𝑔 further into two parts: 𝑥¯ 𝑔 = 𝑥¯ 1 + 𝑥¯ 2 , where 𝑥¯ 1 is a flow induced by 𝑃 ⊕ 𝑒, and 𝑥¯ 2 is
      a flow induced by 𝑃2 . (Note that 𝑃 ⊕ 𝑒 is the same cycle as 𝐶 𝑔 , but at 𝑡 rather than at 𝑖.) The flow 𝑥¯ 1
                                                                                   𝑔
      has positive excess at 𝑡, and zero excess elsewhere; also 𝑥¯ 1𝑒 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , since 𝑒 is not in the support of 𝑥¯ 2 .
                                                                                 𝑔                                   𝑔
      Consider the restriction 𝑦¯ of 𝑥¯ 1 to 𝑃; this has excess 𝑥¯ 1𝑒 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 at 𝑠, and some deficit −∇𝑡 𝑦¯ ≤ 𝛾𝑒 𝑥¯ 𝑒 at
                                                             ←         𝑔      ←      𝑔
      𝑡 (since 𝑃 ⊕ 𝑒 is a flow-generating cycle). Since 𝑓𝑊2 (𝜆, 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ) ≥ 𝑓𝑃 (𝜆, 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ), there is a flow 𝑧¯ 𝑔 induced
                                    𝑔                                                          𝑔      𝑔
      by 𝑊2 where ∇𝑠 𝑧¯ 𝑔 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , but −∇𝑡 𝑧¯ 𝑔 ≥ −∇𝑡 𝑦. ¯ Extending 𝑧¯ 𝑔 to 𝑅 2 by setting 𝑧¯ 𝑒 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , 𝑧¯ 𝑔 is a flow
                          𝑔                   𝑔
      induced by 𝑅 2 , 𝑧¯ 𝑒 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , and ∇𝑡 𝑧¯ ≤ ∇𝑡 𝑥¯ .
                                 1                    1




                                                             24
      Now we consider the flow-absorbing side. 𝑥¯ 2 + 𝑥¯ 𝑝 + 𝑥¯ 𝑎 is a flow induced by 𝑈 𝑎 . But 𝑓𝑈−′ (𝜆) ≥ 𝑓𝑈−𝑎 (𝜆);
                                                                                                    𝑎
      thus 𝑈 𝑎′ can absorb at least as much flow at 𝑡 as 𝑈 𝑎 can. So we can extend 𝑧¯ 𝑔 to a flow 𝑧¯ induced
      by 𝑍 and with 𝑧¯ ≤ 𝑥 𝑍 (𝜆).
                                       𝑔     𝑔
      In conclusion, 𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑧¯ 𝑒 ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 21 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .
   • 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) > 1 > 𝛾(𝑅 2 ). Then 𝑊1 ∈ 𝒲 + and 𝑊2 ∈ 𝒲 − . Define the conservative object

                                                       𝑍 := (𝑅1 , {𝑠}, 𝑅2 ) ∈ 𝒬.

      We will show that 𝑥 𝑒𝑍 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑒 /2.
      Let 𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 be the flow induced by the flow-generating object 𝑅 1 , scaled so that the amount of flow
                         𝑔
      entering 𝑠 is 𝑥¯ 𝑒 . Note that 𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 ≤ 𝑥 𝑅1 (𝜆): because 𝑓®𝑊1 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑓®𝑃 (𝜆), we can send flow on 𝑊1 so that
      the same amount of flow arrives at 𝑠, with the same or less flow entering 𝑡, and still satisfying
                                                                                                      𝑔
      the capacity and cost bounds. The amount of flow entering 𝑠 in 𝑥¯ 𝑔 is at least 𝑥¯ 𝑒 just from flow
      conservation at 𝑠. Similarly, let 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 be the flow induced by the flow-absorbing object 𝑅 2 , scaled to
                      𝑔                                        𝑔                                        ←         ←
      that 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 = 𝑥¯ 𝑒 (equivalently, so that 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 has 𝛾𝑒 𝑥¯ 𝑒 units of flow leaving 𝑡). Again, since 𝑓𝑊2 (𝜆) ≥ 𝑓𝑃 (𝜆),
      𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 ≤ 𝑥 𝑅2 (𝜆).
      Now let 𝑥ˆ = 𝜇𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 + (1 − 𝜇) 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 be the convex combination of 𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 and 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 for which ∇ 𝑥ˆ = 0. Since
      𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 has zero net flow everywhere except for a positive net flow at 𝑠 (since 𝛾(𝑅 1 ) > 1), and 𝑥ˆ 𝑅2 the
      same with a negative net flow at 𝑠 (since 𝛾(𝑅 2 ) < 1), such a convex combination exists. Further,
      𝑥 𝑍 (𝜆) = 𝛼 𝑥ˆ for some 𝛼 ≥ 1, since 𝑥ˆ is a flow induced by 𝑍, and it does not violate any capacity or
      cost bounds (since it is a convex combination of flows that satisfy these bounds). So it suffices to
      show that 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ≥ 14 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .
                                                                                                                𝑔
      If 𝜇 ≥ 1/2, then observe that the amount of flow in 𝑥ˆ arriving at 𝑠 is at least 21 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , by the construction of
                                                                                                                               𝑔
      𝑥ˆ 𝑅1 . All of this flow leaves along 𝑒, so 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ≥ 12 𝑥¯ 𝑔 . On the other hand if 𝜇 < 1/2, then 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ≥ 21 𝑥ˆ 𝑒𝑅2 ≥ 12 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .
                                      𝑔
      So in either case, 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ≥ 21 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 14 𝑥¯ 𝑒 .

                                                                                     𝑔
Case 3: 𝑥¯ 𝑒𝑎 > 12 𝑥¯ 𝑒 . This is essentially identical to the case 𝑥¯ 𝑒 ≥ 21 𝑥¯ 𝑒 , with the roles of flow-generating
objects and flow-absorbing objects exchanged. Formally, one can obtain the result by considering the
                     ←
reversed graph 𝐺, which flips the role of flow-generating and flow-absorbing cycles in a conservative
object, and turns this case into the previous one.

Reducing the size of the dominating collection to 𝑂(𝐾 +𝑚 𝑚).  ¯   It remains to define an 𝑂(𝐾 +𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                                                                                       ¯
                                                                        𝒬
collection 𝒟 of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent conservative objects for which 𝑥 𝑒 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒 /2. We will in fact choose 𝒟 ⊆ 𝒬.
                                                                 𝒟

    The collection 𝒬2 already has size 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚), ¯ so we will include all of these objects. Consider any
𝐶 ∈ 𝒬1 , which we can write as 𝑈 𝑔 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎 for some 𝑈 𝑔 ∈ ℋ and 𝑈 𝑎 ∈ ℬ. Let 𝑥 𝐶 (𝜆) = 𝑥 𝐶,𝑔 (𝜆) + 𝑥 𝐶,𝑎 (𝜆) be
the splitting of 𝑥 𝐶 into the appropriately scaled flows induced by 𝑈 𝑔 and 𝑈 𝑎 . Define, for any collection
                                𝐶,𝑔
                                              := 𝐶∈𝒞 𝑥 𝑒𝐶,𝑎 .
           𝒞,𝑔                            𝒞,𝑎
𝒞 ⊆ 𝒬1 , 𝑥 𝑒              𝐶∈𝒞 𝑥 𝑒 , and 𝑥 𝑒
                      Ô                         Ô
                 :=
                 𝒬 ,𝑔
Claim 4.34. 𝑥 𝑒 1         and 𝑥 𝑒𝒬1 ,𝑎 are both 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-simple.
                                                        ¯
  Given this, by Lemma 4.9 there are collections 𝒟 + and 𝒟 − , both subsets of 𝒬1 and both of size
                𝒟 + ,𝑔
                       = 𝑥 𝒬1 ,𝑔 and 𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ,𝑎 = 𝑥 𝒬1 ,𝑎 . Then
                                         −
𝑂(𝑚 𝑚),
    ¯ so that 𝑥 𝑒
                                                   𝒟 + ,𝑔                                    𝒬 ,𝑔
                                                            , 𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ,𝑎 ) ≥ max(𝑥 𝑒𝒬1 ,𝑎 , 𝑥 𝑒 1 ) ≥ 21 𝑥 𝑒𝒬1 .
                                   +   −                         −
                               𝑥 𝑒𝒟 ∪𝒟 ≥ max(𝑥 𝑒

Hence 𝒟 := 𝒟 + ∪ 𝒟 − ∪ 𝒬2 is our desired collection. It remains only to prove the claim.
Proof of Claim 4.34. For 𝐶 = 𝑈 𝑔 ⊕ 𝑒 ⊕ 𝑈 𝑎 ∈ 𝒬1 , with 𝑈 𝑔 ∈ ℋ and 𝑈 𝑎 ∈ ℬ, define the following two
functions:
   • ℎ 𝐶 (𝜆, 𝑟) is the maximum flow on 𝑒 in a flow induced by 𝑈 𝑔 ⊕ 𝑒 that satisfies the capacity and cost
     constraints, and has an excess of at most 𝑟 at 𝑡. Then ℎ 𝐶 is a 1-simple function:
                                                                            𝑈 𝑔 ⊕𝑒
                                                  ℎ 𝐶 (𝜆, 𝑟) = min(𝑥 𝑒               (𝜆), 𝐾 𝐶 𝑟)

      for some constant 𝐾 𝐶 that measures the ratio between the flow through 𝑒 and the excess at 𝑡 in an
      induced flow.


                                                                     25
   • 𝑔𝐶 (𝜆) := 𝑓𝑈−𝑎 (𝜆). This is again 1-simple (it grows linearly with 𝜆 until possibly reaching some
     threshold where it remains constant).
The functions ℎ :=        𝐶∈𝒬1 ℎ 𝐶 and 𝑔 :=       𝐶∈𝒬1 𝑔𝐶 are then both 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-simple.
                      Ô                       Ô
                                                                                ¯          Now observe that we
can write
                                                    𝒬 ,𝑔
                                                  𝑥 𝑒 1 (𝜆) = ℎ(𝜆, 𝑔(𝜆));
we pick the flow-absorbing part of 𝐶 to accept the maximum amount of flow at 𝑡, and the flow-generating
part that has as much flow through 𝑒 as possible, given the usual capacity and cost constraints, as well as
                                                                                𝒬 ,𝑔
the constraint on how much flow can arrive at 𝑡. It follows by Lemma 4.6 that 𝑥 𝑒 1 is 𝑂(𝐾 + 𝑚 𝑚)-simple.
                                                                                                ¯
                    𝒬1 ,𝑎
   The proof for 𝑥 𝑒      is analogous, exchanging the roles of the flow-generating and flow-absorbing
objects in the above argument.                                                                            □
                                                                                                                      □

4.8    Strong domination bounds for non-conservative objects
In this section, we prove the following theorem, strengthening the previous Theorem 4.30 by a factor of
𝑛.
Theorem 4.35. For any 𝑡 ∈ 𝑉, there is an 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)-sized
                                             ¯        collection ℋ of 𝑂(𝑛)-recurrent flow-generating objects
at 𝑡 such that
                                               𝑓ℋ+ ≥ 𝑓𝒢(𝑡)
                                                      +
                                                           .

    The corresponding absorbing version follows in precisely the same way as Theorem 4.32 follows from
Theorem 4.30. Combined with Theorem 4.33 and Lemma 4.19, this completes the proof of Theorem 4.1.
    At a high level, the proof is based on the same patching approach used for path domination. We
define a dominating collection of flow-generating objects based on a small set of possible signatures; the
signatures are now more complicated, as they include information about where in the flow-generating
object 𝑈 = (𝐶, 𝑊) each bottleneck should reside; in the “cycle” part 𝐶, or the “path” part 𝑃. In order to
show that the dominating collection does the job, we consider an arbitrary simple flow-generating object
at 𝑡, and replace some part of the object in a way that can only increase the amount of flow that can be
generated at 𝑡, for any cost bound 𝜆. We do this at most three times; each time, either the signature
“stabilizes”, and in this case we can show domination from an object in our collection, or if not, the
signature changes in a way that increases the number of bottlenecks in the path part.
    We now define analogous notions of various concepts that we defined previously for walks to flow-
generating objects.
Definition 4.36 (Bottlenecks, signature and backbone of a flow-generating object). Consider a flow-
generating object 𝑈 = (𝐷, 𝑊) at 𝑡, and let 𝑥˜ be a flow induced by a splitting 𝑈             ˜ = (𝐷,
                                                                                                   ˜ 𝑊).
                                                                                                      ˜
    Define the cost bottleneck step of 𝑈  ˜ to be the arc 𝑎c ∈ 𝐸(𝑈)     ˜ for which 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c is maximal, breaking ties
towards arcs closer to 𝑡 according to the order in the trail 𝐷         ˜ ⊕ 𝑊.
                                                                            ˜ The cost bottleneck of 𝑈 is then the arc
𝑒c ∈ 𝐸 that corresponds to 𝑎c . Similarly, define the flow bottleneck step of 𝑈          ˜ to be the arc 𝑎 f ∈ 𝐸(𝑈)
                                                                                                                  ˜ for
which 𝑥˜ 𝑎f /𝑢𝑎f is maximal, breaking ties towards arcs closer to 𝑡; exceptionally, if all arcs of 𝑈 have infinite
capacity, set 𝑎f = 𝑎 c . Again the flow bottleneck of 𝑈 is the arc 𝑒f ∈ 𝐸 that corresponds to 𝑎f . We define the
cost of 𝑈 as 𝑐 𝑎c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c /∇𝑡 𝑥,
                            ˜ and the congestion of 𝑈 as 𝑥˜ 𝑎f /(𝑢𝑎f ∇𝑡 𝑥).
                                                                         ˜
    The signature of 𝑈 is 𝜎(𝑈) B (𝑒c , 𝑒f , □ , 𝑞), where 𝑒c and 𝑒f are the cost and flow bottlenecks, □ ∈ {⪯, ≻}
describes the relative ordering of 𝑎c and 𝑎 f on the trail 𝐷    ˜ ⊕ 𝑊,˜ and 𝑞 ∈ {0, 1, 2} is the number of bottleneck
steps that lie on 𝑊.    ˜ We say that 𝜎(𝑈) is of cycle type if 𝑞 = 0, of mixed type if 𝑞 = 1, and of path type if
𝑞 = 2. We also say that an object is of cycle, mixed or path type if its signature is.
    The backbone of 𝑈, denoted 𝛽(𝑈), is the subwalk of 𝐷 ⊕ 𝑊 that starts and ends with the bottleneck
steps (including the bottleneck steps). We write 𝜏(𝑈) for the subwalk of 𝐷 ⊕ 𝑊 before 𝛽(𝑈), and 𝜂(𝑈)
for the subwalk after 𝛽(𝑈); that is

                                          𝐷 ⊕ 𝑊 = 𝜏(𝑈) ⊕ 𝛽(𝑈) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈).
                                                        ˜ ⊕𝑊
We also define the corresponding partition of the trail 𝐷  ˜ into subtrails 𝜏(𝑈),
                                                                              ˜ 𝛽(𝑈)
                                                                                  ˜ and 𝜂(𝑈).
                                                                                          ˜
                                                                                                        𝑔    𝑔        𝑔
   Let Σ 𝑔 be the collection of all possible signatures for flow-generating objects, with Σ0 , Σ1 and Σ2
being the signatures of cycle, mixed and path type respectively. We will construct a set 𝒟 of 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚)     ¯
flow-generating objects at 𝑡 which dominates the set of simple flow-generating objects at 𝑡. It consists of


                                                            26
                                                                                                   𝑔
3 parts 𝒟 = 𝒟0 ∪ 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 , such that 𝒟2 dominates those with signature from Σ2 , 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 dominates
                               𝑔                                                                      𝑔
those with signature from Σ1 , and 𝒟0 ∪ 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 dominates those with signature from Σ0 .
                                              𝑔
     For a signature 𝜎 = (𝑒1 , 𝑒2 , □ , 𝑞) ∈ Σ , let 𝜎∗ B (𝑒1 , 𝑒2 , □). Let 𝑆(𝜎) := 𝑆(𝜎∗ ), that is, a highest gain
𝜎∗ -capped path.

4.8.1   Dominating objects of path type
                           𝑔
For any signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ2 , let 𝑄 2 (𝜎) be any (2𝑛 + 3)-recurrent flow-generating object at the first node of
𝑆(𝜎), such that 𝑄2 (𝜎) ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎) has signature 𝜎. Let 𝑅(𝜎) := 𝑅(𝜎∗ ); recall that it is a highest gain path from
the last node of 𝑆(𝜎∗ ) to 𝑡, such that 𝑆(𝜎∗ ) ⊕ 𝑅(𝜎∗ ) has signature 𝜎∗ . We define
                                                                                          𝑔
                               𝑈2 (𝜎) := 𝑄 2 (𝜎) ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑅(𝜎)       for each 𝜎 ∈ Σ2 ,

and
                                                                      𝑔
                                             𝒟2 := {𝑈2 (𝜎) : 𝜎 ∈ Σ2 }.
We claim that 𝒟2 dominates all simple flow-generating objects at 𝑡 of cycle type. In fact, we will dominate
a larger collection; this will be useful later in order to dominate objects of mixed and cycle type as well.
                                                                                      𝑔
Lemma 4.37. Let 𝑈 be a flow-generating object at 𝑡 with signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ2 . If 𝑈 is (𝑛 + 3)-recurrent and
                                                   ¯ ∈ 𝒟2 which dominates 𝑈, in that 𝑓 + ≥ 𝑓 + .
𝛽(𝑈) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈) is a path, then there exists an object 𝑈                                  𝑈¯    𝑈

Proof. Let 𝑃 = 𝛽(𝑈) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈) and let 𝑠 be the starting node of 𝑃. Let 𝑍 be the flow-generating object at 𝑠
such that 𝑈 = 𝑍 ⊕ 𝑃. By Theorem 4.22, there exists an 𝑛-recurrent 𝑠-𝑡 walk 𝑊 which strongly dominates
the path 𝑃. From the proof of Theorem 4.22 (see (11)), we know that 𝛽(𝑊) = 𝑆(𝜎′) and 𝜂(𝑊) = 𝑅(𝜎′) for
                      𝑔
some signature 𝜎′ ∈ Σ2 .
    Let 𝑈 ′ = 𝑍 ⊕ 𝑊. Then 𝑈 ′ dominates 𝑈: for any 𝜆, and given whatever excess the object 𝑍 can create
at 𝑠, 𝑊 manages to send at least as much to 𝑡 as 𝑃. Formally,

                       𝑓𝑈+′ (𝜆) = 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑓𝑍+ (𝜆)) ≥ 𝑓®𝑃 (𝜆, 𝑓𝑍+ (𝜆)) = 𝑓𝑈+ (𝜆) for any 𝜆 ∈ R+ .

   Now observe that for any 𝜆 ∈ R+ ,

                                       −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑊 (𝜆) ≤ −∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑃 (𝜆) ≤ ∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑍 (𝜆).

The first inequality follows from the strong dominance of 𝑊 over 𝑃, while the second inequality is due
         𝑔
to 𝜎 ∈ Σ2 . This shows that 𝑍 can generate at least as much excess at 𝑠 as 𝑊 manages to absorb. Hence,
the cost and flow bottlenecks of 𝑈 ′ are realized in 𝑊, implying that 𝜎(𝑈 ′) = 𝜎′.
    Finally, we show that 𝑈¯ := 𝑈2 (𝜎′) ∈ 𝒟2 dominates 𝑈 ′. Note that 𝑈2 (𝜎′) exists because 𝑍 is one such
candidate — it has recurrence 2𝑛 + 3. The point is that since 𝑈2 (𝜎′) and 𝑈 ′ have the same signature 𝜎′,
and are identical on the part that contains both bottleneck arcs, the maximum flow that can be sent to 𝑡
is the same in both objects:

                         ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈2 (𝜎 ) (𝜆) = 𝛾(𝑅(𝜎′))∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑆(𝜎 ) (𝜆) = ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆)
                                 ′                          ′             ′
                                                                                      for all 𝜆.                  □

4.8.2   Dominating objects of mixed type
Before constructing the dominating collection 𝒟1 , we first need a few definitions.
   For a flow-generating object 𝑈 = (𝐷, 𝑊) of mixed type, the core of 𝑈 is (𝐷, 𝑊 \ 𝜂(𝑈)). Given a
signature 𝜎, we say that 𝑈 is a 𝜎-core if 𝜎(𝑈) = 𝜎 and 𝐸(𝜂(𝑈)) = ∅.
   For any signature 𝜎 of mixed type, let 𝑌(𝜎) be a (𝑛 + 2)-recurrent 𝜎-core chosen to have smallest
possible cost in the case that 𝜎 is of the form (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯, 1), or of smallest possible congestion if 𝜎 is of the
form (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻, 1).
                             𝑔
   For any signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ1 , let 𝑅 1 (𝜎) be a highest-gain path from the last node of 𝑌(𝜎) to 𝑡, such that
𝑌(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑅 1 (𝜎) has signature 𝜎. We define
                                                                                  𝑔
                                     𝑈(𝜎) := 𝑌(𝜎) ⊕ 𝑅 1 (𝜎) for each 𝜎 ∈ Σ1

and
                                                                      𝑔
                                              𝒟1 := {𝑈(𝜎) : 𝜎 ∈ Σ1 .}


                                                          27
                                                                                 𝑔
Lemma 4.38. Let 𝑈 be a flow-generating object at 𝑡 with signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ1 . Let 𝑒 be the bottleneck arc of 𝛽(𝑈)
that is closer to 𝑡. If 𝑈 is (𝑛 + 2)-recurrent and 𝑒 ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈) is a path, then there exists an object in 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 which
dominates 𝑈.

Proof. Let 𝑠 be the first node of 𝜂(𝑈) (so 𝑒 has head 𝑠). Define 𝑈 ′ := 𝑌(𝜎) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈); we replace everything
up until 𝑠 with 𝑌(𝜎).
Claim 4.39. 𝑓𝑈+′ ≥ 𝑓𝑈+ . Furthermore, if 𝜎(𝑈 ′) ≠ 𝜎(𝑈), then 𝑈 ′ is of path type, and 𝛽(𝑈 ′) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈 ′) is a path.
Proof. Suppose that 𝜎 := 𝜎(𝑈) = (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ⪯, 1); the case 𝜎 = (𝑒c , 𝑒f , ≻, 1) will be completely analogous,
swapping the roles of the cost and flow bottlenecks. Note that 𝑈 contains a finite capacity arc because 𝜎
is of mixed type. Let 𝑗 be the head of 𝑒f , and let 𝑅 be the core of 𝑈. Write 𝑅˜ and 𝑌˜ for splittings of 𝑅 and
𝑌(𝜎) respectively, chosen so that an arc 𝑎c ∈ 𝐸˜ is the cost bottleneck step for both, and an arc 𝑎f ∈ 𝐸˜ the
flow bottleneck step for both.
                                                                  ˜           ˜                              ˜
    To show that 𝑓𝑈+′ ≥ 𝑓𝑈+ , it clearly suffices to show that 𝑥 𝑌𝑎f (𝜆) ≥ 𝑥 𝑎𝑅f (𝜆) (or equivalently, ∇ 𝑗 𝑥 𝑌 (𝜆) ≥
    ˜                                                                                               ˜              ˜
∇ 𝑗 𝑥 𝑅 (𝜆)) for all 𝜆, given that 𝑈 ′ and 𝑈 share 𝜂(𝑈). So fix any 𝜆 ≥ 0, and let 𝑦˜ := 𝑥 𝑌 (𝜆), 𝑥˜ := 𝑥 𝑅 (𝜆).
If 𝑦˜ 𝑎f = 𝑢𝑒f , then clearly the claim holds. If not, then 𝑐 𝑒c 𝑦˜ 𝑎c = 𝜆 ≥ 𝑐 𝑒c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c . Since 𝑌(𝜎) has minimum
cost amongst (𝑛 + 2)-recurrent 𝜎-cores, it has cost no larger than 𝑅; that is, 𝑐 𝑒c 𝑦˜ 𝑎c /∇ 𝑗 𝑦˜ ≤ 𝑐 𝑒c 𝑥˜ 𝑎c /∇ 𝑗 𝑥.
                                                                                                                    ˜
Combining, ∇ 𝑗 𝑦˜ ≥ ∇ 𝑗 𝑥˜ as required.
    Finally, we observe that if the cost bottleneck step of 𝑈 ′ is not 𝑎c , then it cannot be any other arc of
 ˜                                           ˜ so in this case, the cost bottleneck must be an arc of 𝜂(𝑈). On
𝑌, since 𝑎 c is the cost bottleneck step of 𝑌;
the other hand, the flow bottleneck step of 𝑈 ′ remains 𝑎f — it cannot be any other arc of 𝑌˜ and 𝑎 f ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈) ˜
                                            ˜             ˜
because 𝑎f is the flow bottleneck step of 𝑌 and 𝑎f ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈). So if 𝜎(𝑈 ) ≠ 𝜎(𝑈), then 𝛽(𝑈 ) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈 ) = 𝑒f ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈),
                                                                       ′                  ′      ′

which is a path.                                                                                              □
   Let us first consider the case where 𝜎(𝑈 ′) = 𝜎(𝑈). We claim that 𝑈(𝜎) ∈ 𝒟1 dominates 𝑈 ′. Fix any
                                       𝑔
𝜆 ∈ R+ . Since 𝜎(𝑈(𝜎)) = 𝜎(𝑈 ′) = 𝜎 ∈ Σ1 , we obtain

                     ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈(𝜎) (𝜆) = 𝛾(𝑅 1 (𝜎))∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑌(𝜎) (𝜆) ≥ 𝛾(𝜂(𝑈))∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑌(𝜎) (𝜆) = ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆),
                                                                                            ′




where the inequality is due to our choice of 𝑅 1 (𝜎) and the fact that 𝜂(𝑈 ′) = 𝜂(𝑈) is a path.
   Next, consider the case where 𝜎(𝑈 ′) ≠ 𝜎(𝑈). According to Claim 4.39, 𝑈 ′ is of path type and
𝛽(𝑈 ′) ⊕ 𝜂(𝑈 ′) is a path. Since 𝑈 ′ is (𝑛 + 3)-recurrent, by Lemma 4.37, there exists an object in 𝒟2 which
dominates 𝑈 ′.
   So, there is an object in 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 which dominates 𝑈 ′, and 𝑈 ′ dominates 𝑈, completing the proof. □

4.8.3   Dominating objects of cycle type
                            𝑔
For any signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ0 , let 𝐿0 (𝜎) be an (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent walk from the last node of 𝑆(𝜎) to the first
node of 𝑆(𝜎), and let 𝑅 0 (𝜎) be a 2-recurrent walk from the last node of 𝑆(𝜎) to 𝑡, such that 𝑈(𝜎) B
(𝐿0 (𝜎) ⊕ 𝑆(𝜎), 𝑅0 (𝜎)) is a flow-generating object with signature 𝜎, 𝜏(𝑈) = 𝐿0 (𝜎) and maximizes the net
flow at 𝑡. Formally, it maximizes
                                                                 
                                                          1
                                             1−                    𝛾(𝑅 0 (𝜎)).
                                                  𝛾(𝐿0 (𝜎))𝛾(𝑆(𝜎))

The dominating collection is defined as
                                                                      𝑔
                                                  𝒟0 := {𝑈(𝜎) : 𝜎 ∈ Σ0 }.
                                                                                 𝑔
Lemma 4.40. Let 𝑈 be a flow-generating object at 𝑡 with signature 𝜎 ∈ Σ0 . If 𝑈 is simple, then there exists an
object in 𝒟0 ∪ 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 which dominates 𝑈.
Proof. Denote 𝑈 = (𝐶, 𝑃), where 𝐶 is a flow-generating cycle and 𝑃 is a path. Let 𝑠 be the unique common
node of 𝐶 and 𝑃. By Theorem 4.28, there exists an (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent flow-generating 𝑠-𝑠 walk 𝐶 ′ which
                                                                                            𝑔
dominates 𝐶. From the proof, we know that 𝛽(𝐶 ′) = 𝑆(𝜎′) for some signature 𝜎′ ∈ Σ0 , and 𝜂(𝐶 ′) is a
path. In the exceptional case where 𝛽(𝐶 ) = 𝐶 , it is a highest gain cycle with signature 𝜎′. Note that the
                                            ′     ′

first and last arcs of 𝐶 ′ are its bottlenecks. For such a signature 𝜎′, in this proof we redefine 𝑆(𝜎′) as a
highest gain cycle with signature 𝜎′. Then, 𝛽(𝐶 ′) = 𝑆(𝜎′) for this case as well.



                                                            28
    Now, consider the (𝑛 + 2)-recurrent flow-generating object 𝑈 ′ = (𝐶 ′ , 𝑃) at 𝑡. Since 𝐶 ′ dominates 𝐶,
for any 𝜆 ∈ R+
                          ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆) = 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑓𝐶+′ (𝜆)) ≥ 𝑓®𝑊 (𝜆, 𝑓𝐶+ (𝜆)) = ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆).
                                ′



This shows that 𝑈 ′ dominates 𝑈.
     We first consider the case where 𝜎(𝑈 ′) = 𝜎′. Let 𝑟 be the last node of 𝛽(𝐶 ′). Let 𝐶 ′′ be the cycle obtained
by rerouting 𝐶 ′ to start and end at 𝑟, and define the flow-generating object 𝑈 ′′ = (𝐶 ′′ , 𝜂(𝐶 ′) ⊕ 𝑃). Clearly,
𝑈 ′′ is (𝑛 + 3)-recurrent. Let 𝑈˜ ′ = (𝐶˜ ′ , 𝑃)
                                              ˜ be a splitting of 𝑈 ′, and let 𝑈˜′′ = (𝐶˜′′ , 𝜂˜ ⊕ 𝑃)
                                                                                                   ˜ be a corresponding
splitting of 𝑈 , in the sense that 𝐶˜ is a rerouting of 𝐶˜′′ to start and end at 𝑟. Write 𝑎 c and 𝑎 f as the cost
                ′′                        ′

bottleneck step and flow bottleneck step of 𝑈˜ ′ respectively. Let 𝑥˜ be a flow induced by 𝑈˜ ′, and let 𝑦˜ be a
flow induced by 𝑈˜′′, scaled so that ∇𝑡 𝑥˜ = ∇𝑡 𝑦.     ˜ Then, 𝑥˜ 𝑒 = 𝑦˜ 𝑒 for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝜏(𝐶˜ ′)) ∪ 𝐸(𝛽(𝐶˜ ′)) ∪ 𝐸(𝑃).
                                                                                                                   ˜ On
    ˜
𝜂(𝐶 ), every arc 𝑒 satisfies 𝑥˜ 𝑒 = 𝑦˜ 𝑒 + 𝑦˜ 𝑒¯ , where 𝑒¯ is its corresponding arc in 𝜂.
      ′                                                                                    ˜ Since 𝑎 c , 𝑎f ∈ 𝐸(𝛽(𝐶˜ ′)), it
follows that 𝜎(𝑈 ′′) = 𝜎′ and ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 = ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 .
                                       ′′           ′


     We claim that 𝑈(𝜎 ) dominates 𝑈 . For any 𝜆 ∈ R+ ,
                         ′                   ′′
                                                              
                                                  1
                  ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈(𝜎 ) (𝜆) = 1 −                      𝛾(𝑅 0 (𝜎′))∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑆(𝜎 ) (𝜆)
                          ′                                                    ′

                                         𝛾(𝐿0 (𝜎′))𝛾(𝑆(𝜎′))
                                                              
                                             1
                                                       𝛾(𝜂(𝐶 ′))𝛾(𝑃)∇𝑠 𝑥 𝑆(𝜎 ) (𝜆) = ∇𝑡 𝑥 𝑈 (𝜆),
                                                                            ′              ′′
                               ≥ 1−
                                    𝛾(𝜏(𝑈 ′′))𝛾(𝑆(𝜎′))
where the inequality is due to our choice of 𝐿0 (𝜎), 𝑅0 (𝜎) and the fact that 𝜏(𝑈 ′′) is (𝑛 + 1)-recurrent and
𝜂(𝑈 ′′) = 𝜂(𝐶 ′) ⊕ 𝑃 is 2-recurrent.
                                                                      𝑔     𝑔
   Next, we consider the case where 𝜎(𝑈 ′) ≠ 𝜎′. Then, 𝜎(𝑈 ′) ∈ Σ1 ∪ Σ2 . Since 𝑈 ′ is (𝑛 + 2)-recurrent,
                                                                                       𝑔     𝑔
we are done by Lemma 4.38 or Lemma 4.37, depending on whether 𝜎(𝑈 ′) is in Σ1 or Σ2 .                        □

   Clearly, 𝒟 = 𝒟0 ∪ 𝒟1 ∪ 𝒟2 has size at most |Σ 𝑔 | = 𝑂(𝑚 𝑚).
                                                           ¯   By Lemmas 4.37, 4.38 and 4.40,
Theorem 4.35 is proved.


5    Initialization for generalized flows
In this section, we show that (LP) can be solved using the SLLS IPM after a preprocessing relying on
primal and dual feasibility oracles for the generalized flow problem. Our input problem is
                                         min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩     s.t.       A𝑥 = 𝑏 ,   𝑥 ≥ 0,                                   (14)
where the variables correspond to arcs and the rows to nodes of a minimum-cost generalized flow
problem as in (MGF). In the preprocessing and initialization stage, we will solve feasibility systems for
any 𝑏 ′ ∈ R𝑚 , 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], and 𝑐 ′ ∈ R𝐼 , ℓ , 𝑟 ∈ (R ∪ {−∞})𝐼 of the forms
                               A𝐼 𝑥 = 𝑏 ′ ,   𝑥≥ℓ      and [A𝐼 ]⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐 ′ ,        𝑠 ≥𝑟,                           (15)
Here, A𝐼 is the submatrix correspond to the columns in 𝐼; in these systems, we set all variables outside 𝐼 to
0. Strongly polynomial subroutines are available, as they easily reduce to generalized flow maximization
[Vég17, OV20], and to 2VPI feasibility, e.g., [Meg83, HN94], respectively.
    Throughout this section, let us assume both the primal and dual programs in (LP) are feasible. We
can check both primal and dual feasibilities using the oracles above. E.g., if the dual is infeasible, then
the dual feasibility algorithm returns an unbounded direction for the primal.

Finding maximum support solutions. Given an instance of (LP), we first find primal and dual feasible
solutions of maximal support. Namely, we find sets 𝑃★ , 𝑄 ★ ⊆ [𝑛] and primal and dual feasible solutions
( 𝑥,
  ¯ 𝑠¯ ) ∈ 𝒫 × 𝒟 satisfying the following (i) supp( 𝑥)¯ = 𝑃★, supp(¯𝑠 ) = 𝑄 ★; (ii) for any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] \ 𝑃★, 𝑥 𝑖 = 0
                                           ★
for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫, and for 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] \ 𝑄 , 𝑠 𝑖 = 0 for every 𝑠 ∈ 𝒟. We note that duality theory implies
𝑃★ ∪ 𝑄 ★ = [𝑛], see also Lemma 7.2 later.
     These can be found by solving at most 𝑛 primal and 𝑛 dual instances of (15) as follows. First, we find
any primal feasible solution 𝑥ˆ ∈ 𝒫. Then, for any 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] \ supp( 𝑥), ˆ we solve the primal LP in (15) of the
form A𝑧 = 0, 𝑧 𝑗 ≥ 1, 𝑧 𝑖 ≥ 0 for 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] \ (supp( 𝑥)
                                                   ˆ ∪ {𝑗}). If this auxiliary LP has a feasible solution 𝑧, then
                                                                      (𝑗)
𝑥 (𝑗) B 𝑥ˆ + 𝛼𝑧 ∈ 𝒫 for a sufficiently small 𝛼 > 0 with 𝑥 𝑗 > 0; and if it is infeasible then clearly 𝑥 𝑗 = 0
must hold for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫. We obtain the desired 𝑃★ as the set of indices in supp( 𝑥)     ˆ and the indices
where the auxiliary LP is feasible, and the desired 𝑥¯ as the average of all such solutions. The set 𝑄 ★ and
vector 𝑠¯ can be found analogously.


                                                               29
Reducing the LP. We obtain an equivalent problem instance by replacing the costs by 𝑠¯ . Let us define
the index sets
                        𝑅 B 𝑃★ ∩ 𝑄 ★ , 𝑆 B 𝑃★ \ 𝑄 ★ , 𝑇 B [𝑛] \ 𝑃★ .
Let us first delete all variables 𝑒 ∈ 𝑇, leading to the system
                        min ⟨¯𝑠 𝑅 , 𝑥 𝑅 ⟩ + ⟨¯𝑠 𝑆 , 𝑥 𝑆 ⟩   s.t.      A 𝑅 𝑥 𝑅 + A𝑆 𝑥 𝑆 = 𝑏 ,              𝑥𝑅 , 𝑥𝑆 ≥ 0 ,   (16)
This clearly has the same optimum value as the original system. In the next step, let us remove the
nonnegativity constraints from all variables in 𝑆. Note that 𝑠¯ 𝑒 > 0 for 𝑒 ∈ 𝑅 and 𝑠¯ 𝑒 = 0 for 𝑆. Thus, we
obtain the system
                           min ⟨¯𝑠 𝑅 , 𝑥 𝑅 ⟩ s.t. A𝑅 𝑥 𝑅 + A𝑆 𝑥 𝑆 = 𝑏 , 𝑥 𝑅 ≥ 0 ,                        (17)
with the guarantee that its optimum value equals the optimum value of (16), and therefore of the original
system (14) (with respect to the modified cost function 𝑠¯ .)
    Consider a variable 𝑒 ∈ 𝑃★ \ 𝑄 ★ that represents an (𝑖, 𝑗) arc 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑖,𝑗 . We can obtain an equivalent
minimum-cost generalized flow instance by contracting this arc. Namely, we replace every arc 𝑒 ′ ∈ 𝐸 𝑘,𝑖
of gain factor 𝛾𝑒 ′ by a (𝑘, 𝑗)-arc of gain factor 𝛾𝑒 ′ 𝛾𝑒 , and replace every arc 𝑒 ′ ∈ 𝐸 𝑖,𝑘 by a (𝑗, 𝑘) arc of gain
factor 𝛾𝑒 ′ /𝛾𝑒 . In both cases we keep the cost 𝑐 𝑒 ′ for the new arc. Further, we replace 𝑏 𝑗 by 𝑏 𝑖 + 𝛾𝑖𝑗 𝑏 𝑖 , and
delete the node 𝑖. Note that in the matrix form this corresponds to column operations that change the
row of 𝑖 so that it contains −1 in the column corresponding to 𝑒 and 0 in all other entries, followed by
a row operation which adds 𝛾𝑖𝑗 times the row of 𝑖 to the row of 𝑗. Further, this mapping preserves the
primal solution 𝑥ˆ 𝑅∪𝑆 on the variables in 𝑅 with the same values.
    We contract every arc in 𝑆 this way to obtain a minimum-cost generalized flow instance
                                         min ⟨𝑐 ′ , 𝑥 ′⟩     s.t.      A′ 𝑥 ′ = 𝑏 ′ ,          𝑥′ ≥ 0 .                   (18)
Moreover, a strictly positive feasible solution is known. Assume we can find primal and dual optimal
solutions (𝑥 ′ , 𝑦 ′ , 𝑠 ′) to this system. This can be naturally mapped back to primal and dual optimal
solutions ( 𝑥,
            ˜ 𝑦,˜ 𝑠˜ ) to the system (17), with 𝑠˜ 𝑖 = 0 for 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆. If 𝑥˜ 𝑆 ≥ 0, then after appending the variables
𝑖 ∈ 𝑇 with 𝑥˜ 𝑖 = 0, we get an optimal primal solution to the original input instance (14), noting that (14)
and (17) have the same optimum value.
    Assume now 𝑥˜ 𝑆 has some negative coordinates. Observe that ( 𝑦,           ˜ 𝑠˜ ) is also an optimal dual solution
to (16), because it is feasible to the dual, and because (16) and (17) have the same optimum values. By
complementary slackness, the following system is feasible, and any solution 𝑥 yields an optimal solution
to (16):
                               A𝑅 𝑥 𝑅 + A𝑆 𝑥 𝑆 = 𝑏 , 𝑥 𝑅 , 𝑥 𝑆 ≥ 0 , 𝑥 𝑖 = 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ supp(˜𝑠 ) .
We solve this system using the primal oracle in (15). After adding coordinates 𝑥 𝑖 = 0 for 𝑖 ∈ 𝑇, we
obtain a primal optimal solution 𝑥★ to the original problem (14). Given 𝑥★, we can obtain a dual optimal
solution 𝑠 ★ by solving a dual feasibility problem
                                            A⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐 ,         𝑠 𝑖 = 0 ∀𝑖 ∈ supp(𝑥★).

Initializing the IPM. According to the above reduction, we can focus our attention on solving the
min-cost generalized flow problem (14) under the assumption that 𝑐 > 0 and a strictly positive primal
feasible solution 𝑥ˆ > 0 is provided. Thus, ( 𝑥,
                                              ¯ 0, 𝑐) form a pair of primal and dual feasible solutions with
gap 𝛾 = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩.
             ¯ We select 𝑀 such that
                                                                                       𝑛2
                                                                                                            
                                                                     1 1
                              𝑀 ≥ max 𝛾 max max                         ,          ,      (∥ 𝑥¯ ∥ ∞ + ∥𝑐∥ ∞ ) .
                                                  𝑖∈[𝑛]             𝑥¯ 𝑖 𝑐 𝑖           𝛽
The first term in the bound guarantees that for any primal and dual optimal solutions (𝑥★ , 𝑦★ , 𝑠 ★) to (18)
we have ∥𝑥★ ∥ ∞ , ∥𝑠 ★ ∥ ∞ < 𝑀, noting that ⟨𝑐, 𝑥★⟩ ≤ ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩            ¯ 𝑠 ★⟩ ≤ ⟨ 𝑥,
                                                            ¯ = 𝛾 and ⟨ 𝑥,         ¯ 𝑐⟩ = 𝛾. The second term
will be used to argue for the centrality of the initial solution of the extended system below.
   We now write the ‘big-𝑀 system’ (4) of [VY96]. For simplicity, in the following argument we denote
the input to the system (18) (A, 𝑏, 𝑐) as for the original system, and we let 𝑥ˆ > 0 denote the primal feasible
solution. As noted already, this is still a min-cost generalized flow problem.
                                                                                             max ⟨𝑏, 𝑦⟩ + 2𝑀 ⟨1𝑛 , 𝑦 ′⟩
                         min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥 ′⟩ + 𝑀 ⟨1𝑛 , 𝑥 ′⟩
                                                                           A 𝑦 + 𝑦′ + 𝑠 = 𝑐
                                                                                   ⊤
                   A𝑥 − A𝑥 ′ = 𝑏
                                                                                         𝑦 ′ + 𝑠 ′′ = 0𝑛                  (19)
                       𝑥 + 𝑥 ′′ = 2𝑀1𝑛                                                   ⊤       ′
                                                                                   −A 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑀1𝑛
                     𝑥, 𝑥 ′ , 𝑥 ′′ ≥ 0𝑛 ,
                                                                                        𝑠, 𝑠 ′ , 𝑠 ′′ ≥ 0𝑛 ,

                                                                      30
We can initialize with (𝑥, 𝑥 ′ , 𝑥 ′′) = (𝑀1𝑛 , 𝑀1𝑛 , 𝑀1𝑛 − 𝑥)    ¯ and (𝑠, 𝑠 ′ , 𝑠 ′′) = (𝑀1𝑛 , 𝑀1𝑛 − 𝑐, 𝑀1𝑛 ). By the
                𝑛2
choice of 𝑀 ≥ 𝛽 (∥ 𝑥¯ 𝑅 ∥ ∞ + ∥ 𝑠¯ 𝑅 ∥ ∞ ), it is easy to check that this point satisfies the initialization condition
in Theorem 1.3.
    We claim that any optimal solution to this system is optimal to the original system; that is, all
the auxiliary variables are 0. To see this, note that by the choice of 𝑀, for any primal and dual
optimal solutions (𝑥★ , 𝑦★ , 𝑠 ★) to (18), (𝑥★ , 0𝑛 , 𝑀1𝑛 − 𝑥★) and (𝑠 ★ , 0𝑛 , 𝑀1𝑛 − 𝑐 − 𝑠 ★) are optimal to (19) by
complementary slackness. Also by complementary slackness, it follows that the auxiliary variables 𝑥 ′
and 𝑠 ′′ must be 0𝑛 for any primal and dual optimal solutions.
    Further, we note that (19) is a min-cost generalized flow problem with capacity bounds. This can
be reduced to an uncapacitated min-cost generalized flow problem by adding a new node for each arc.
Hence, the straight line complexity bounds are applicable.
     Finally, for the sake of the strongly polynomial model, we need to guarantee that the bit-complexity
of 𝑀 is bounded in terms of the encoding length of the input; the definition of the encoding length is
given in Section 8. Still, we note that it suffices to guarantee that the maximum support solutions 𝑥ˆ and 𝑠ˆ
found in the first step have bounded encoding length. This can be ensured by requiring a basic solution
from each of the feasibility oracle calls, and choosing the maximal possible values of each coefficient 𝛼
if it is bounded, and 𝛼 = 1 if unbounded. Given arbitrary feasible solutions, a basic solution can be
obtained by a simple support reduction procedure in strongly polynomial time.


6    Background on interior point methods
Projections and lifts. Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a linear subspace. We define two important operations: projection
to a coordinate subspace, and fixing coordinates to 0. Namely, for 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], let
                       𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) B {𝑤 𝐼 : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 },         𝜑𝐼 (𝑊) B {𝑤 𝐼 : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑤[𝑛]\𝐼 = 0} .                     (20)
It is easy to verify that the coordinate projection of 𝑊 ⊥ is the orthogonal complement of 𝜑𝐼 (𝑊).
Lemma 6.1. For any subspace 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 and 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], 𝐼 ≠ ∅, 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊 ⊥ ) = [𝜑𝐼 (𝑊)]⊥
    The lifting map can be used to map back elements of 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) to 𝑊.
Definition 6.2. Given a subset 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], 𝐼 ∉ {∅, [𝑛]}, and a subspace 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 , we define the lifting map
𝐿𝑊
 𝐼
   : 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) → 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 as follows:

                                    𝐿𝑊
                                     𝐼 (𝑥) B arg min{∥𝑤∥ : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑤 𝐼 = 𝑥}.                                      (21)
We further define ℓ 𝐼𝑊 : 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) → 𝜋[𝑛]\𝐼 (𝑊) by ℓ 𝐼𝑊 (𝑥) B [𝐿𝑊
                                                             𝐼
                                                               (𝑥)][𝑛]\𝐼 , i.e., the restriction of the output of
the lifting map to the coordinates in [𝑛] \ 𝐼.
   Note that the lifting map is well-defined and is a linear map that can be computed in strongly
polynomial time given a basis of 𝑊. This map plays a key role in LLS IPMs, see e.g. [DHNV23].

Subspace formulation for LP. We now reformulate (LP) in the language of subspaces, a more conve-
nient language for the initialization techniques in Section 7. Give an instance of (LP) with (A, 𝑏, 𝑐), let
𝑊 = ker(A) and 𝑑 ∈ R𝑛 such that A𝑑 = 𝑏. Note that such a 𝑑 can be found in strongly polynomial time
if it exists; if it does not exists, then the LP is infeasible. Thus, we can write the LP as follows:
                                      min ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩                 min ⟨𝑑, 𝑠⟩
                                          𝑥 ∈𝑊+𝑑                      𝑠 ∈ 𝑊⊥ + 𝑐                      (LP-subspace)
                                          𝑥 ≥ 0,                      𝑠 ≥ 0,
We repeat the definitions of 𝒫, 𝒟, 𝒫++ , and 𝒟++ , also indexing them as we will consider different linear
programs.
          𝒫(𝑊 , 𝑑) B {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 | 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0} ,         𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐) B {𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 | 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ + 𝑐, , 𝑠 ≥ 0}
                                                         𝑛                                𝑛
and the strictly feasible sets 𝒫++ (𝑊 , 𝑑) = 𝒫(𝑊 , 𝑑) ∩ R++ and 𝒟++ (𝑊 , 𝑑) = 𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐) ∩ R++ . We simply
use 𝒫, 𝒟, 𝒫++ , 𝒟++ when clear from the context. For (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒫++ × 𝒟++ , the normalized duality gap is
                                                               ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩
                                                   𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) B          .
                                                                 𝑛
We will use the following simple but useful property.


                                                          31
Proposition 6.3. Given 𝑥, 𝑥 ′ ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑠, 𝑠 ′ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ + 𝑐, we have that

                                                 ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ + ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠 ′⟩ + ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠⟩ .

In particular, if ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ = 0, then
                                                        ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠 ′⟩ + ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠⟩ .
Proof. This follows since 𝑥 − 𝑥 ′ ∈ 𝑊 and 𝑠 − 𝑠 ′ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ live in orthogonal subspaces.                                     □
    We formulate a simple linearity property of the the duality gap; see e.g. [ADL+ 23].
Proposition 6.4 (Linearity of duality gap). Given 𝑥 (1) , . . . , 𝑥 (𝑘) ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑠 (1) , . . . , 𝑠 (𝑘) ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ + 𝑐 forming the
                                                                                         Í𝑘
sequence 𝑧 (1) = (𝑥 (1) , 𝑠 (1) ), . . . , 𝑧 (𝑘) = (𝑥 (𝑘) , 𝑠 (𝑘) ) and 𝜆 ∈ R 𝑘 such that 𝑖=1 𝜆 𝑖 = 1, we have that

                                                        𝑘                            𝑘
                                                                            !
                                                        Õ                            Õ
                                                                      (𝑖)
                                                    𝜇          𝜆𝑖 𝑧             =          𝜆 𝑖 𝜇(𝑧 (𝑖) ) .
                                                         𝑖=1                         𝑖=1


The central path and the analytic center. Given (LP-subspace), if 𝒫++ , 𝒟++ ≠ ∅, then for every 𝜇 > 0
there exists a unique point (𝑥(𝜇), 𝑠(𝜇)) ∈ 𝒫 × 𝒟 with 𝑥 𝑖 (𝜇)𝑠 𝑖 (𝜇) = 𝜇 for every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. The central path
is the algebraic curve formed by the points (𝑥(𝜇), 𝑠(𝜇)) for 𝜇 ∈ (0, ∞). The limit of the central path is a
primal-dual optimal solution pair (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★) ∈ 𝒫 × 𝒟, such that 𝐵★ = supp(𝑥★) and 𝑁 ★ = supp(𝑠 ★) form a
partition of [𝑛].
    The SLLS algorithm maintains iterates in the ℓ2 -neighborhood of the central path. For the rest of the
paper, we use a fixed value 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6].

                                                             𝑥◦𝑠
                                                                                                                  
                               𝒩 (𝛽) B (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒫++ × 𝒟++ : −1
                                  2
                                                                     −1 ≤ 𝛽 ,                                          (22)
                                                            𝑛 ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩   2

           2
We let 𝒩 (𝛽) denote the closure of the ℓ2 neighborhood. This will correspond to the part of neighborhood
containing the limit optimal solutions on the central path.
   We use the following proximity properties. For the first one, see e.g., [Gon92, Lemma 5.4] and [MT03,
Proposition 2.1].
Proposition 6.5. Let 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) for 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/4] and 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑧), and consider the central path point
𝑧 cp (𝜇) = (𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠 cp (𝜇)). For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛],

                                            𝑥𝑖     1 − 2𝛽                  𝑥𝑖
                                                          𝑥 𝑖 ≤ 𝑥 𝑖 (𝜇) ≤     ,
                                                                   cp
                                                 ≤                                                           and
                                          1 + 2𝛽   1−𝛽                    1−𝛽
                                             𝑠𝑖    1 − 2𝛽                  𝑠𝑖
                                                          𝑠 𝑖 ≤ 𝑠 𝑖 (𝜇) ≤     .
                                                                  cp
                                                 ≤
                                          1 + 2𝛽    1−𝛽                   1−𝛽

    We will often use the following proposition which is immediate from the definition of 𝒩 2 (𝛽).

Proposition 6.6. Let 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) for 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/4], and 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑧). Then for each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]

                                                     (1 − 𝛽)𝜇 ≤ 𝑠 𝑖 𝑥 𝑖 ≤ (1 + 𝛽)𝜇 .

   The following lemma shows that the choice of parameter 𝜇 = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /𝑛 is essentially optimal for the
purpose of minimizing centrality error at (𝑥, 𝑠).

Lemma 6.7 ([MT03, Lemma 4.4]). For 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/4], let (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒫++ ×𝒟++ and 𝜇′ > 0 satisfy ∥𝑥𝑠/𝜇′ −1∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽.
Then, for 𝜇 B ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /𝑛, we have that

                         (𝑥 ◦ 𝑠)        𝛽                                              √                  √
                                 −1 ≤       ,                  and              (1 − 𝛽/ 𝑛)𝜇′ ≤ 𝜇 ≤ (1 + 𝛽/ 𝑛)𝜇′ .      (23)
                            𝜇      2  1 − 𝛽

   A key property of the central path is ‘near monotonicity’, formulated in the following lemma, see
[VY96, Lemma 16].




                                                                                32
Lemma 6.8. For the central path point 𝑧 cp (𝜇) = (𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠 cp (𝜇)) and any 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒫 × 𝒟, it holds that
                                                                𝜇(𝑧) cp
                                                                                     
                                                       𝑧 ≤ 𝑛 1+      𝑧 (𝜇) .
                                                                 𝜇
Moreover, if 𝜇(𝑧) ≤ 𝜇, then 𝑧 ≤ 𝑛𝑧 cp (𝜇).
Proof. We only prove the first part; for the proof of the second statement see [VY96, Lemma 16]. By
Proposition 6.3,
                          ⟨𝑥, 𝑠 cp (𝜇)⟩ + ⟨𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠⟩ = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ + ⟨𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠 cp (𝜇)⟩ = 𝑛𝜇(𝑧) + 𝑛𝜇 .
Dividing by 𝜇, and using that 𝑥 𝑖 (𝜇)𝑠 𝑖 (𝜇) = 𝜇, we get
                                          cp      cp


                                           𝑛
                                                                                  !
                                                       𝑥𝑖                𝜇(𝑧)
                                                                        𝑠𝑖
                                           Õ                                                             
                                                         + cp     ≤ 𝑛 1+      .
                                                  𝑥 𝑖 (𝜇) 𝑠 𝑖 (𝜇)
                                                    cp
                                                                          𝜇
                                            𝑖=1

The first part follows since all terms are nonnegative.                                                           □
    Assuming 𝒫++ (𝑊 , 𝑑) ≠ ∅ and 𝒫 is bounded, its analytic center is
                                                                                  𝑛
                                                                                  Õ
                                                       𝑥˜ B arg max                       log 𝑥 𝑖 .
                                                                  𝑥∈𝒫++ (𝑊 ,𝑑) 𝑖=1

By Lagrangian duality, there exists a unique 𝑣˜ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ such that 𝑥˜Í      𝑖𝑣
                                                                          ˜ 𝑖 = 1 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. We define
the analytic center of 𝒟++ (𝑊 , 𝑐) analogously as the maximizer of 𝑛𝑖=1 log 𝑥 𝑖 over 𝒟++ (𝑊 , 𝑐). This is
equivalent to the existence of 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 with 𝑠˜ 𝑖 𝑣˜ 𝑖 = 1 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. We note that one of 𝒫++ (𝑊 , 𝑑) and
𝒟++ (𝑊 , 𝑑) is always unbounded; hence, the analytic center may only exist for either of them.
    It is well-known that the central path limit point (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★) coincide with the analytic centers of the
primal and dual optimal facets, see e.g., [RTV05, Theorem I.30]. Namely, 𝑥★ is the analytic center of
𝜋𝐵★ (𝑊), and 𝑠 ★ is the analytic center of 𝜋 𝑁 ★ (𝑊 ⊥ ).
    We also use the following step-length estimate. In Appendix B, we show a stronger version Proposi-
tion B.16.
Lemma 6.9 (Step-length estimate for general directions, [ADL+ 23]). Let 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6].
Consider directions Δ𝑥 ∈ 𝑊, Δ𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ that satisfy ∥Δ𝑥 ◦ Δ𝑠 ∥ ≤ 𝛽𝜇/4. Let
                                                              ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥) ◦ (𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥
                                                   𝛾B                               .
                                                                       𝜇
                           2                                         √
Then (𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 (2𝛽) and 𝜇(𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) ≤ (1 + 23 𝛽/ 𝑛)(1 − 𝛼)𝜇, for all 0 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 1 − 𝛽 .
                                                                                                      4𝛾



6.1    A stronger version of the SLLS IPM
We will require following adapted version of the IPM in Theorem 1.3, which we prove in Appendix B.
The two main differences are that the iterations are implementable in strongly polynomial time, and
the second is that the output guarantees are stronger, namely, it outputs certificates that the returned
optimal solutions are close the analytic centers of the corresponding optimal faces.
Theorem 6.10. Let 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6] be a constant, 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). Given a point (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), for (LP-subspace) with
data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐), there exists an IPM, that terminates in
                                                                           𝑛
                                                                                                      !
                                                                         𝑛
                                                                         Õ
                                                  𝑂 𝑛       1.5
                                                                  log                 SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                              𝑖 )
                                                                        𝜂
                                                                              𝑖=1

many iterations and returns a quadruple (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★ , 𝑣★ , 𝑤★) ∈ R4𝑛 that for 𝐵★ B supp(𝑥★) and 𝑁 ★ B supp(𝑠 ★)
has the following properties:
  (1) 𝐵★ and 𝑁 ★ form a partition of [𝑛],
  (2) 𝑥★ ∈ 𝒫(𝑊 , 𝑑), 𝑠 ★ ∈ 𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐),
  (3) 𝑣★ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑣★𝐵 > 0𝐵 and 𝑤★ ∈ 𝑊, 𝑤 ∗𝑁 > 0𝑁 .
  (4) ∥(𝑥★𝐵★ ◦ 𝑣 𝐵∗ ★ , 𝑠 ★𝑁 ★ ◦ 𝑤★𝑁 ★ ) − 1𝑛 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽.
Furthermore, each iteration can be implemented by a strongly polynomial algorithm in the Turing model.


                                                                             33
6.2    Straight-line complexity of a subspace
For a subspace 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 we define, in a slight overload of notation, the following worst-case straight line
complexity.
Definition 6.11. For a subspace 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1) we let
                                 n                                                                  o
                                     𝑖 ) | 𝑥 is MCP for (LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐) .
          SLC𝜂 (𝑊) B sup max SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪      𝔪
                                                                                                            (24)
                         𝑐,𝑑≥0       𝑖∈[𝑛]


   Thus, we define the subspace SLC over all possible primal-dual feasible LPs corresponding to the
subspace 𝑊, i.e., 𝑊 = ker(A) in the matrix formulation (LP). As noted in the introduction, we would
obtain essentially the same bound if using the dual SLC𝜂 (𝑠 𝑖𝔪 ) in the definition. The following Lemma,
shown in Section 7.3, asserts that SLC(𝑊) may only go up by one when deleting or projecting out
variables.
Lemma 6.12. Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a subspace and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). Then, for any index set 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], SLC𝜂 (𝜋𝐼 (𝑊)) ≤
SLC𝜂 (𝑊) + 1 and SLC𝜂 (𝜑𝐼 (𝑊)) ≤ SLC𝜂 (𝑊) + 1.


7     An initialization framework for general Linear Programs
Section 5 gave an initialization technique for generalized flows. This requires primal and dual feasibility
subroutines that are available for this problem but not in general. Also, it requires solving 2𝑛 feasibility
problems as preprocessing before a single call to the SLLS IPM.
    In this section, we present a new, general initialization technique applicable for general instances of
(LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐). It only requires four calls to SLLS IPM. Moreover, the running time of
all these IPMs will be upper bounded by the subspace straight-line complexity bound SLC𝜂 (𝑊),    ¯ where
 ¯
𝑊 B {(𝑤, −𝑤, 𝑤)   ¯ : 𝑤 − 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝑊 }. This subspace also corresponds to the system used in the ‘big-𝑀’
initialization (4); however, we will use a different system. For a generalized flow problem, this still
corresponds to a (capacitated) generalized flow problem. The main result of this section is following
theorem.
Theorem 7.1 (Initialization for LP). Given a subspace 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 and 𝑑, 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 , there exists an algorithm
(Algorithm 1) that either finds primal-dual optimal solutions to (LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐) or finds a
certificate of primal or dual infeasibility. The running time of the algorithm is
                                                                           
                                                                 1       ¯
                                             𝑂 poly(𝑛) · min log   SLC𝜂 (𝑊)                                 (25)
                                                        𝜂∈(0,1]  𝜂

and it requires space strongly polynomial in size(A, 𝑑, 𝑐), where A is a representation of 𝑊 as ker(A) = 𝑊. Here,
𝑊¯ B {(𝑤, −𝑤, 𝑤)  ¯ : 𝑤 − 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝑊 }.
    The main vehicle of this result is the SLLS IPM in [ADL+ 23], which requires that primal and dual are
strictly feasible and furthermore requires as input an initial point near the central path.
    We present a initialization technique with three stages, where the first stage corresponds to a conic
feasibility problem, the second stage corresponds to primal and dual feasibility and the third stage
corresponds to an optimization problem. Compared to the initialization in Section 5, the first two stages
correspond to finding maximum support primal and dual solutions. In the third stage, we similarly
remove variables outside the primal support and project out variables outside the dual support. Using
the stronger output guarantees in Theorem 6.10, the first two stages will provide well-centered starting
solutions to the subsequent stages.

Farkas lemma.      To prepare for our initialization technique, we will review the Farkas lemma and a conic
version of it.
Lemma 7.2 (Farkas lemma). Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 and 𝑑, 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 . Then, exactly one of the following is feasible:
(P1) 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0, or
(P2) 𝑦 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑦 ≥ 0, ⟨𝑑, 𝑦⟩ < 0.
Analogously, exactly one of the following is feasible:


                                                           34
(D1) 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ + 𝑐, 𝑠 ≥ 0, or
(D2) 𝑧 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑧 ≥ 0, ⟨𝑐, 𝑧⟩ < 0.

Lemma 7.3 (Conic Farkas lemma). Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a subspace and 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. Then exactly one of the following is
feasible:
(C1) 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥 ≥ 0, 𝑥 𝑖 > 0, or
(C2) 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑥 ≥ 0, 𝑥 𝑖 > 0.

Proof. Clearly, both cannot be feasible: if 𝑦 is feasible for (C1) and 𝑧 is feasible for (𝐶2), then 0 = ⟨𝑦, 𝑧⟩ ≥
𝑦 𝑖 𝑧 𝑖 > 0, a contradiction.
       Now assume that (C1) is infeasible. Then, by scaling the system 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥 ≥ 0, 𝑥 𝑖 ≥ 1 is also infeasible,
which is equivalent to the system 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊 − 𝑒 𝑖 , 𝑥¯ ≥ 0. By Lemma 7.2 there exists a certificate of infeasibility
𝑦 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑦 ≥ 0, ⟨ 𝑦,¯ −𝑒 𝑖 ⟩ < 0, which is equivalent to 𝑦 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑦 ≥ 0, 𝑦 𝑖 > 0, giving a feasible solution to
(C2).                                                                                                           □

7.1   High level description
Stage I: Conic feasibility. In the first stage, our goal is to find the strictly complementary partition
(𝐵, 𝑁) for the subspace 𝑊 guaranteed by Lemma 7.3. Thus, there exist 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 ∩ R+𝑛 and 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ ∩ R+𝑛
such that 𝑥 𝑖 > 0 for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 and 𝑠 𝑖 > 0 for 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁. We aim for the stronger requirement that these solutions
be the analytic centers of the following (feasible and bounded) regions:

                       𝑥 𝐵 ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊), 0𝐵 ≤ 𝑥 𝐵 ≤ 1𝐵 ,        𝑠 𝑁 ∈ 𝜑 𝑁 (𝑊 ⊥ ), 0𝑁 ≤ 𝑠 𝑁 ≤ 1𝑁 ,                  (26)

where we recall the definition of 𝜑 from (20).
  We do so by running the interior point method on the following primal-dual system.

                                       min ⟨1𝑛 , 𝑥⟩
                                                  ˆ                 min ⟨1𝑛 , 𝑠ˇ ⟩
                                      𝑥¯ − 𝑥ˆ ∈ 𝑊                   𝑠¯ − 𝑠ˇ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥
                                                                                                               (27)
                                      𝑥¯ + 𝑥ˇ = 1𝑛             𝑠¯ − 𝑠ˇ + 𝑠ˆ = 1𝑛
                                     𝑥,
                                     ¯ 𝑥,ˆ 𝑥ˇ ≥ 0𝑛 ,               𝑠¯ , 𝑠ˆ , 𝑠ˇ ≥ 0𝑛 ,
The variables 𝑥¯ and 𝑠¯ correspond to the true variables in (LP-subspace). The variable 𝑥ˆ is auxiliary, and
describes the subspace error in 𝑊 in the primal of (27). The variable 𝑥ˇ is auxiliary and corresponds to the
slack variables 𝑥ˆ ≤ 1𝑛 in the upper bounds constraints on 𝑥.     ¯ The variables dual to 𝑥ˇ are the variables
𝑠ˇ , which correspond to subspace error in 𝑊 ⊥ . Analogously, 𝑠ˆ functions as an upper bound on the term
𝑠¯ − 𝑠ˇ and is the dual variable to the primal subspace error variables 𝑥. ˆ
      We will show that (27) is easy to initialize with the primal and dual solutions ( 21 13𝑛 , 13𝑛 ), both systems
have optimum objective values 0, and the supports of the optimal solutions 𝑥¯ c and 𝑠¯ c form the partition
(𝐵, 𝑁) as in Lemma 7.3.
      In particular, the relative interior of the optimal region of the primal in (27), restricted to the coordi-
nates in 𝐵, corresponds exactly to the relative interior of the primal feasible region in (26). The analogous
statement holds for 𝑠¯ 𝑁 on the dual side. We can use the result from Theorem 6.10 to find feasible vectors
𝑥¯ 𝐵c and 𝑠¯ 𝑁
             c
               that satisfy (26), as well as conic vectors that certify the centrality of these vectors. This
information will be useful for initializing the feasibility systems in Stage II.

Stage II: Primal and dual feasibility. Having obtained the conic maximum support partition (𝐵, 𝑁)
of the subspace 𝑊, our next goal is to find maximum support primal and dual feasible solutions with
some additional guarantees. First, we note that given any vector 𝑥 ′ ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑 with 𝑥 ′𝑁 ≥ 0𝑁 , we can find a
feasible 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0𝑛 as 𝑥 = 𝑥 ′ + 𝛼 𝑥¯ 𝐵c for a sufficiently large 𝛼 > 0; moreover, supp(𝑥) = supp(𝑥 ′) ∪ 𝐵.
Hence, we can focus on finding a maximum support primal feasible solution on the subspace 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)
projected to the coordinates in 𝑁. We can analogously argue about the dual coordinates in 𝐵.
    Thus, we aim to find vectors near the analytic center of the (relative interior of the) optimal facets of
the following region.

                                            𝑠 ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ) + 𝑐 𝐵 , 𝑠 ≥ 0𝐵 .                                     (28)



                                                         35
The above correspond to the coordinate-projection of the dual feasible region 𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐) onto the coordi-
nates in 𝐵. The analogous primal feasibility problem is

                                                 𝑥 ∈ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊) + 𝑑 𝑁 , 𝑥 ≥ 0𝑁 .                                       (29)

Here, the feasible region corresponds to the coordinate-projection of the primal feasible region 𝒫(𝑊 , 𝑑)
onto the coordinates in 𝑁; as noted above, feasibility on coordinates in 𝐵 can be obtained using the Stage
I solution.
    Furthermore, note that the feasible regions in (28) and (29) are bounded, as unboundedness of (28)
would imply the existence of a ray 𝑣 ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ), 𝑣 ≥ 0𝐵 , 𝑣 ≠ 0𝐵 , which can not exist, as we already found
a strictly positive vector 𝑥¯ 𝐵c > 0𝐵 in the orthogonal space i.e., 𝑥¯ 𝐵c ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ )⊥ = 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊) and so we arrive
at the contradiction 0 = 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣 > 0.
    We solve dual feasibility (28) by running the interior point in Theorem 6.10 on the following auxiliary
primal-dual system, again noting that 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ )⊥ = 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊).

                                   min ⟨𝑐 𝐵 , 𝑥¯ 𝐵 ⟩                   min ⟨1𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 ⟩
                                    𝑥¯ 𝐵 ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊)                 𝑠¯ 𝐵 − 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ) + 𝑐 𝐵 ,
                                                                                                                    (30)
                               𝑥¯ 𝐵 + 𝑥ˇ 𝐵 = 1𝐵 ,                    𝑠¯ 𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 ≥ 0𝐵 .
                                  𝑥¯ 𝐵 , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵 ≥ 0𝐵 .

It will turn out, that we can initialize these systems directly, using the output of Theorem 6.10 under the
Stage I program. Depending on the objective value of this primal-dual system we will be able to either
decide dual infeasibility or find a point near the analytic center of the optimal facet of (28).
    An analogous program exists for the variables ( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 , 𝑥ˆ 𝑁 ) and (¯𝑠 𝑁 , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁 ) for primal feasibility (29). In case
that both (29) and (28) are feasible, let 𝑥¯ 𝑁 and 𝑠¯ 𝐵d be the corresponding vectors returned by the algorithm.
                                             p



Stage III: Optimization Finally, we aim to solve the optimization problem. Here, we will need to
restrict the set of variables we are operating on even further. To initialize the IPM for optimization, we
require strictly feasible primal-dual solutions. However, Stage II may have returned feasible solutions
𝑥¯ 𝑁 and 𝑠¯ 𝐵d that are not fully supported on 𝑁 and 𝐵. By the property that these vector are near the
   p

analytic center of the relative interior of the optimal facet, this allows us to conclude that all feasible
primal solutions 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫(𝑊 , 𝑑) fulfill that 𝑥 𝑁¯ = 0𝑁¯ for 𝑁¯ B 𝑁 \ supp( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 ). Similarly, all feasible dual
                                                                                    p

solutions 𝑠 ∈ 𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐) fulfill that 𝑠 𝐵¯ = 0𝐵¯ for 𝐵¯ B 𝐵 \ supp(¯𝑠 𝐵d ). Hence, we are able to delete these variable
sets and only consider the variables 𝐵∗ B supp(¯𝑠 𝐵d ) and 𝑁 ∗ B supp( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 ) for the optimization problem.
                                                                                  p

The corresponding optimization problem now operates on a subspace 𝑊 ∗ ⊆ R𝐵 ∪𝑁 of 𝑊 on which the
                                                                                            ∗   ∗


coordinates in 𝑁¯ are fixed to 0 and the coordinates in 𝐵¯ are projected out. That is,
                                                                                            
                              𝑊 ∗ B 𝜋[𝑛]\(𝐵∪
                                          ¯ 𝑁)
                                             ¯ 𝜑[𝑛]\𝑁¯ (𝑊) = 𝜑𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ 𝜋[𝑛]\𝐵¯ (𝑊) .                                 (31)

Recall from Section 5 that the deletion and projection operations can be interpreted as arc deletions
and contractions for generalized flows, resulting in another generalized flow instance. Again, we can
initialize this new optimization system with the vectors obtained from the algorithm in Theorem 6.10
under the Stage II program.
    The output of this last call to an IPM, gives us an optimal solution on the coordinates 𝐵∗ ∪ 𝑁 ∗ . Some
extra combinatorial work is necessary to lift these primal and dual optimization vectors to a primal-dual
optimal solution of the original LP (LP-subspace) on the full coordinate set 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁.

7.2     The algorithm and analysis
The full algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. We now show that it works correctly, by analyzing the
three stages separately.

7.2.1   Stage I, Strict conic feasibility
In this section we show how to solve the conic feasibility problem. Let data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐) for (LP-subspace)
be given. Our aim is to find the partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛] and corresponding vectors 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥 ≥ 0, 𝑥 𝐵 > 0
and 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑠 ≥ 0, 𝑠 𝑁 > 0, which exists by Lemma 7.3. Note that for generalized flow problems we are


                                                             36
 Algorithm 1: LP-Solve
     Input : An instance of (LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐).
     Output: One of the following:
        • A pair of primal-dual optimal solutions: (𝑥 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ) feasible to (LP-subspace) such that ⟨𝑥 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ⟩ = 0.
                                                             𝑛 such that ⟨𝑑, 𝑦⟩ < 0.
         • A certificate of primal infeasibility: 𝑦 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ ∩ R+
                                                         𝑛 such that ⟨𝑐, 𝑦⟩ < 0.
         • A certificate of dual infeasibility: 𝑦 ∈ 𝑊 ∩ R+

 1 𝛽 c ← 2−16 , 𝛽 p ← 𝛽 d ← 2−8 , 𝛽∗ ← 2−4                                                      ∗
                                                                                          26 𝐵 ← supp(𝑠 ), 𝐵
                                                                                                                 d ¯ ← 𝐵 \ 𝐵∗
 2 // Stage I: Conic Feasibility                                                                 ∗
                                                                                          27 𝑁 ← supp(𝑥 ), 𝑁
                                                                                                                  p ¯ ← 𝑁 \ 𝑁∗

 3 𝑊 ← {(𝑤,          ¯ 𝑤,ˆ 𝑤)  ˇ ∈ R : 𝑤¯ − 𝑤ˆ ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑤¯ = −𝑤}
                                                                                                                                          
      c                                 3𝑛                                   ˇ                    ∗
                                                                                          28 𝑊 ← 𝜋[𝑛]\(𝐵∪        ¯ 𝑁)¯ 𝜑[𝑛]\ 𝑁¯ (𝑊)
 4 (𝑥 , 𝑠 , 𝑣 , 𝑤 ) ← IPM(𝑊 , 13𝑛 , 13𝑛 , 𝛽 )
      c c c              c                       c 1                c
                                                     2                                         ′                       𝑊∗ p
                                                                                          29 𝑥 ← 𝑑 𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ + 𝐿 ∗ (𝑥 ∗ − 𝑑 𝑁 ∗ )
 5 (𝑥
    ¯ c , 𝑥ˆ c , 𝑥ˇ c ) ← 𝑥 c , (¯𝑠 c , 𝑠ˆ c , 𝑠ˇ c ) ← 𝑠 c                                                            𝑁        𝑁
                                                                                               ′                      (𝑊 ∗ )⊥ d
 6 (𝑤¯ c , 𝑤ˆ c , 𝑤ˇ c ) ← 𝑤 c , (𝑣¯ c , 𝑣ˆ c , 𝑣ˇ c ) ← 𝑣 c                              30 𝑠 ← 𝑐 𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ + 𝐿 ∗                (𝑠    − 𝑐 𝐵∗ )
                                                                                                                      𝐵            𝐵∗
 7 𝐵 ← supp( 𝑥          ¯ c ), 𝑁 ← supp(¯𝑠 c )                                            31 𝜇 ← (𝛽 )
                                                                                                0         c −1 ∥𝑥 ′ ◦ 𝑠 ′ ∥
                                                                                                                               1
 8 // Stage II: Feasibility                                                                             ′
                                                                                          32 𝑥 ← 𝑥 + 𝜇 (𝑤 ∗ , 0 𝑁 ∗ )
                                                                                               0               0 d
 9 // Primal Feasibility
                                                                                                                     𝐵
                                                                                                       ′
                                                                                          33 𝑠 ← 𝑠 + 𝜇 (0𝐵∗ , 𝑣 ∗ )
                                                                                               0               0           p
10 𝑊 ← {(𝑤,
      p               ¯ 𝑤)ˆ : 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝜑 𝑁 (𝑊 ⊥ ), 𝑤¯ + 𝑤ˆ = 0}                                                                𝑁
                                                                                                 ∗  ∗                            ∗ 0 0 ∗
     p                             c −1
11 𝑑 ← (𝑑 𝑁 , 0 𝑁 ) + (𝛽 ) (∥𝑑 𝑁 ∥ 1 + 1)∥(¯                     𝑠𝑁
                                                                  c , 𝑠ˆ c )∥ (𝑤
                                                                               ¯ c ,𝑤
                                                                                    ˆ c ) 34 (𝑥 , 𝑠 , •, •) ← IPM(𝑊 , 𝑥 , 𝑠 , 𝛽 )
                                                                         𝑁 1 𝑁        𝑁               𝜑 𝑁¯ (𝑊) ∗
12 (𝑠 , 𝑥 , 𝑤 , 𝑣 ) ← IPM(𝑊 , (¯
      p p            p p                           p 𝑠 c , 𝑠ˆ c ), 𝑑 p , 𝛽 p )
                                                       𝑁 𝑁
                                                                                             ˜ ← 𝐿𝐵∗[𝑛]\
                                                                                          35 𝑥
                                                                                                          ∪𝑁 ∗
                                                                                                                   (𝑥 )
    𝑠 , 𝑠ˆ ) ← 𝑠 , (𝑥¯ , 𝑥ˆ ) ← 𝑥
13 (¯
      p     p            p      p    p               p                                                𝜑     ¯
                                                                                                            𝐵 (𝑊  ⊥)
                                                                                             ˜ ← 𝐿𝐵∗[𝑛]\
                                                                                          36 𝑠
                                                                                                         ∪𝑁 ∗
                                                                                                                     (𝑠 ∗ )
14 (𝑤¯ p , 𝑤ˆ p ) ← 𝑤 p , (𝑣¯ p , 𝑣ˆ p ) ← 𝑣 p
                                                                                          37 𝛼 ← min{𝛼 ∈ R : 𝑥            ˜ 𝐵¯ + 𝛼 𝑤¯ d¯ ≥ 0𝐵¯ }
15 if 𝑥ˆ p ≠ 0𝑁 then                                                                                                                   𝐵
16   return (FARKAS, (0𝐵 , 𝑠¯ p ))                                                             ′′
                                                                                          38 𝑥 ← 𝑥    ˜ 𝐵¯ + 𝛼 𝑤¯ d¯
                                                                                                                    𝐵
                                                                                                                                        p
17 // Dual Feasibility                                                                  39   𝛼 ← min{𝛼 ∈ R : 𝑠˜ 𝑁¯ + 𝛼 𝑣¯ ¯ ≥ 0𝑁¯ }
                                                                                                                                        𝑁
18 𝑊 ← {(𝑤,  ¯ 𝑤)
                ˇ : 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝜑 𝐵 (𝑊), 𝑤¯ + 𝑤ˇ = 0}                                               𝑠 ′′ ← 𝑠˜ 𝑁¯ + 𝛼 𝑣¯ ¯
      d                                                                                                            p
                                                                                        40
                       c −1                                                                                        𝑁
19 𝑐 ← (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) + (𝛽 ) (∥𝑐 𝐵 ∥ 1 + 1)∥( 𝑥
                                           ¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c )∥ 1 (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c )
    d
                                                                                                         (𝑥 ∗ , 0𝑁¯ , 𝑥 ′′ ), (𝑠 ∗ , 0𝐵¯ , 𝑠 ′′ )
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                        41   return
20 (𝑥 d , 𝑠 d , 𝑣 d , 𝑤 d ) ← IPM(𝑊 d , (𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ), 𝑐 d , 𝛽 d )                   42

21 ( 𝑥
     ¯ d , 𝑥ˇ d ) ← 𝑥 d , (¯𝑠 d , 𝑠ˇ d ) ← 𝑠 d                                          43   procedure IPM:
                                                                                              Input : data (𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 , 𝑥 > 0𝑛 , 𝑠 > 0𝑛 ) for
22 (𝑣¯ d , 𝑣ˇ d ) ← 𝑣 d , (𝑤¯ d , 𝑤ˇ d ) ← 𝑤 d
                                                                                                      (LP-subspace), 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6) with
23 if 𝑠ˇ d ≠ 0𝐵 then                                                                                     𝑛𝑥𝑠 − 1∥ ≤ 𝛽.
                                                                                                      ∥ ⟨𝑥,𝑠⟩            2
24    return (FARKAS, (𝑥¯ d , 0𝑁 ))
                                                                                              Output: (𝑥 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ , 𝑣 ∗ , 𝑤 ∗ ) as in Theorem 6.10
25   // Stage III: Optimization




able to solve this problem with combinatorial algorithms (e.g., Bellman-Ford). However, using an IPM
we can solve the conic feasibility problem for arbitrary LP with strongly polynomially bounded SLC in
strongly polynomial time. An additional benefit of using an IPM instead of combinatorial methods is
that we are able to find specific conic solutions which will be useful to directly implement later stages of
the initialization procedure.
     We consider following the LP of the form (LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 c , 𝑑c , 𝑐 c ), where 𝑑c = 12 13𝑛 ,
𝑐 c = 13𝑛 and
                                𝑊 c B {(𝑤,¯ 𝑤, ˆ 𝑤)  ˇ ∈ R3𝑛 : 𝑤¯ − 𝑤ˆ ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑤¯ = −𝑤}    ˇ ,
                                                                                                        (32)
                            (𝑊 c )⊥ B {(𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ , 𝑣ˇ ) ∈ R3𝑛 : 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˇ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑣ˇ = 𝑣¯ + 𝑣ˆ } .
The orthogonality of the two subspaces above can be verified, by noting that dim(𝑊 c ) = 𝑛 + dim(𝑊) and
dim((𝑊 c )⊥ ) = 𝑛 + dim(𝑊 ⊥ ) = 2𝑛 − dim(𝑊), hence dim(𝑊 c ) + dim((𝑊 c )⊥ ) = 3𝑛 and furthermore, for
vectors (𝑤,
         ¯ 𝑤,ˆ 𝑤)
                ˇ and (𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ , 𝑣ˇ ) fulfilling the constraints on the right hand side of (32) we have that

            ⟨(𝑤,
              ¯ 𝑤,
                 ˆ 𝑤),                   ¯ 𝑣¯ ⟩ + ⟨𝑤,
                   ˇ (𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ , 𝑣ˇ )⟩ = ⟨𝑤,          ˆ 𝑣ˆ ⟩ + ⟨𝑤,           ¯ 𝑣¯ ⟩ + ⟨𝑤,
                                                                 ˇ 𝑣ˇ ⟩ = ⟨𝑤,          ˆ 𝑣ˆ ⟩ − ⟨𝑤,
                                                                                                  ¯ 𝑣ˇ ⟩
                                                                                                                                                                 (33)
                                      = ⟨𝑤,
                                         ¯ 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˇ ⟩ + ⟨𝑤,ˆ 𝑣ˆ ⟩ = ⟨𝑤, ¯ 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˇ ⟩ + ⟨𝑤,
                                                                                      ˆ 𝑣ˇ − 𝑣¯ ⟩ = ⟨𝑤¯ − 𝑤,
                                                                                                          ˆ 𝑣ˇ − 𝑣¯ ⟩ = 0 .

     The corresponding LP for data (𝑊 c , 𝑑c , 𝑐 c ) is therefore given as

                                                 min ⟨𝑐 c , 𝑥⟩                            min ⟨𝑑c , 𝑠⟩
                                                       𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 c + 𝑑c                             𝑠 ∈ (𝑊 c )⊥ + 𝑐 c                                     (Init-Conic-LP)
                                                       𝑥 ≥ 03𝑛 ,                                𝑠 ≥ 03𝑛 ,

                                                                                  37
      Note that 𝑑 c ◦ 𝑐 c = 21 13𝑛 and therefore, (𝑑c , 𝑐 c ) is on the central path of (Init-Conic-LP) with parameter
𝜇 = 21 . In particular, we can call the IPM on this system and obtain a solution (𝑥 c , 𝑠 c , 𝑣 c , 𝑤 c ) such that the
output guarantees in Theorem 6.10 hold. Let us decompose the output as 𝑥 c = ( 𝑥¯ c , 𝑥ˆ c , 𝑥ˇ c ), 𝑠 c = (¯𝑠 c , 𝑠ˆ c , 𝑠ˇ c ),
𝑣 c = (𝑣¯ c , 𝑣ˆ c , 𝑣ˇ c ) and 𝑤 c = (𝑤¯ c , 𝑤ˆ c , 𝑤ˇ c ). Note that for the vector (𝑤,
                                                                                       ¯ 𝑤,  ˇ B 12 (−1𝑛 , −1𝑛 , 1𝑛 ) ∈ 𝑊 c , we
                                                                                          ˆ 𝑤)
obtain that 𝑥 B 𝑑 + (𝑤,
                      ′       c    ¯ 𝑤,ˆ 𝑤)
                                         ˇ = (0𝑛 , 0𝑛 , 1𝑛 ) is feasible to (LP-subspace) and analogously for (𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ , 𝑣ˇ ) B
(−1𝑛 , 0𝑛 , −1𝑛 ) ∈ (𝑊 c )⊥ we have that 𝑠 ′ B 𝑐 c + (𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ , 𝑣ˇ ) = (0𝑛 , 1𝑛 , 0𝑛 ) is feasible to the dual. As ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ = 0,
they are complementary and so primal-dual optimal solutions to (Init-Conic-LP). The primal optimal
region is therefore given by {(𝑥,              ¯ 𝑥,ˆ 𝑥)ˇ ≥ 03𝑛 : 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥ˆ = 0𝑛 , 𝑥ˇ = 1𝑛 − 𝑥}¯ ⊆ 𝒫(𝑊 c , 𝑑c ) and the dual
optimal region is given by {(¯𝑠 , 𝑠ˆ , 𝑠ˇ ) ≥ 03𝑛 : 𝑠¯ ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑠ˇ = 1𝑛 − 𝑠¯ } ⊆ 𝒟(𝑊 , 𝑐 c ). By the output guarantee
                                                                      ⊥                       c

of Theorem 6.10 we have that 𝐵 B supp(𝑥 c ) ∩ [𝑛] and 𝑁 B supp(𝑠 c ) ∩ [𝑛] form a partition of [𝑛],
which we extract in Line 7 of Algorithm 1. In particular, we have that the relative interior of the
optimal region of the primal of (Init-Conic-LP) is given by {( 𝑥,                     ¯ 𝑥,
                                                                                        ˆ 𝑥)
                                                                                           ˇ ≥ 03𝑛 : 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥ˆ = 0𝑛 , 𝑥ˇ =
1𝑛 − 𝑥,   ¯ 𝑥ˇ > 0𝑛 , 𝑥¯ 𝐵 > 0𝐵 } ⊆ 𝒫(𝑊 c , 𝑑c ) and the relative interior of the optimal dual region is given by
{(¯𝑠 , 𝑠ˆ , 𝑠ˇ ) ≥ 03𝑛 : 𝑠¯ ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑠ˆ = 1𝑛 − 𝑠¯ , 𝑠ˆ > 0𝑛 , 𝑠¯ 𝑁 > 0𝑁 }.
      The conic vectors 𝑣 𝑐 and 𝑤 𝑐 fulfill by Theorem 6.10 furthermore the property that

                 ∥(𝑥¯ 𝐵c ◦ 𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ◦ 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) − 12|𝐵| ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽 c      and      ∥(¯𝑠 𝑁
                                                                                        c
                                                                                          ◦ 𝑤¯ c𝑁 , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁
                                                                                                       c
                                                                                                         ◦ 𝑤ˆ c𝑁 ) − 12|𝑁 | ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽 c .       (34)

The properties in (34) are required for the initialization of the feasibility systems. Intuitively, the property
above means that the conic vectors are close to the analytic center of the optimal face of the conic feasibility
problem.
   We further have by Theorem 6.10 the properties that 𝑣 c ∈ (𝑊 c )⊥ and 𝑣supp(𝑥 c
                                                                                     c ) > 0. So, in particular,



                  (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) ∈ 𝜋(𝐵,𝐵) ((𝑊 c )⊥ ) ∩ R++ = {(𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˇ ) : 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˇ ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ), 𝑣¯ > 0𝐵 , 𝑣ˇ > 0𝐵 } .
                                                                2|𝐵|
                                                                                                                                              (35)

Analogously, we have that 𝑤 c ∈ 𝑊 c and 𝑤 supp(𝑠
                                          c
                                                 c ) > 0. So, in particular,


                                                             2|𝑁 |
                (𝑤¯ c𝑁 , 𝑤ˆ c𝑁 ) ∈ 𝜋(𝑁 ,𝑁) (𝑊 c ) ∩ R++ = {(𝑤,
                                                            ¯ 𝑤)
                                                               ˆ : 𝑤¯ − 𝑤ˆ ∈ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊), 𝑤¯ > 0𝑁 , 𝑤ˆ > 0𝑁 } .                                   (36)

7.2.2   Stage II, From strict conic feasibility to analytic centers
In the call to Line 2 we have identified the partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛] such that the property (C1) in Lemma 7.3
holds for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 and analogously the property (C2) holds for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁. In this section we describe how
Algorithm 1 solves dual feasibility in lines 17 to 25. The primal feasibility problem is solved analogously
in lines 9 to 17. The original dual feasibility problem for data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐) in form (LP-subspace) is given by
𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ + 𝑐, 𝑠 ≥ 0. The subproblems we are considering now are (28) and (29).
    Solving the dual feasibility problem on the coordinates in 𝐵 is the challenging part, as for feasibility
on the coordinates in 𝑁 we can make use of the vector 𝑠¯ 𝑐 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ that was found in the previous section
and that has the properties that 𝑠¯ 𝐵𝑐 = 0𝐵 and 𝑠¯ 𝑁
                                                   𝑐
                                                     > 0𝑁 . We are not yet able to decide feasibility of the
system (28). However, we can already conclude that the feasible region is bounded, which is certified by
                                           𝐵                   𝐵
the primal conic vector 𝑥¯ 𝐵c ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊) ∩ R++   = 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ )⊥ ∩ R++ . This is crucial, as our goal in this section
is to find a vector that approximates the analytic center of the relative interior of the feasible region of
(28). We do so by considering the following subspace 𝑊 d in Line 18 of Algorithm 1. Here,

                                                  𝑊 d B {(𝑤,
                                                          ¯ 𝑤)
                                                             ˇ : 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊), 𝑤¯ + 𝑤ˇ = 0} ,
                                             (𝑊 d )⊥ B {(𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˇ ) : 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˇ ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊)⊥ }

   and the corresponding dual feasibility system (Init-Dual-Feas-LP) is in form (LP-subspace) with data
(𝑊 d , ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ), 𝑐 d ), where 𝑐 d = (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) + (𝛽 c )−1 (∥𝑐 𝐵 ∥ 1 + 1)∥( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c )∥ 1 (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ).

                     min 𝑐 d , ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵 , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵 )                            min (𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ), (¯𝑠 𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 )
                ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵 , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵 ) ∈ 𝑊 d + ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c )              (¯𝑠 𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 ) ∈ (𝑊 d )⊥ + 𝑐 d                          (Init-Dual-Feas-LP)
                ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵 , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵 ) ≥ 02|𝐵| ,                              (¯𝑠 𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ 𝐵 ) ≥ 02|𝐵| ,
      The vector 𝑐 d is chosen such that the term (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) gets dominated by the multiple of the conic term
(𝑣¯ 𝐵 , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ). The conic term is not affecting the optimal solution as (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) ∈ (𝑊 d )⊥ according to (35) and is
    c

just needed for centrality of the initial vectors as we will see next. For

                                                      𝜇d B (𝛽c )−1 (∥𝑐 𝐵 ∥ 1 + 1)∥( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c )∥ 1                                        (37)


                                                                             38
we get with (34) that

               ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) ◦ 𝑐 d
                                         − 12|𝐵|         = ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) ◦ (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) − 12|𝐵| + (𝜇d )−1 ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) ◦ (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) 2
                        𝜇d
                                                   2                                                                                                     (38)
                                                         ≤ ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) ◦ (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) − 12|𝐵| 2 + (𝜇d )−1 ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) ◦ (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) 2
                                                         ≤ 𝛽c + 𝛽 c = 2𝛽c ,

and therefore using Lemma 6.7 we get that
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                 2𝛽 c
                                                       ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ), 𝑐 d       ∈𝒩   2
                                                                                                         ⊆ 𝒩 2 (𝛽d ) .                                   (39)
                                                                                                 1 − 2𝛽c
    Unlike in the previous section, we are not able to describe the optimal region yet. Now, consider
the output (𝑥 d , 𝑠 d , 𝑣 d , 𝑤 d ) under the algorithm in Theorem 6.10. Again, let us write 𝑥 d = ( 𝑥¯ d , 𝑥ˇ d ),
𝑠 d = (¯𝑠 d , 𝑠ˇ d ), 𝑣 d = (𝑣¯ d , 𝑣ˇ d ) and 𝑤 d = (𝑤¯ d , 𝑤ˇ d ).
    If 𝑠ˇ d ≠ 0𝐵 as checked in Line 23, then the corresponding primal vector is going to be a Farkas
certificate of dual infeasibility. Namely, consider the primal solution corresponding to the update
(𝑤,
  ¯ 𝑤)ˇ B (− 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥¯ 𝐵c ) ∈ 𝑊 d which results in the feasible vector 𝑥 ′ B ( 𝑥¯ 𝐵c , 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) + (𝑤, ˇ = (0𝐵 , 𝑥¯ 𝐵c + 𝑥ˇ 𝐵c ) =
                                                                                                   ¯ 𝑤)
(0𝐵 , 1𝐵 ). As 𝑠ˇ ≠ 0𝐵 , we have that 𝑥 , 𝑠 = 1𝐵 , 𝑠ˇ > 0. Therefore, 𝑥 is not an optimal primal solution.
                      d                             ′   d            d           ′

In particular, 𝑥 𝐵d = 𝑥 𝐵d − 𝑥 ′𝐵 ∈ 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ) is a Farkas certificate of infeasibility of System (28) as

                𝑥 𝐵d , 𝑐 𝐵 = 𝑥 𝐵d − 𝑥 ′𝐵 , 𝑐 𝐵 = 𝑥 d − 𝑥 ′ , (𝑐 𝐵 , 0𝐵 ) = 𝑥 d − 𝑥 ′ , 𝑐 d = 𝑥 d − 𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 d < 0 ,                                       (40)

where we used that 𝑥 ′ − 𝑥 d ∈ 𝑊 d and (𝑣¯ 𝐵c , 𝑣ˇ 𝐵c ) ∈ (𝑊 d )⊥ . The certificate 𝑥 𝐵d can be extended to a certificate
of dual infeasibility of (LP-subspace) by padding it with zeros on the coordinates in 𝑁.
      Otherwise, we have that 𝑠ˇ d = 0𝐵 and therefore, 𝑠¯ d ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊)⊥ = 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊 ⊥ ) and 𝑠¯ d ≥ 0𝐵 by feasibility. In
particular, we have obtained a feasible solution to (28). Furthermore, we obtain conic vectors 𝑣 d and 𝑤 d
which will become important in the third stage program, where we use them for initialization. Recall
that the IPM returns a support-maximal solution. In particular, if for some coordinate 𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 we have that
𝑠¯ 𝑖d = 0, then 𝑠 𝑖 = 0 for all feasible solutions to (28). Let 𝐵¯ B 𝐵 \ supp(𝑠 d ) and 𝐵∗ B supp(𝑠 d ).
      By Theorem 6.10 we obtain that
                                                ∥ 𝑠¯ 𝐵d∗ ◦ 𝑤 𝐵d∗ − 1𝐵∗ ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽 d .                                   (41)
   A completely analogous analysis can be applied for primal feasibility in Algorithm 1 on lines 9 to
17. We either terminate with a certificate of primal infeasibility, or we obtain a feasible solution to the
system (29) and conic vectors 𝑣 p and 𝑤 p which will be used in the third stage program.
   We also find a subset 𝑁 ∗ = supp( 𝑥¯ p ) and a set 𝑁¯ B 𝑁 \ 𝑁 ∗ . Furthermore, we have that

                                                                    ∥ 𝑥¯ 𝑁 ∗ ◦ 𝑣 𝑁 ∗ − 1𝑁 ∗ ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽p .
                                                                         p           p
                                                                                                                                                         (42)

    The corresponding orthogonal subspaces for primal feasibility are

                                                𝑊 p B {(𝑤, ¯ 𝑤)  ˆ : 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝜑 𝑁 (𝑊 ⊥ ), 𝑤¯ + 𝑤ˆ = 0}
                                                                                                                                                         (43)
                                              (𝑊 p )⊥ B {(𝑣¯ , 𝑣ˆ ) : 𝑣¯ − 𝑣ˆ ∈ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)}

    and the corresponding optimization problem is

                 min ⟨𝑑p , (¯𝑠 𝑁 , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁 )⟩                                           min (¯𝑠 𝑁
                                                                                             c
                                                                                               , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁
                                                                                                    c
                                                                                                      ), ( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 , 𝑥ˆ 𝑁 )
            (¯𝑠 𝑁 , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁 ) ∈ 𝑊 p + (¯𝑠 𝑁
                                       c
                                         , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁
                                              c
                                                )                               ( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 , 𝑥ˆ 𝑁 ) ∈ (𝑊 p )⊥ + 𝑑p                          (Init-Primal-Feas-LP)
            (¯𝑠 𝑁 , 𝑠ˆ 𝑁 ) ≥ 02|𝑁 | ,                                           ( 𝑥¯ 𝑁 , 𝑥ˆ 𝑁 ) ≥ 02|𝑁 | ,
    We are now ready to solve the optimization problem.

7.2.3   Stage III, From analytic centers to optimization
The procedures in Sections 7.2.1 and 7.2.2 allowed us determine the set 𝐵∗ ∪ 𝑁 ∗ ⊆ [𝑛] of variables for
which strictly feasible solution exist (unless we have decided infeasibility). Accordingly, for 𝐵¯ B 𝐵 \ 𝐵∗
and 𝑁¯ B 𝑁 \ 𝑁 ∗ we define
                                                                                                                         
                                         𝑊 ∗ B 𝜋[𝑛]\(𝐵∪
                                                     ¯ 𝑁)
                                                        ¯ 𝜑[𝑛]\𝐵¯ (𝑊) = 𝜑𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ 𝜋[𝑛]\𝑁¯ (𝑊) .                                                           (44)


                                                                                             39
in Line 28 of Algorithm 1. The subspace 𝑊 ∗ is the subspace on which our final call to the interior point
method in Theorem 1.3 will be applied. Using the output of the algorithms described in the previous
                        𝑝
section, we are given 𝑥 𝑁 ∗ and 𝑠 𝐵𝑑 ∗ near the analytic center of the following two feasibility systems:
                                           𝑓                                                              𝑓
                      𝑥 ∈ 𝜋 𝑁 ∗ (𝑊 ∗ ) + 𝑥 𝑁 ∗ , 𝑥 ≥ 0 ,           and            𝑠 ∈ 𝜋𝐵∗ ((𝑊 ∗ )⊥ ) + 𝑠 𝐵∗ , 𝑠 ≥ 0 .                    (45)

which is certified by 𝑤 𝐵d∗ and 𝑣 𝑁 ∗ , respectively in (41) and (42).
                                     p

    These vectors suffice for initialization of the corresponding subsystem of the original system on the
coordinates 𝐵∗ and 𝑁 ∗ , as we will see next.
    Consider the vector 𝑥 ′ B 𝑑𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ + 𝐿𝑊
                                                ∗
                                                  (𝑥 𝑁 ∗ − 𝑑 𝑁 ∗ ) and analogously on the dual side 𝑠 ′ B 𝑐 𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ +
                                                     p
                                              𝑁∗
    ∗
 (𝑊 ) ⊥
𝐿𝐵∗ (𝑠 𝐵d∗ − 𝑐 𝐵∗ ). We require these shifts of 𝑑 and 𝑐 as we have to set the coordinates in 𝑁¯ to zero on the
primal side and the coordinates 𝐵¯ to 0 on the dual side, as we have concluded that all feasible solutions
to the original system have these coordinates set to 0.
    Using (41) and (42) we can now find vectors near the central path by choosing 𝜇0 large enough. More
precisely, we choose
                                                𝜇0 = (𝛽 c )−1 ∥𝑥 ′ ◦ 𝑠 ′ ∥ 1                                    (46)
in Line 31 of Algorithm 1 and set our initial vectors to be 𝑥 0 B 𝑥 ′ + 𝜇0 (𝑤 𝐵d∗ , 0𝑁 ∗ ) an 𝑠 0 B 𝑠 ′ + 𝜇0 (0𝐵∗ , 𝑣 𝑁 ∗ ).
                                                                                                                                             p

These are central as
                      𝑥0 ◦ 𝑠0        1 ′ ′
                                        ∥𝑥 ◦ 𝑠 ∥ 2 + ∥𝑤 𝐵d∗ ◦ 𝑠 𝐵′ ∗ − 1𝐵∗ ∥ 2 + ∥𝑣 𝑁 ∗ ◦ 𝑥 ′𝑁 ∗ − 1𝑁 ∗ ∥ 2
                                                                                    p
                              −1 ≤
                        𝜇 0
                                2
                                    𝜇 0
                                     1 ′ ′
                                        ∥𝑥 ◦ 𝑠 ∥ 2 + ∥𝑤 𝐵d∗ ◦ 𝑠 𝐵d∗ − 1𝐵∗ ∥ 2 + ∥𝑣 𝑁 ∗ ◦ 𝑥 𝑁 ∗ − 1𝑁 ∗ ∥ 2
                                                                                   p       p
                                  =                                                                                                      (47)
                                    𝜇0
                                                     1
                                  ≤ 𝛽c + 𝛽d + 𝛽p ≤ 𝛽∗
                                                     2
This implies by Lemma 6.7 that

                                                                      2𝛽
                                                                      1 ∗
                                              𝑥0 ◦ 𝑠0
                                                            − 1   ≤            ≤ 𝛽∗ ,                                                    (48)
                                     (|𝐵 | + |𝑁 |) ⟨𝑥 , 𝑠 ⟩
                                        ∗       ∗  −1 0  0
                                                                2   1 − 21 𝛽 ∗

hence (𝑥 0 , 𝑠 0 ) is sufficient to apply the algorithm in Theorem 6.10 in Line 34 with the appropriate choice
of 𝛽∗ in Line 1 in Algorithm 1.
    This results in primal-dual optimal solutions (𝑥 ∗ , 𝑠 ∗ ) to the programs

              min⟨𝑠 0 , 𝑥⟩ : 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 ∗ + 𝑥 0 , 𝑥 ≥ 0𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ ,                  min⟨𝑥 0 , 𝑠⟩ : 𝑠 ∈ (𝑊 ∗ )⊥ + 𝑠 0 , 𝑠 ≥ 0𝐵∗ ∪𝑁 ∗ .           (49)

This time, we do not require to extract the conic centrality certificates optimal face of the system, as we
are able to lift the solution to the original system directly.
    It remains to show that we are able to lift this solution to an optimal solution in the variables [𝑛].
Extending the solution on the primal side on 𝑁¯ is easy, as we set all the values to 0. Analogously, we
can set the values on the dual side to 0 on the coordinates in 𝐵.        ¯ This leaves us with the problem of
extending the solution on the primal side to 𝐵¯ and on the dual side to 𝑁.        ¯ However, notice that we can
utilize the vectors 𝑤 𝐵d¯ and 𝑣 𝑁¯ that were returned in the call to the feasibility solver in the previous section
                                p

                                                                                                               𝑁                 𝜑   ¯ (𝑊)
(Section 7.2.2). First, let us lift the solution 𝑥 ∗ to a vector on all coordinates. That is, let 𝑥˜ = 𝐿𝐵∗[𝑛]\
                                                                                                           ∪𝑁 ∗
                                                                                                                                             (𝑥 ∗ )
                                                     𝜑
                                                     𝐵     ¯   (𝑊 ⊥ )
and analogously on the dual side let 𝑠˜ = 𝐿𝐵∗[𝑛]\  ∪𝑁 ∗
                                                          (𝑠 ∗ ), see Lines 35 and 36 in Algorithm 1.
       The solutions obtained from the optimization algorithm satisfy all the required properties, except
that 𝑥˜ 𝐵¯ or 𝑠˜ 𝑁¯ may not be non-negative. However, since 𝑠˜ 𝐵¯ = 0𝐵¯ , we only need to ensure non-negativity
on the primal side of 𝐵,   ¯ and complementarity holds automatically. To achieve this, we can use the vector
𝑤¯ d , which satisfies 𝑤¯ d ∈ 𝜑𝐵 (𝑊), 𝑤¯ d ≥ 0𝐵 , and supp(𝑤¯ d ) = 𝐵¯ due to strict complementarity of 𝑤¯ d and
𝑠¯ d . We can augment 𝑥˜ by (𝛼 𝑤¯ d , 0𝑁 ) for sufficiently large 𝛼 > 0 to ensure that all variables in 𝐵¯ become
non-negative (38). Similarly, we use the vector 𝑣¯ p to augment 𝑠˜ on the dual side (40).
Proof of Theorem 7.1. Let us first show that the operations in Algorithm 1 before and after the calls to the
IPM can be computed in strongly polynomial time. The operations for which this is not straightforward
are coordinate fixing 𝜑, coordinate projection 𝜋, and applying the lifting map 𝐿. Given a subspace
𝑊 = ker(A) ⊆ R𝑛 for some A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 and a subset 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], we can compute the coordinate fixing


                                                                        40
𝜑𝐼 (𝑊) as 𝜑𝐼 (𝑊) = ker(A𝐼 ). In particular, we can compute coordinate fixes in linear time. The coordinate
projection 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) can be computed as follows. Let 𝐽 = [𝑛] \ 𝐼 and reorder the columns of A such that the
columns 𝐽 appear before the columns in 𝐼. Let 𝑟 = rank(A𝐽 ). Now, let M be the matrix that arises from A
by performing Gaussian elimination. Then M[𝑟+1,𝑚],𝐽 = 0(𝑚−𝑟)×|𝐽 | and 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) = ker(M[𝑟+1,𝑚],𝐽 ). For 𝑟 = 𝑚,
we have 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) = R𝐼 . Note that analogous computations can be performed for the dual subspace 𝑊 ⊥ ,
given as 𝑊 ⊥ = im(A⊤ ), to obtain 𝜑𝐼 (𝑊 ⊥ ) and 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊 ⊥ ). Finally, we need to show that the lifting map 𝐿
can be computed in strongly polynomial time. It is a well-known fact that 𝐿 is a projection, which can be
represented using basic matrix multiplications and inversions, see Proposition B.17.
    Further, note that the calls to the IPM uses subspaces, for which the SLC is bounded as the SLC of
𝑊¯ B {(𝑤, −𝑤, 𝑤) ¯ : 𝑤 − 𝑤¯ ∈ 𝑊 }. In Stage I of Algorithm 1 for conic feasibility, the subspace 𝑊¯ is used.
                                                                      ¯
The subsequent calls to the IPM are performed on subspaces of 𝑊 arising from projecting and fixing
some coordinates. For every such subspace 𝑊 ′, Lemma 6.12 implies SLC𝜂 (𝑊 ′) ≤ SLC𝜂 (𝑊) + 2.
    It remains to show that the number of iterations of the IPMs as well as the space used are as claimed.
Here, Theorem 6.10 gives us the bound on the number of iterations. Following up each iteration of
the algorithm in Theorem 6.10 with the algorithm in Lemma 8.2 and subsequently applying a constant
number of standard corrector steps (Proposition B.1) gives us the desired space bound.                    □

7.3    SLC preserving subspace operations
We now prove Lemma 6.12. We first need an auxiliary statement characterizing the max central path
curve; the proof follows using standard arguments in polyhedral combinatorics.
Lemma 7.4. Given an instance of (LP-subspace) with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐), 𝑐, 𝑑 ≥ 0𝑛 , let 𝑥 𝔪 denote the max central
path and let 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. Let 𝑔★ ≥ 0 denote the largest breakpoint of 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                    𝑖
                                                                      , that is, 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                   𝑖
                                                                                     (𝑔) is an affine function on [𝑔★ , ∞).
                                           (1)            (2)
Then, for each 𝑔 ∈ [0, 𝑔★], 𝑥 𝔪
                              𝑖
                                (𝑔) = 𝜆𝑣 𝑖 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑣 𝑖 , such that 𝑣 (1) and 𝑣 (2) are basic feasible solutions to the
primal problem 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0, and 𝜆 ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, if 𝑔 < 𝑔★ then ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = 𝑔 for any optimal solution 𝑥
to max{𝑥 𝑖 : 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫𝑔 }.
Lemma 6.12. Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a subspace and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). Then, for any index set 𝐼 ⊆ [𝑛], SLC𝜂 (𝜋𝐼 (𝑊)) ≤
SLC𝜂 (𝑊) + 1 and SLC𝜂 (𝜑𝐼 (𝑊)) ≤ SLC𝜂 (𝑊) + 1.

Proof. Let 𝐽 B [𝑛] \ 𝐼. Let us start with the first statement: let 𝑊 ¯ = 𝜋𝐼 (𝑊) = {𝑤 𝐼 : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 }. Consider
             ¯     𝐼                                                                         ¯ 𝑐¯). Note that
                                                                                         ¯ , 𝑑,
vectors 𝑐¯ , 𝑑 ∈ R+ , and let 𝑥¯ denote the max central path for the LP with data (𝑊
                                𝔪
             ¯             ¯    ¯                    ¯
replacing 𝑑 by any 𝑑 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑 and 𝑐¯ by any 𝑐 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑐 does not change the straight line complexities.
                       ′                          ′     ⊥

Thus, we can assume that 𝑑¯ ≥ 0 is a primal and 𝑐¯ is a dual optimal solution. In particular, the optimum
value is 𝑐¯ , 𝑑¯ = 0.
   We construct vectors 𝑐, 𝑑 ∈ R+𝑛 such that for the max central path of the LP with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐) and
max central path 𝑥 𝔪 , we have SLC( 𝑥¯ 𝔪  𝑖
                                            ) ≤ SLC(𝑥 𝔪
                                                      𝑖
                                                        ) + 1. Let 𝒱¯ ⊆ R𝐼 denote the finite set of all basic
                                      ¯
                                  ¯ , 𝑑, 𝑐¯), and
feasible solutions to the LP for (𝑊

                                         𝑀 B max{∥𝐿𝑊
                                                   𝐼 (𝑣
                                                          ¯ ∞ : 𝑣¯ ∈ 𝒱}
                                                      ¯ − 𝑑)∥        ¯ .

Let us define                        (                                     (
                                    𝑐¯ 𝑖    if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ,                         𝑑¯ 𝑖   if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ,
                               𝑐𝑖 B                       and       𝑑𝑖 B
                                    0       if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽 .                         𝑀      if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽 .

Note that for every 𝑣¯ ∈ 𝒱¯ and 𝑣 = 𝐿𝑊       𝐼
                                                     ¯ + 𝑑, we have 𝑣 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑣 ≥ 0, that is, 𝑣 is feasible for the
                                               (𝑣¯ − 𝑑)
LP with (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐).
    Let us select the breakpoint 𝑔¯ ★ for the function 𝑥¯ 𝔪    𝑖
                                                                 as in Lemma 7.4. We claim that 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                                                                                                   𝑖
                                                                                                      (𝑔) = 𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                              𝑖
                                                                                                                 (𝑔) for
                         ★
all 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 and 𝑔 ∈ [0, 𝑔¯ ]. This immediately yields the desired bound SLC( 𝑥¯ 𝑖 ) ≤ SLC(𝑥 𝑖 ) + 1.
                                                                                      𝔪          𝔪

    First, we show 𝑥¯ 𝔪  (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥 𝔪    (𝑔). This follows because for every 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0, we have 𝑥 𝐼 ∈ 𝑊           ¯
                                                                                                                  ¯ + 𝑑,
                       𝑖            𝑖
𝑥 𝐼 ≥ 0 and further ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥 𝐼 ⟩ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ since 𝑐 𝐽 = 0𝐽 . For the converse direction 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                                                                                         𝑖
                                                                                           (𝑔) ≤  𝑥 𝔪
                                                                                                    𝑖
                                                                                                      (𝑔), consider    a
            ¯   ¯
point 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥¯ ≥ 0, ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩
                                 ¯ ≤ 𝑔 with 𝑥¯ 𝑖 (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ 𝑖 . By Lemma 7.4, 𝑥¯ = 𝜆𝑣 + (1 − 𝜆)𝑣 for 𝑣 , 𝑣 ∈ 𝒱,
                                                 𝔪                                 (1)         (2)       (1)   (2)    ¯
𝜆 ∈ [0, 1]. Since 𝐿𝑊𝐼
                       is  a linear   operator,

                      ∥𝐿𝑊        ¯          𝑊 (1)
                        𝐼 ( 𝑥¯ − 𝑑)∥ ∞ ≤ 𝜆∥𝐿 𝐼 (𝑣
                                                    ¯ ∞ + (1 − 𝜆)∥𝐿𝑊 (𝑣 (2) − 𝑑)∥
                                                  − 𝑑)∥            𝐼
                                                                              ¯ ∞ ≤ 𝑀,

by the definition of 𝑀, and therefore 𝑥 = 𝐿𝑊
                                           𝐼
                                                    ¯ + 𝑑 ∈ 𝑊, 𝑥 ≥ 0 is a feasible solution to the larger LP
                                             ( 𝑥¯ − 𝑑)
with ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩
                     ¯ ≤ 𝑔.


                                                            41
     Let us now show the second statement on coordinate deletion. Let 𝑊  ¯ = 𝜑𝐼 (𝑊) = {𝑤 𝐼 : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑤 𝐽 =
                            ¯    𝐼                                                                    ¯ 𝑐¯).
                                                                                                  ¯ , 𝑑,
0𝐽 }. Consider vectors 𝑐¯ , 𝑑 ∈ R+ , and let 𝑥¯ denote the max central path for the LP with data (𝑊
                                               𝔪
                                       ¯                                                  ¯
As in the first case, we can assume 𝑑 and 𝑐¯ are primal and dual optimal solutions with 𝑑, 𝑐¯ = 0. Recall
the circuit imbalance 𝜅 A from Definition 3.1, and note that it only depends on the subspace 𝑊 = ker(A).
Thus, we can use 𝜅𝑊 for the circuit imbalance corresponding to the subspace. Let us define
                                   (                                                        (
                                 𝑐¯ 𝑖                  if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ,                               𝑑¯ 𝑖     if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 ,
                            𝑐𝑖 B                                           and    𝑑𝑖 B
                                 𝜅𝑊 ∥ 𝑐¯ ∥ 1 + 1       if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽 .                               0        if 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽 ,

Let 𝑥 𝔪 denote the max central path for the LP with data (𝑊 , 𝑑, 𝑐). Again, our goal is to show SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥¯ 𝔪           𝑖
                                                                                                                        )≤
SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪    )  + 1.  We  select   𝑔
                                   ¯ ★ for the function 𝑥¯ 𝔪 as in Lemma 7.4. The proof is complete by showing
           𝑖                                                    𝑖
𝑥¯ 𝔪
   𝑖
     (𝑔) = 𝑥 𝔪 𝑖
                 (𝑔) for all 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 and 𝑔 ∈ [0, 𝑔¯ ★]. Let us assume 𝑔 < 𝑔¯ ★; the case 𝑔 = 𝑔¯ ★ follows by continuity.
      First, note that 𝑥 𝔪    (𝑔) ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝔪  (𝑔) for every value 𝑔 ≥ 0, since every solution 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊           ¯ 𝑥¯ ≥ 0 maps
                                                                                                      ¯ + 𝑑,
                           𝑖            𝑖
to 𝑥 = ( 𝑥,  ¯ 0𝐽 ) such that 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0 and ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ = ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩.         ¯ We now show the converse direction
𝑥𝔪 𝑖
     (𝑔) ≤   𝑥
             ¯ 𝔪
               𝑖
                 (𝑔).
      For a contradiction, assume that 𝑥 𝔪        𝑖
                                                     (𝑔) > 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                                                              𝑖
                                                                  (𝑔). Let 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥 ≥ 0 and 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑊 + 𝑑, 𝑥¯ ≥ 0 be such
that 𝑥 𝑖 (𝑔) = 𝑥 𝑖 > 𝑥¯ 𝑖 = 𝑥¯ 𝑖 (𝑔) = 𝑥¯ 𝑖 and ⟨ 𝑐¯ , 𝑥⟩
         𝔪                      𝔪                       ¯ , ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ ≤ 𝑔. Consider a conformal circuit decomposition of
𝑧 = 𝑥 − ( 𝑥, ¯ 0𝐽 ) ∈ 𝑊 as 𝑥 − ( 𝑥,  ¯ 0𝐽 ) = ℓ𝑘=1 ℎ (ℓ ) as in Proposition 2.4.
                                               Í
      Let 𝐾 = {ℓ ∈ [𝑘] : supp(ℎ (ℓ ) ) ∩ 𝐽 ≠ ∅}. If 𝐾 = ∅, then supp(𝑥) ⊆ 𝐼 holds, and 𝑥 𝐼 gives a better solution
than 𝑥¯ for the program defining 𝑥¯ 𝔪        𝑖
                                               (𝑔), a contradiction. Thus, 𝐾 ≠ ∅. Take any ℓ ∈ 𝐾; let 𝑗 ∈ supp(ℎ (ℓ ) )∩ 𝐽.
From the definition of the circuit imbalance, it follows that
                        D          E
                                            (ℓ )               (ℓ )                  (ℓ )              (ℓ )
                            𝑐, ℎ (ℓ ) ≥ 𝑐 𝑗 ℎ 𝑗 − ∥𝑐 𝐼 ∥ 1 · ∥ ℎ 𝐼 ∥ ∞ > ∥ 𝑐¯ ∥ 1 (𝜅𝑊 ℎ 𝑗 − ∥ ℎ 𝐼 ∥ ∞ ) > 0 .

Consequently, for 𝑦 = 𝑥 − ℓ ∈𝐾 ℎ (ℓ ) , we must have ⟨𝑐, 𝑦⟩ < ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ ≤ 𝑔. By the conformity of the
                                       Í
decomposition, we also have 𝑦 𝑖 ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 . Further, supp(𝑦) ⊆ 𝐼. To summarize, 𝑦 𝑖 ≥ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 = 𝑥¯ 𝔪
                                                                                             𝑖
                                                                                               while
⟨𝑐¯ , 𝑦𝐼 ⟩ < 𝑔, contradicting the last part of Lemma 7.4.                                         □


8    A strongly polynomial rounding procedure
In this section, we develop tools to bound the bit-complexity of the iterates of the SLLS IPM, in order to
obtain a strongly polynomial algorithm in the Turing model. We start by defining the sizes of numbers,
as in e.g., [GLS88].
Definition 8.1 (Sizes of numbers). For an integer 𝑛 ∈ Z, we define the encoding length of 𝑛 as size(𝑧) =
1 + ⌈log2 (|𝑛| + 1)⌉. For a rational number 𝑟 ∈ Q represented as 𝑟 = 𝑝/𝑞 for integers 𝑝, 𝑞 ∈ Z, we let
size(𝑧) = size(𝑝) + size(𝑞). Further, for a rational vector or matrix, the size is defined as the sum of
the sizes of the entries. For matrices and vectors 𝑎 1 , 𝑎2 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑘 of possibly different dimensions, we let
                              Í𝑘
size(𝑎1 , 𝑎2 , . . . , 𝑎 𝑘 ) = 𝑖=1 size(𝑎 𝑖 ).
    Our strongly polynomial implementation of the SLLS IPM algorithm [ADL+ 23] has two main in-
gredients. In Appendix B, we present a variant of this algorithm that proves Theorem 6.10. This
implementation avoids the square root computations in [ADL+ 23], even if it is slower by a factor 𝑛. The
algorithm uses poly(𝑛) basic arithmetic operations and comparisons.
    Moreover, as stated in Theorem 6.10, every iteration can be implemented by a strongly polynomial
algorithm in the Turing model. That is, given an iterate (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ Q2𝑛 , implementing an iteration takes
poly(𝑛) time and uses poly(𝑛) size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑥, 𝑠) space. In particular, the next iterate (𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ) ∈ Q2𝑛 has
size(𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ) = poly(𝑛) size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑥, 𝑠). We emphasize that this guarantee in each iteration does not
suffice to obtain an strongly polynomial overall IPM algorithm in the Turing model. The standard affine
scaling step direction (also used in many other IPMs) is the solution to a linear system where the matrix
is determined by the current iterate (𝑥, 𝑠). Thus, the encoding length may increase super-polynomially
in super-polylogarithmically many iterations.
    The main contribution of this section is the following rounding lemma.
Lemma 8.2. Given (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) ∩ Q2𝑛 , there exists a strongly polynomial algorithm that finds a point
  ˜ 𝑠˜ ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (3𝛽) ∩ Q2𝑛 with 𝜇( 𝑥,
( 𝑥,                              ˜ 𝑠˜ ) ≤ (1 + 𝛽/𝑛 2 )𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) and size( 𝑥,
                                                                         ˜ 𝑠˜ ) ≤ 𝑂(𝑛 7 ) size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐).




                                                                      42
    Thus, after each iterate (𝑥, 𝑠) of the SLLS IPM (or after every polylog(𝑛) iterates), we can round it to
another iterate ( 𝑥,
                   ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) with possibly slightly worse gap bound√in a slightly wider neighborhood. Note that
every iteration decreases the gap at least by a factor 1 − 𝛽/𝑂( 𝑛); thus, we only lose a small fraction of the
progress due to the rounding. After each such rounding, we can move back to the smaller neighborhood
𝒩 2 (𝛽) by at most two corrector steps (see Proposition B.1).
    Lemma 8.2 is applicable much more broadly than the SLLS IPM. Whenever a path-following IPM
method computes every iteration in strongly polynomial time, this additional rounding is applicable.
Thus, if the total number of elementary arithmetic operations and comparisons in the original algorithm
is strongly polynomial, then we can modify it using this rounding step to obtain a strongly polynomial
algorithm in the Turing model. This is applicable to all LLS IPMs such as [VY96, MT03, DHNV23]. The
rounding steps could also be used in weakly polynomial algorithms; however, in case our running time
is allowed to depend on the total encoding length 𝐿 = size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐), it may be more efficient to use other
methods such as [GPV23].
    It is interesting to note that the new iterate ( 𝑥,
                                                     ˜ 𝑠˜ ) could have much better duality gap than (𝑥, 𝑠): the
rounding algorithm itself may take long steps down    √ the central path. In particular, using the rounding it
turns out that the number of iterates is at most 𝑂( 𝑛 log(𝑛)) times the number of vertices of the polytope:
adding this rounding step to any (possibly weakly polynomial) path following IPM already achieves the
property highlighted in the title “Interior point methods are not worse than Simplex” of [ADL+ 23].
    We use the following simple bounds from [GLS88].
Lemma 8.3. The following bounds hold:
                                                       Í𝑘                      Í𝑘                          Î𝑘                Í𝑘
   (i) For rational numbers 𝑟1 , . . . , 𝑟 𝑘 , size(      𝑖=1 𝑟 𝑖 ) ≤ 2            𝑖=1 size(𝑟 𝑖 ), and size(   𝑖=1 𝑟 𝑖 ) ≤    𝑖=1 size(𝑟 𝑖 ).

  (ii) For an invertible matrix M ∈ Q𝑛×𝑛 , size(M−1 ) ≤ 4𝑛 2 size(M).
 (iii) For A ∈ Q𝑚×𝑛 , 𝑏 ∈ Q𝑚 , 𝑐 ∈ Q𝑛 , let 𝒫 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 | A𝑥 = 𝑏, 𝑥 ≥ 0𝑛 } and 𝒟 = {𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 | ∃𝑦 ∈
       R𝑚 , A⊤ 𝑦 + 𝑠 = 𝑐, 𝑠 ≥ 0𝑛 } denote the primal and dual feasible regions. Then every vertex and extreme ray
       of 𝒫 has size 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏)), and every vertex and extreme ray of 𝒟 has size 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑐)).
    We use two further auxiliary tools.
Lemma 8.4 (Anchoring numbers). Let 𝛼, 𝑟 ∈ Q++ such that 𝑟/2𝑛 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 2𝑛 𝑟, and let 𝐾 ∈ Z. Then, there is an
𝑂(log2 (𝑛 + 𝐾)) time strongly polynomial algorithm that returns a number 𝛼ˆ ∈ Q with 𝛼 ≤ 𝛼ˆ ≤ (1 + 1/𝐾)𝛼 and
size( 𝛼)
      ˆ ≤ size(𝑟) + 𝑂(𝑛 + 𝐾).
Proof. Using binary search, in 𝑂(log 𝑛) iterations we can find a value 𝑘 ∈ [−𝑛, 𝑛] such that 2 𝑘 𝑟 ≤ 𝛼 ≤
2 𝑘+1 𝑟; each iteration takes 𝑂(log 𝑛) arithmetic operations. Next, we let 𝛿 = (1 + 1/𝐾), and with a second
binary search in 𝑂(log 𝐾) iterations we find a value 𝑗 ∈ [0, 𝐾] such that 2 𝑘 𝑟𝛿 𝑗−1 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 2 𝑘 𝑟𝛿 𝑗 ; again, each
iteration takes 𝑂(log 𝐾) arithmetic operations. Then, 𝛼ˆ = 2 𝑘 𝑟𝛿 𝑗 satisfies the claimed properties.           □
Lemma 8.5 (Minkowski–Weyl decomposition). For A ∈ Q𝑚×𝑛 , 𝑏 ∈ Q𝑚 , let 𝒫 = {𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 | A𝑥 = 𝑏, 𝑥 ≥ 0𝑛 }.
Assume we are given a point 𝑥 ∈ 𝒫. Then, there is a strongly polynomial algorithm that returns extreme points
                                                                                                                                 Í𝑘
𝑣 (1) , . . . , 𝑣 (𝑘) , extreme rays 𝑟 (1) , . . . , 𝑟 (ℓ ) , and multipliers 𝜆1 , . . . , 𝜆 𝑘 ≥ 0, 𝜂1 , . . . , 𝜂ℓ ≥ 0 such that 𝑖=1 𝜆 𝑖 = 1,
𝑘 + ℓ ≤ 𝑛 + 1, and
                                                            𝑘
                                                            Õ                      ℓ
                                                                                   Õ
                                                                         (𝑖)
                                                     𝑥=           𝜆𝑖 𝑣         +          𝜂 𝑗 𝑟 (𝑗) .
                                                            𝑖=1                     𝑗=1

    We prove Lemma 8.2 in two steps. First, we show that every iterate (𝑥, 𝑠) can be replaced by another
feasible pair ( 𝑥,
                ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) whose normalized gap has bounded bit-complexity. This may involve an unbounded
decrease in the gap value, as the algorithm identifies an improving direction along the central path.
In the second step, we replace such a point by another one nearby that has approximately the same
normalized gap and also bounded bit-complexity.
Lemma 8.6. Let (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽). There is a strongly polynomial algorithm that returns a solution ( 𝑥,
                                                                                                     ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (2𝛽)
with 𝜇( 𝑥,                            ★
        ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ≤ 𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) and a value 𝜇 ∈ Q such that 𝜇( 𝑥,           ★
                                                           ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ≤ 𝜇 ≤ (1 + 𝛽/(4𝑛 ))𝜇( 𝑥,
                                                                                     2      ˆ 𝑠ˆ ), and size(𝜇★) =
𝑂(𝑛 ) size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐).
    3


Proof. Let 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠); thus, ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ = 𝑛𝜇. Let us construct a Minkowski–Weyl decomposition of (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈
𝒫 × 𝒟 into vertices and extreme rays of 𝒫 × 𝒟. Note that every vertex is of the form (𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ), where
𝑣 (𝑖) is a vertex of 𝒫 and 𝑢 (𝑖) is a vertex of 𝒟. Similarly, for every extreme ray (𝑟 (𝑗) , 𝑡 (𝑗) ), the vector 𝑟 (𝑗) is


                                                                         43
an extreme ray of 𝒫 and 𝑡 (𝑗) is an extreme ray of 𝒟. The number of vertices and extreme rays is at most
2𝑛 + 1. We write the decomposition in the form
                                                              𝑘
                                                              Õ
                                               (𝑥, 𝑠) =              𝜆 𝑖 (𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) + (𝑟, 𝑡) ,
                                                               𝑖=1

                 𝑘
where 𝜆 ≥ 0, 𝑖=1     𝜆 𝑖 = 1, and (𝑟, 𝑡) is a ray of 𝒫 × 𝒟 (i.e., the sum of all extreme ray terms). Let us
                 Í
partition the vertices according to their objective values:

                      𝐼 − = {𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] : 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) ≤ 𝜇} ,                     𝐼 + = {𝑖 ∈ [𝑘] : 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) > 𝜇} ,
Let us define
                                            𝑖∈𝐼 − 𝜆 𝑖 (𝑣
                                                           (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) )
                                                                                                           𝑖∈𝐼 + 𝜆 𝑖 (𝑣
                                        Í                                                             Í                   (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) )
                            −    −                                                     +     +
                          (𝑥 , 𝑠 ) =                                       ,        (𝑥 , 𝑠 ) =                                            .
                                                   𝑖∈𝐼 − 𝜆 𝑖                                                      𝑖∈𝐼 + 𝜆 𝑖
                                               Í                                                              Í

Thus, we can write
                      (𝑥, 𝑠) = ( 𝑥,
                                 ¯ 𝑠¯ ) + (𝑟, 𝑡),                  ¯ 𝑠¯ ) = (1 − 𝛼)(𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ) + 𝛼(𝑥 + , 𝑠 + )
                                                           where ( 𝑥,
for some 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1]. That is, ( 𝑥, ¯ 𝑠¯ ) ∈ 𝒫 × 𝒟 is the part of (𝑥, 𝑠) in the convex hull of the vertices. We also
let 𝜇− = 𝜇(𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ) and 𝜇+ = 𝜇(𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ). We note that 𝐼 − ≠ ∅ but 𝐼 + might be empty. In that case, we let
(𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ) = (0, 0) and set 𝛼 = 0. Let us also define the accuracy parameter
                                                                                𝛽
                                                                  𝛿B                 .
                                                                               16𝑛 2
 Consider the index 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 − with 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) maximal. By definition, 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) ≤ 𝜇. Since 𝑣 (𝑖) and 𝑢 (𝑖)
are primal and dual vertices, size(𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) )) = 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐)) by Lemma 8.3(iii). If 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) ≥
𝜇𝛿2 /(4𝑛), then using Lemma 8.4, we can find in strongly polynomial time a value 𝜇★ ∈ Q with 𝜇 ≤ 𝜇★ ≤
(1 + 𝛿)𝜇 and size(𝜇★) = 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐)).
    Similarly, whenever 𝐼 + ≠ ∅, we can pick 𝑗 ∈ 𝐼 + with 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑗) , 𝑢 (𝑗) ) minimal. If 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑗) , 𝑢 (𝑗) ) ≤ 4𝑛𝜇/𝛿2 , then
we can again find 𝜇★ ∈ Q with small encoding length satisfying 𝜇 ≤ 𝜇★ ≤ (1 + 𝛿)𝜇 in strongly polynomial
time. In both cases, we output ( 𝑥,     ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) = (𝑥, 𝑠) with the value 𝜇★. For the rest of the proof, we can assume
that
                                          𝛿2 𝜇                                    4𝑛𝜇
                     𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) <          ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 − and 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑗) , 𝑢 (𝑗) ) > 2    ∀𝑗 ∈ 𝐼 + .                    (50)
                                          4𝑛                                       𝛿
In particular, 𝜇− < 𝜇𝛿2 /(4𝑛), and 𝜇+ > 4𝑛𝜇/𝛿2 if 𝐼 + ≠ ∅. We now consider two cases.

Case I: (50) holds and 𝐼 + ≠ ∅. Let us define
                                                                      (𝑟, 𝑡)
                                  (𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) B (𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ) +                         and          𝜇′ = 𝜇(𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) .                       (51)
                                                                        𝛼
Thus, (𝑥, 𝑠) = (1 − 𝛼)(𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ) + 𝛼(𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′). By the linearity of the duality gap (Proposition 6.4), we have
𝜇 = (1 − 𝛼)𝜇− + 𝛼𝜇′, implying
                                                              𝜇
                                                         𝛼≤ ′.                                                (52)
                                                              𝜇
We show the following strong property.
Claim 8.7. (𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ) ≤ (1 + 𝛿)(𝑥, 𝑠), and for every 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], either 𝑥 −𝑖 ≥ (1 − 𝛿)𝑥 𝑖 or 𝑠 𝑖− ≥ (1 − 𝛿)𝑠 𝑖 .
Proof. First, assume for a contradiction that 𝑥 −𝑖 ≤ (1 − 𝛿)𝑥 𝑖 and 𝑠 𝑖− ≤ (1 − 𝛿)𝑠 𝑖 for some 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. We claim
that 𝜇+ ≤ 2𝑛𝜇/𝛿 2 must hold, leading to a contradiction with (50).
     Since (1 − 𝛼)𝑥 −𝑖 + 𝛼𝑥 ′𝑖 = 𝑥 𝑖 and (1 − 𝛼)𝑠 𝑖− + 𝛼𝑠 ′𝑖 = 𝑠 𝑖 , the assumptions on 𝑥 −𝑖 and 𝑠 𝑖− yield 𝛼𝑥 ′𝑖 ≥ 𝛿𝑥 𝑖 and
𝛼𝑠 𝑖 ≥ 𝛿𝑠 𝑖 . Together with (52), we get
   ′

                                                             𝜇 ′                                     𝜇 ′
                                                𝛿𝑥 𝑖 ≤         𝑥           and             𝛿𝑠 𝑖 ≤      𝑠
                                                             𝜇′ 𝑖                                    𝜇′ 𝑖
Multiplying these inequalities, we have

                                                            𝜇                                       𝜇2
                                                                              2
                                                  𝛿 𝑥𝑖 𝑠𝑖 ≤
                                                    2
                                                                                    𝑥 ′𝑖 𝑠 ′𝑖 ≤ 𝑛      ,
                                                            𝜇′                                      𝜇′

                                                                               44
where the last inequality follows by the definition 𝜇′ = ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ /𝑛. By (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), we get 𝑥 𝑖 𝑠 𝑖 ≥ (1−𝛽)𝜇,
and therefore (1 − 𝛽)𝛿2 𝜇′ ≤ 𝑛𝜇. Thus, 𝜇′ ≤ 2𝑛𝜇/𝛿 2 . Finally, note that 𝜇′ = ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ /𝑛 ≥ ⟨𝑥 + , 𝑠 + ⟩ /𝑛 = 𝜇+ ,
and therefore 𝜇+ ≤ 2𝑛𝜇/𝛿2 , in contradiction with (50).
    Next, assume that 𝑥 −𝑖 ≥ (1 + 𝛿)𝑥 𝑖 for some 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]; the case 𝑠 𝑖− ≥ (1 + 𝛿)𝑥 𝑖 follows analogously. Again,
we use (1 − 𝛼)𝑥 −𝑖 + 𝛼𝑥 ′𝑖 = 𝑥 𝑖 . The lower bound on 𝑥 −𝑖 and 𝑥 ′𝑖 ≥ 0 imply 1 − 𝛼 ≤ 1/(1 + 𝛿), that is,
𝛼 ≥ 𝛿/(1 + 𝛿). Together with (52), we get 𝜇′ ≤ (1 + 𝛿)𝜇/𝛿. Thus, 𝜇+ ≤ 2𝜇/𝛿, again a contradiction with
(50).                                                                                                         □
   In light of the above claim, let

                   𝐵 B {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑥 −𝑖 ≥ (1 − 𝛿)𝑥 𝑖 }          and        𝑁 B {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑠 𝑖− ≥ (1 − 𝛿)𝑠 𝑖 } .

By the above claim, 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛]. Further, 𝐵 ∩ 𝑁 = ∅ since 𝜇− < 𝜇𝛿2 /(4𝑛). Now, we can find a possibly
much better solution ( 𝑥,ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) by following the direction Δ𝑥 = 𝑥 − − 𝑥 and Δ𝑠 = 𝑠 − − 𝑠. For each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]
we have Δ𝑥 𝑖 Δ𝑠 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛𝛿𝜇 in both cases 𝑖 ∈ 𝐵 or 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁, using the near-monotonicity property (Lemma 6.8).
Thus, ∥Δ𝑥 ◦ Δ𝑠 ∥ ≤ 𝑛 1.5 𝛿/𝜇 < 𝛽𝜇/4, and therefore Lemma 6.9 on determining the step-size is applicable.
We have
                           ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥) ◦ (𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥     ∥𝑥 − ◦ 𝑠 − ∥   ⟨𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ⟩   𝑛𝜇−
                     𝛾B                           =               ≤              =     ≤ 𝛿2 .
                                       𝜇                  𝜇             𝜇           𝜇
Lemma 6.9 guarantees that for any step-length 𝜚 such that (1 − 𝜚) ≥ 4𝛾/𝛽, the iterate

                                 ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) B (𝑥, 𝑠) + 𝜚(Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) = 𝜚(𝑥 − , 𝑠 − ) + (1 − 𝜚)(𝑥, 𝑠) .
                               ( 𝑥,

will be in 𝒩 2 (2𝛽), with 𝜇ˆ = 𝜇( 𝑥,  ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ≤ 1.5(1 − 𝜚)𝜇. Hence, we can use any value 𝜚 such that (1 − 𝜚)𝜇 ≥
4𝑛𝜇− /𝛽. Note also that by the linearity of the gap we can write 𝜇ˆ = 𝜚𝜇− + (1 − 𝜚)𝜇.
    It is left to specify a suitable value of 𝜚. Again, taking 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 − with 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) maximal, we have
𝜇 ≤ 𝜇(𝑣 (𝑖) , 𝑢 (𝑖) ) < 𝛿2 𝜇/(4𝑛) by the assumption (50). Let us pick 𝜚 such that 𝜇ˆ = 6𝑛
  −
                                                                                        𝛽 𝜇(𝑣 , 𝑢 ); note that
                                                                                               (𝑖) (𝑖)

𝜇ˆ < 𝜇. Then, ( 𝑥,ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) and 𝜇★ = 𝜇ˆ satisfy the requirements of the lemma.

Case II: (50) holds and 𝐼 + = ∅. We can write (𝑥, 𝑠) = (𝑥 − + 𝑟, 𝑠 − + 𝑡) for the rays 𝑟 and 𝑡. Since 𝑟 and 𝑡
live in orthogonal linear spaces, ⟨𝑟, 𝑡⟩ = 0. Since both are nonnegative, we must have 𝑟 𝑖 = 0 or 𝑡 𝑖 = 0 for
each 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. On the other hand, we must have that
                                                                          4𝑛(1 − 𝛽) − 4(1 − 𝛽) − −
                      𝑥 𝑖 𝑠 𝑖 = (𝑥 −𝑖 + 𝑟 𝑖 )(𝑠 𝑖− + 𝑡 𝑖 ) ≥ (1 − 𝛽)𝜇 >            𝜇 ≥        𝑥𝑖 𝑠𝑖 .
                                                                             𝛿2          𝛿2
Let us define 𝐵 = {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] | 𝑟 𝑖 = 0} and 𝑁 = {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] | 𝑡 𝑖 = 0}. By the above inequality, 𝐵 and 𝑁 form a
partition of [𝑛]. Using this partition, we can move to a new ( 𝑥,ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) the same way as in the previous case,
noting that we have the even stronger ∥Δ𝑥 ◦ Δ𝑠 ∥ = 0 for Δ𝑥 = 𝑥 − − 𝑥 and Δ𝑠 = 𝑠 − − 𝑠.                    □
Remark 8.8. In both cases of the above proof where we ‘shoot down’ along the central path, it exhibits
a ‘polarized’ structure: primal variables in 𝐵 stay roughly the same and scale down linearly with 𝜇 in 𝑁;
for dual variables, the role of 𝑁 and 𝐵 is reversed. We note that this is the crucial structural property
exploited in the SLLS steps of [ADL+ 23]; see also Appendix B.
   The following lemma will be the ingredient to complete the proof of Lemma 8.2.
Lemma 8.9. Let 𝒫 = {𝑥 : A𝑥 = 𝑏, 𝑥 ≥ 0𝑛 } ⊂ R𝑛 be a polytope with nonempty interior and let 𝑦 be a vector
in the interior of 𝒫. For an index set 𝐽 ⊆ [𝑛], let 𝑅 ≥ max𝑥∈𝑃, ∥𝑥 𝐽 /𝑦 𝐽 ∥ ∞ be an integer, and 𝐾 > 0 any integer.
There is a strongly polynomial algorithm that computes a vector 𝑧 ∈ 𝑃 such that ∥(𝑧 𝐽 − 𝑦 𝐽 )/𝑦 𝐽 ∥ 2 ≤ 1/𝐾 with
            ˜ 3 size(A, 𝑏) + 𝑛 log(𝐾 + 𝑅)).
size(𝑧) ≤ 𝑂(𝑛
Proof. First, we obtain a Minkowski–Weyl decomposition in strongly polynomial time as in Lemma 8.5
        Í𝑘             Í𝑘
as 𝑦 = 𝑖=1    𝜆 𝑖 𝑣 𝑖 , 𝑖=1 𝜆 𝑖 = 1, 𝜆 ≥ 0, such that 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 + 1 and each 𝑣 (𝑖) is a vertex of 𝒫. Note that the
decomposition does not include extreme rays, since the polytope is bounded. Let 𝛿 = 1/(2𝑛 2 𝑅𝐾), and let
                                                                              Í𝑘 ˜
us round the 𝜆 𝑖 ’s to 𝜆˜ 𝑖 such that each 𝜆˜ 𝑖 is an integer multiple of 𝛿, 𝑖=1   𝜆 𝑖 = 1, 𝜆˜ ≥ 0, and ∥ 𝜆˜ − 𝜆∥ ∞ ≤ 𝛿.
To achieve this, we first round down each 𝜆˜ 𝑖 to the nearest integer multiple of 𝛿. This can be done by
𝑂(𝑛 log(1/𝛿)) = 𝑂(𝑛 log(𝑛𝑅𝑘)) comparisons in total by doing a binary search on each coordinate. Let 𝜆′𝑖
                                                     Í𝑘 ′
denote these coordinates. At this point, 1 − 𝑖=1          𝜆 𝑖 = ℓ 𝛿 for an integer ℓ ≤ 𝑛. We now pick arbitrary ℓ
coordinates and set 𝜆˜ 𝑖 = 𝜆′𝑖 + 1 for them, and set 𝜆˜ 𝑖 = 𝜆′𝑖 for all other coordinates.


                                                                 45
                             Í𝑘        ˜
   We claim that 𝑧 =             𝑖=1 𝜆 𝑖 𝑣 𝑖 satisfies the requirements. First, note that

                                                         𝑘
                                           𝑧−𝑦    Õ                 𝑣 (𝑖)              1
                                                ≤   |𝜆 𝑖 − 𝜆˜ 𝑖 | ·       ≤ 2𝑅𝑛 1.5 𝛿 < ,
                                            𝑦 2                      𝑦 2               𝐾
                                                     𝑖=1
                                                √                √
since each |𝜆 𝑖 − 𝜆˜ 𝑖 | ≤ 𝛿 and ∥𝑣 (𝑖) /𝑦 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛 ∥𝑣 (𝑖) /𝑦∥ ∞ ≤ 𝑛𝑅 by the definition of 𝑅. The bound on the
encoding length of 𝑧 follows since each vertex 𝑣 (𝑖) have size bounded as 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏)) (Lemma 8.3(iii)),
and each coefficient 𝜆˜ 𝑖 is a ratio of two integers ≤ 𝑛 2 𝑅𝐾.                                              □
   We are ready to prove Lemma 8.2.
Proof of Lemma 8.2. Given (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) ∩ Q𝑛+𝑛 , we first use Lemma 8.6 to obtain ( 𝑥, ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (2𝛽) and a
         ★           ★
value 𝜇 with 𝜇ˆ ≤ 𝜇 ≤ (1 + 𝛽/(4𝑛 ))𝜇ˆ for 𝜇ˆ = 𝜇( 𝑥,
                                      2                                         ★
                                                       ˆ 𝑠ˆ ), satisfying size(𝜇 ) = 𝑂(𝑛 size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐)). Let us
                                                                                        3

also fix any 𝑑 ∈ Q𝑛 such that A𝑑 = 𝑏; by choosing a nonsingular 𝑚 × 𝑚 submatrix B of A, for 𝑑 = B−1 𝑏
we get size(𝑑) = 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏)); this 𝑑 can be fixed throughout the algorithm.
    Let us now apply Lemma 8.9 with 𝐾 = ⌈8𝑛/𝛽⌉ on the primal-dual polyhedron, and the index set 𝐽
corresponding to the 𝑥 ′ and 𝑠 ′ variables.

     𝒬 = (𝑥 ′ , 𝑦 ′ , 𝑠 ′) ∈ R𝑛+𝑚+𝑛 | A𝑥 ′ = 𝑏 , A⊤ 𝑦 ′ + 𝑠 ′ = 𝑐, 𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′ ≥ 0𝑛 , ⟨𝑐, 𝑥 ′⟩ + ⟨𝑑, 𝑠 ′⟩ ≤ ⟨𝑐, 𝑑⟩ + 𝑛𝜇★
           

and the input point ( 𝑥,    ˆ 𝑠ˆ ). We note that 𝒬 is in fact a polytope. For the 𝑥 ′ and 𝑠 ′ variables, we have both
lower and upper bounds. Hence, if there is an infinite ray in 𝒬, it is supported on the 𝑦 ′ variables. But
since A is assumed to have full row rank, for any 𝑦 ′ ≠ 0 we have A⊤ 𝑦 ′ ≠ 0. Hence, no such ray may exist.
    Note also that ⟨𝑐, 𝑥 ′⟩ + ⟨𝑑, 𝑠 ′⟩ ≤ ⟨𝑐, 𝑑⟩ + 𝑛𝜇★ is equivalent to ⟨𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′⟩ ≤ 𝑛𝜇★ by Proposition 6.3. In
particular, ( 𝑥, ˆ 𝑦,
                   ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ∈ 𝒬, where 𝑦ˆ is such that A⊤ 𝑦ˆ + 𝑠ˆ = 𝑐. By the centrality of ( 𝑥, ˆ 𝑠ˆ ), using Lemma 6.8
with 𝜇/𝜇
      ˆ      ≤ 1 + 𝛿 and Proposition 6.5, one can check that 𝑅 = 2𝑛 is a valid bound for 𝐽. Further, the
size of the description of 𝒬 is size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐, 𝑑, 𝜇★) = 𝑂(𝑛 3 size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐)). Therefore, the algorithm returns a
                                         ˜ 6 size(A, 𝑏, 𝑐)) and
point (𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) with size(𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) = 𝑂(𝑛

                                                                                          2 1/2
                                                                                           !          √
                       𝑥′        𝑠′       √                          𝑥′
                                                                             2
                                                                               𝑠′                      2    𝛽
                          − 1𝑛 +    − 1𝑛 ≤ 2                            − 1𝑛 +    − 1𝑛            ≤      ≤    .          (53)
                       𝑥ˆ     2  𝑠ˆ     2                            𝑥ˆ     2  𝑠ˆ      2              𝐾    4𝑛

We can bound the ratio 𝜇′/𝜇ˆ by
                                                             𝑛                        𝑛
                           𝛽                                                        𝛽
                                                                                                        2
                                            1 Õ ′ ′ (1 − 1/𝐾)2 Õ
                       1 + 2 𝜇ˆ ≥ 𝜇★ ≥ 𝜇′ =       𝑥𝑖 𝑠𝑖 ≥          𝑥ˆ 𝑖 𝑠ˆ 𝑖 = 1 −                              𝜇ˆ .     (54)
                          4𝑛                𝑛             𝑛                        4𝑛
                                              𝑖=1              𝑖=1

We are ready to show that (𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) ∈ 𝒩 2 (3𝛽).

      𝑥′ ◦ 𝑠′                     𝑥              𝑠′             𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ
                                  ′                                  
              − 1𝑛 =                 − 1𝑛 + 1𝑛 ◦    − 1𝑛 + 1𝑛 ◦         − 1𝑛
        𝜇′        2               𝑥ˆ             𝑠ˆ               𝜇′         2
                                                                                                                         (55)
                                  𝑥′        𝑠′        𝑥′        𝑠′                            𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ   𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ
                                                                                         
                         ≤           − 1𝑛 +    − 1𝑛 +    − 1𝑛      − 1𝑛                               +         − 1𝑛
                                  𝑥ˆ     2  𝑠ˆ     2  𝑥ˆ      2 𝑠
                                                                ˆ       2                       𝜇′ ∞      𝜇′         2

Using (53), and bringing out a factor 𝜇/𝜇
                                      ˆ ′ in both terms, we get
                                                                        !
                          𝑥′ ◦ 𝑠′           𝜇ˆ 𝛽     𝛽                       𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ   𝜇ˆ 𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ 𝜇′
                                                       2         
                                  − 1 𝑛   ≤       +                                  + ′         − 1𝑛
                            𝜇′          2   𝜇′ 4𝑛   4𝑛                          𝜇ˆ ∞ 𝜇       𝜇ˆ   𝜇ˆ  2

                                                  𝜇ˆ 𝛽              𝑥ˆ ◦ 𝑠ˆ             𝜇′
                                                                                                         
                                                ≤ ′     (1 + 2𝛽) +           − 1𝑛 +        1𝑛 − 1𝑛                       (56)
                                                  𝜇 2𝑛                 𝜇ˆ         2     𝜇ˆ         2
                                                      𝛽     𝛽         √ 𝛽
                                                                            
                                                ≤ 1+          + 2𝛽 + 𝑛           ≤ 3𝛽 .
                                                     2𝑛 𝑛                   4𝑛

Here, the first inequality used (53), the second used that ( 𝑥,
                                                             ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) and the triangle inequality, the
third used again ( 𝑥,
                   ˆ 𝑠ˆ ) ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽) and the two sided bound (54) on 𝜇′/𝜇.
                               2                                        ˆ The final inequality uses 𝛽 ≤ 1/6
and 𝑛 ≥ 2. Therefore, (𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) ∈ 𝒩 2 (3𝛽), as required.                                                   □


                                                                       46
References
[ABGJ18]    X. Allamigeon, P. Benchimol, S. Gaubert, and M. Joswig. Log-barrier interior point methods
            are not strongly polynomial. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry, 2(1):140–178,
            2018. 3
[AC91]      I. Adler and S. Cosares. A strongly polynomial algorithm for a special class of linear
            programs. Operations Research, 39(6):955–960, 1991. 1, 2

[ADL+ 23]   X. Allamigeon, D. Dadush, G. Loho, B. Natura, and L. A. Végh. Interior point methods are
            not worse than Simplex, 2023. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 13, 32, 33, 34, 42, 43, 45, 53, 54, 57, 60
[AGV22]     X. Allamigeon, S. Gaubert, and N. Vandame. No self-concordant barrier interior point
            method is strongly polynomial. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
            of Computing (STOC), pages 515–528, 2022. 3

[AMO93]     R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin. Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applica-
            tions. Prentice-Hall, Inc., feb 1993. 2
[BCK+ 23]   J. v. d. Brand, L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, R. Peng, M. P. Gutenberg, S. Sachdeva, and
            A. Sidford. A deterministic almost-linear time algorithm for minimum-cost flow. In 2023
            IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2023. 2
[BSS89]     L. Blum, M. Shub, and S. Smale. On a theory of computation and complexity over the
            real numbers: NP-completeness, recursive functions and universal machines. Bulletin of the
            American Mathematical Society, 21(1):1–46, 1989. 4
[CKL+ 22]   L. Chen, R. Kyng, Y. P. Liu, R. Peng, M. P. Gutenberg, and S. Sachdeva. Maximum flow
            and minimum-cost flow in almost-linear time. In 2022 IEEE 63rd Annual Symposium on
            Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 612–623. IEEE, 2022. 2
[CLS19]     M. B. Cohen, Y. T. Lee, and Z. Song. Solving linear programs in the current matrix mul-
            tiplication time. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
            Computing, pages 938–942, 2019. 2

[CM94a]     E. Cohen and N. Megiddo. New algorithms for generalized network flows. Mathematical
            Programming, 64(1):325–336, 1994. 1, 2
[CM94b]     E. Cohen and N. Megiddo. Improved algorithms for linear inequalities with two variables
            per inequality. SIAM Journal on Computing, 23(6):1313–1347, 1994. 1, 6

[DHNV23] D. Dadush, S. Huiberts, B. Natura, and L. A. Végh. A scaling-invariant algorithm for linear
         programming whose running time depends only on the constraint matrix. Mathematical
         Programming, 2023. (in press). 1, 3, 6, 13, 31, 43
[DKNV22] D. Dadush, Z. K. Koh, B. Natura, and L. A. Végh. An accelerated newton–dinkelbach
         method and its application to two variables per inequality systems. Mathematics of Operations
         Research, 2022. 2, 6
[DNV20]     D. Dadush, B. Natura, and L. A. Végh. Revisiting Tardos’s framework for linear program-
            ming: Faster exact solutions using approximate solvers. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
            IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 2020. 1
[DR24]      D. Dadush and A. Ramachandran. Strongly polynomial frame scaling to high precision. In
            Proceedings of the 2024 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), 2024.
            to appear. 8, 63
[DS08]      S. I. Daitch and D. A. Spielman. Faster approximate lossy generalized flow via interior
            point algorithms. In Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
            (STOC), pages 451–460. ACM, 2008. 2

[DTK23]     I. Diakonikolas, C. Tzamos, and D. M. Kane. A strongly polynomial algorithm for approx-
            imate forster transforms and its application to halfspace learning. In Proceedings of the 55th
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1741–1754, 2023. 8, 63


                                                   47
[Edm67]    J. Edmonds. Systems of distinct representatives and linear algebra. J. Res. Nat. Bur. Standards
           Sect. B, 71(4):241–245, 1967. 4
[ENV22]    F. Ekbatani, B. Natura, and A. L. Végh. Circuit imbalance measures and linear programming.
           In Surveys in Combinatorics 2022, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, page
           64–114. Cambridge University Press, 2022. 6
[Ful68]    D. Fulkerson. Networks, frames, blocking systems. Mathematics of the Decision Sciences, Part
           I, Lectures in Applied Mathematics, 2:303–334, 1968. 10
[GJO97]    D. Goldfarb, Z. Jin, and J. B. Orlin. Polynomial-time highest-gain augmenting path algo-
           rithms for the generalized circulation problem. Mathematics of Operations Research, 22(4):793–
           802, 1997. 2
[GLS88]    M. Grötschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrĳver. Geometric algorithms and combinatorial optimization,
           volume 2. Springer Science & Business Media, 1988. 4, 7, 42, 43, 66
[Gon92]    C. C. Gonzaga. Path-following methods for linear programming. SIAM review, 34(2):167–
           224, 1992. 32
[GPT91]    A. V. Goldberg, S. A. Plotkin, and É. Tardos. Combinatorial algorithms for the generalized
           circulation problem. Math. Oper. Res., 16(2):351–381, 1991. 1, 2, 6, 52
[GPV23]    M. Ghadiri, R. Peng, and S. S. Vempala. The bit complexity of efficient continuous optimiza-
           tion. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE,
           2023. 4, 43
[HN94]     D. S. Hochbaum and J. Naor. Simple and fast algorithms for linear and integer programs
           with two variables per inequality. SIAM Journal on Computing, 23(6):1179–1192, 1994. 1, 2,
           7, 29
[Hoc04]    D. S. Hochbaum. Monotonizing linear programs with up to two nonzeroes per column.
           Operations Research Letters, 32(1):49–58, January 2004. 1, 11
[JSWZ21]   S. Jiang, Z. Song, O. Weinstein, and H. Zhang. A faster algorithm for solving general LPs. In
           Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing. ACM, June
           2021. 2
[Kan39]    L. V. Kantorovich. Mathematical methods of organizing and planning production. Publica-
           tion House of the Leningrad State University, page 68, 1939. English translation in Management
           Science 6(4):366-422, 1960. 2
[Kar84]    N. Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming. In Proceedings of
           the 16th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 302–311, 1984. 1
[Kar22]    A. Karczmarz. Improved strongly polynomial algorithms for deterministic mdps, 2vpi
           feasibility, and discounted all-pairs shortest paths. In Proceedings of the 2022 Annual ACM-
           SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 154–172. SIAM, 2022. 2, 6
[Kha79]    L. G. Khachiyan. A polynomial algorithm in linear programming. In Doklady Academii Nauk
           SSSR, volume 244, pages 1093–1096, 1979. 1
[LMT09]    G. Lan, R. D. Monteiro, and T. Tsuchiya. A polynomial predictor-corrector trust-region
           algorithm for linear programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 19(4):1918–1946, 2009. 3,
           55
[LS14]     Y. T. Lee and A.√Sidford. Path finding methods for linear programming: Solving linear
                        ˜ rank) iterations and faster algorithms for maximum flow, part ii. In 55th
           programs in 𝑂(
           Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 424–433. IEEE, 2014. 2
[Meg83]    N. Megiddo. Towards a genuinely polynomial algorithm for linear programming. SIAM
           Journal on Computing, 12(2):347–353, 1983. 1, 2, 6, 29
[MMT98]    N. Megiddo, S. Mizuno, and T. Tsuchiya. A modified layered-step interior-point algorithm
           for linear programming. Mathematical Programming, 82(3):339–355, 1998. 3


                                                  48
[MT03]      R. D. C. Monteiro and T. Tsuchiya. A variant of the Vavasis-Ye layered-step interior-point
            algorithm for linear programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 13(4):1054–1079, 2003. 3,
            32, 43
[MT05]      R. D. C. Monteiro and T. Tsuchiya. A new iteration-complexity bound for the MTY predictor-
            corrector algorithm. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 15(2):319–347, 2005. 3
[MTY93]     S. Mizuno, M. Todd, and Y. Ye. On adaptive-step primal-dual interior-point algorithms for
            linear programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 18:964–981, 11 1993. 53
[NPT92]     C. H. Norton, S. A. Plotkin, and É. Tardos. Using separation algorithms in fixed dimension.
            Journal of Algorithms, 13(1):79–98, 1992. 1, 2
[OV20]      N. Olver and L. A. Végh. A simpler and faster strongly polynomial algorithm for generalized
            flow maximization. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 67(2):1–26, 2020. 1, 2, 6, 7, 29
[Rad04]     T. Radzik. Improving time bounds on maximum generalised flow computations by con-
            tracting the network. Theoretical Computer Science, 312(1):75–97, 2004. 2
[Roc69]     R. T. Rockafellar. The elementary vectors of a subspace of 𝑅 𝑁 . In Combinatorial Mathematics
            and Its Applications: Proceedings North Carolina Conference, Chapel Hill, 1967, pages 104–127.
            The University of North Carolina Press, 1969. 10
[RTV05]     C. Roos, T. Terlaky, and J.-P. Vial. Interior point methods for linear optimization. Springer Science
            & Business Media, 2005. 33
[RW09]      M. Restrepo and D. P. Williamson. A simple GAP-canceling algorithm for the generalized
            maximum flow problem. Mathematical Programming, 118(1):47–74, 2009. 2
[Sma98]     S. Smale. Mathematical problems for the next century. The Mathematical Intelligencer, 20(2):7–
            15, 1998. 1
[Tar85]     É. Tardos. A strongly polynomial minimum cost circulation algorithm. Combinatorica,
            5(3):247–255, Sep 1985. 1
[Tar86]     É. Tardos. A strongly polynomial algorithm to solve combinatorial linear programs. Opera-
            tions Research, pages 250–256, 1986. 1
[TW98]      É. Tardos and K. D. Wayne. Simple maximum flow algorithms in lossy networks. In
            Proceedings of IPCO, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 1412, pages 310–324, 1998. 2
[Vai89]     P. M. Vaidya. Speeding-up linear programming using fast matrix multiplication. In 30th
            Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 332–337. IEEE, 1989. 2
[vdB20]     J. van den Brand. A deterministic linear program solver in current matrix multiplication
            time. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 259–278. SIAM,
            2020. 2
[vdBLSS20] J. van den Brand, Y. T. Lee, A. Sidford, and Z. Song. Solving tall dense linear programs in
           nearly linear time, 2020. 2
[vdBZ23]    J. van den Brand and D. Zhang. Faster high accuracy multi-commodity flow from single-
            commodity techniques, 2023. 2
[Vég17]     L. A. Végh. A strongly polynomial algorithm for generalized flow maximization. Mathe-
            matics of Operations Research, 42(2):179–211, 2017. 1, 2, 6, 29
[VY96]      S. A. Vavasis and Y. Ye. A primal-dual interior point method whose running time depends
            only on the constraint matrix. Mathematical Programming, Series B, 74(1):79–120, 1996. 1, 2,
            6, 7, 13, 30, 32, 33, 43
[Way02]     K. D. Wayne. A polynomial combinatorial algorithm for generalized minimum cost flow.
            Mathematics of Operations Research, pages 445–459, 2002. 1, 2, 6
[Ye97]      Y. Ye. Interior-Point Algorithms: Theory and Analysis. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1997.
            53


                                                      49
                                                 √
[YTM94]   Y. Ye, M. J. Todd, and S. Mizuno. An 𝑜( 𝑛𝐿)-iteration homogeneous and self-dual linear
          programming algorithm. Mathematics of Operations Research, 19(1):53–67, February 1994. 7
[ZLY23]   M. Zong, Y. T. Lee, and M.-C. Yue. Short-step methods are not strongly polynomial-time.
          Mathematical Programming, July 2023. 3




                                              50
A      Omitted proofs
Lemma 4.4. Let (𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸), 𝛾, 𝑐, 𝑢, 𝑏) be an instance of minimum-cost generalized flow as given by (MGF)
satisfying Assumption 4.2, and let 𝑥 ∗ be any primal optimal solution. Let 𝑥 𝔪 be the corresponding primal max-
central path as given by (MCP-Flow). Consider the instance of minimum-cost generalized circulation on the
residual graph 𝐺 𝑥 ∗ , and let 𝑥ˆ 𝔪 be the corresponding primal max-central path. For any 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1),
  (i) If 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 𝑢𝑒 , then SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                  𝑒 ) = 1.

  (ii) If 𝑥 ∗𝑒 < 𝑢𝑒 , then SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥 𝔪
                                     𝑒 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ).
                                                     𝔪


 (iii) If 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 > 0, then SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥←𝔪 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ).
                                                 𝑒              𝑒

 (iv) If 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 = 0, then SLC𝜂 (𝑥←𝔪 ) = 1.
                                            𝑒

Proof. Every feasible solution 𝑥 of (MGF) can be mapped to a feasible solution 𝑥ˆ of (MGC), given by
𝑥ˆ 𝑒 B min(𝑥 𝑒 , 𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ) for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺 𝑥 ∗ ) ∩ 𝐸, and 𝑥ˆ←𝑒 B 𝛾𝑒 min(𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒 , 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ) for all 𝑒 ∈ supp(𝑥 ∗ ). This is
obtained by first mapping 𝑥 to a feasible solution 𝑥¯ of (MGC), defined by 𝑥¯ 𝑒 B max(𝑥 𝑒 − 𝑥 ∗𝑒 , 0) for all
𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺 𝑥 ∗ ) ∩ 𝐸, and 𝑥¯←𝑒 B 𝛾𝑒 max(𝑥 ∗𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒 , 0) for all 𝑒 ∈ supp(𝑥 ∗ ). Then, augment 𝑥¯ along every cycle of the
             ←
form (𝑒 , 𝑒) to obtain 𝑥.   ˆ Note that ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩
                                            ˆ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ ¯ = ⟨𝑐, 𝑥⟩ − ⟨𝑐, 𝑥 ∗ ⟩. With the mapped solution 𝑥,    ˆ we deduce
that 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 (𝜆) = min(𝑥 𝑒 (𝜆), 𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒 ) for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸(𝐺 𝑥 ∗ ) ∩ 𝐸 and 𝜆 ≥ 0. Similarly, 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 (𝜆) = 𝛾𝑒 min(𝑥←𝔪 (𝜆), 𝑥 ∗𝑒 )
          𝔪                𝔪           ∗
                                                                                                𝑒                  𝑒
for all 𝑒 ∈ supp(𝑥 ∗ ) and 𝜆 ≥ 0.
       Let 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 and 𝜂 ∈ (0, 1). Let 𝑓 : R+ → R+ be a continuous piecewise-affine function such that
𝜂 𝑥ˆ 𝔪
     𝑒 ≤ 𝑓 ≤ 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 . If 𝑥 𝑒 ≤ 𝑢𝑒 /2, then for any 𝜆 ≥ 0 where 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 (𝜆) = 𝑢 𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒 , we have 𝑓 (𝜆) ≥ 𝜂(𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 𝑒 ) ≥
                   𝔪        ∗                                           𝔪                ∗                              ∗

𝜂𝑢𝑒 /2 ≥ 𝜂𝑥 𝑒 (𝜆)/2. Since 𝑓 ≤ 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ≤ 𝑥 𝑒 , it follows that 𝜂𝑥 𝑒 /2 ≤ 𝑓 ≤ 𝑥 𝑒 . Thus, SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥 𝑒 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ 𝔪
                 𝔪                     𝔪      𝔪                       𝔪              𝔪                      𝔪
                                                                                                                          𝑒 ).
On the other hand, if 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ≥ 𝑢𝑒 /2, then 𝑥 𝔪    𝑒 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒 ≥ 𝑢𝑒 /2 ≥ 𝑥 𝑒 /2. In this case, SLC1/2 (𝑥 𝑒 ) = 1 ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ 𝑒 ).
                                                       ∗             𝔪                               𝔪                  𝔪

       If 𝑒 ∈ 𝐹 and 𝑥 ∗𝑒 > 0, then the argument for 𝑥←𝔪 is analogous but opposite. Let ℎ : R+ → R+ be
                                                                𝑒
a continuous piecewise-affine function such that 𝜂 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ≤ ℎ ≤ 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 . If 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ≤ 𝑢𝑒 /2, then 𝑥←𝔪 ≥ 𝑢𝑒 − 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ≥
                                                                  𝑒            𝑒                            𝑒
𝑢𝑒 /2 ≥ 𝑥←𝔪 /2. So, SLC1/2 (𝑥←𝔪 ) = 1 ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ). On the other hand, if 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ≥ 𝑢𝑒 /2, then for any 𝜆 ≥ 0
               𝑒                   𝑒                     𝑒
where 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 (𝜆) = 𝛾𝑥 ∗𝑒 , we have ℎ(𝜆) ≥ 𝜂𝛾𝑒 𝑥 ∗𝑒 ≥ 𝜂𝛾𝑒 𝑢𝑒 /2 ≥ 𝜂𝛾𝑒 𝑥←𝔪 (𝜆)/2. As ℎ ≤ 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ≤ 𝛾𝑒 𝑥←𝔪 , it follows that
             𝑒                                                             𝑒                    𝑒         𝑒
𝜂𝑥←𝔪 /2 ≤ ℎ/𝛾𝑒 ≤ 𝑥←𝔪 . Hence, SLC𝜂/2 (𝑥←𝔪 ) ≤ SLC𝜂 ( 𝑥ˆ←𝔪 ).
     𝑒                   𝑒                    𝑒               𝑒
                                                𝑒 ) = 1 for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐 with 𝑥 𝑒 = 𝑢 𝑒 , and SLC𝜂 (𝑥←   ) = 1 for all 𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 𝑐
       Finally, it is easy to see that SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪                                 ∗                    𝔪
                                                                                                      𝑒
with 𝑥 𝑒 = 0, as required.
           ∗                                                                                                                □
Lemma 4.6. Suppose 𝑓 : R2+ → R+ is 𝑘1 -simple and 𝑔 : R+ → R+ is 𝑘2 -simple. Then ℎ : R+ → R+ defined by
ℎ(𝑥) = 𝑓 (𝑥, 𝑔(𝑥)) is 𝑂(𝑘1 + 𝑘2 )-simple.
Proof. Write 𝑓 (𝑧) = 𝑖≤𝑘1 𝑓 (𝑖) , where 𝑓 (𝑖) (𝑧) = min(𝑣 𝑖0 , 𝑣 𝑖1 𝑧1 , 𝑣 𝑖2 𝑧2 ) for 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 ∈ R+ ∪ {∞} for all 𝑖, 𝑗. Then
                         Ô
ℎ = 𝑖≤𝑘1 ℎ (𝑖) (𝑥) where
    Ô

                              ℎ (𝑖) (𝑥) := 𝑓 (𝑖) (𝑥, 𝑔(𝑥)) = min(𝑣 𝑖0 , 𝑣 𝑖1 𝑥, 𝑣 𝑖2 𝑔(𝑥)).
    Consider any interval [𝑥 1 , 𝑥2 ] where 𝑔(𝑥) is constant; then ℎ (𝑖) (𝑥) is the minimum of a constant and
a linear function over this interval. The same holds if 𝑔(𝑥) is linear on this interval. So ℎ (𝑖) is a simple
function, and hence ℎ is as well.
    Given a 𝑘-simple function 𝑟 : R+ → R+ , say that 𝑥 ∈ R++ is a local apex of 𝑟 if for some 𝜖 > 0, 𝑟 is linear
on (𝑥 − 𝜖, 𝑥) and constant on (𝑥, 𝑥 + 𝜖). A 𝑘-simple function has at most 𝑘 local apexes, so it suffices to
show that ℎ has at most 2𝑘 1 + 𝑘2 local apexes. Note that a local apex of ℎ must be a local apex of ℎ (𝑖) for
some 𝑖.
    Fix some 𝑖. We claim that ℎ (𝑖) has at most 2 local apexes that are not local apexes of 𝑔. To see
                           𝑣 𝑔(𝑥)
this, first observe that 𝑖2𝑣 𝑖0 and 𝑣 𝑣 𝑖1𝑔(𝑥)
                                           𝑥
                                               are both nondecreasing functions. The former is clear from
                                       𝑖2
monotonicity of 𝑔; the latter is immediate after writing 𝑔(𝑥) = max𝑖≤𝑘2 min(𝑤 𝑖0 , 𝑤 𝑖1 𝑥), so that 𝑔(𝑥)/𝑥 =
max𝑖 min(𝑤 𝑖0 /𝑥, 𝑤 𝑖1 ). This means that there will be values 𝑥 𝑖1 ≤ 𝑥 𝑖2 ∈ R+ ∪ {∞} so that

                                                      𝑣 𝑖1 𝑥        for 𝑥 ≤ 𝑥 𝑖1
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                           (𝑖)
                                         ℎ (𝑥) = 𝑣 𝑖2 𝑔(𝑥)           for 𝑥 𝑖1 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑥 𝑖2 .
                                                 𝑣 𝑖0               for 𝑥 𝑖2 ≤ 𝑥
                                                
                                                
                                                
Then 𝑥 𝑖1 and 𝑥 𝑖2 are the only possible local apexes of ℎ (𝑖) aside from the 𝑘2 (or fewer) local apexes of 𝑔.
Thus ℎ has at most 2𝑘1 + 𝑘 2 local apexes in total, as required.                                            □

                                                                51
Lemma 4.8. Given 𝑓1 , . . . , 𝑓𝑟 : R+ → R+ , with 𝑓𝑖 being 𝑘 𝑖 -simple for each 𝑖, then        𝑖 𝑓 𝑖 is (𝑘 1 +𝑘 2 +. . .+𝑘 𝑟 )-simple.
                                                                                           Ó

Proof. It suffices to show this for 𝑟 = 2. Let 𝑓 := 𝑓1 ∧ 𝑓2 .
    Given a simple function 𝑔, say that 𝑦 is a “flat value” of 𝑔 if there is an interval for which 𝑔(𝑥) = 𝑦
for all 𝑥 in the interval. Let 𝐻(𝑔) denote the set of flat values of 𝑔. Then the 𝑔 is |𝐻(𝑔)|-simple if 𝑔 is
bounded, and (|𝐻(𝑔)| + 1)-simple if 𝑔 is unbounded.
    It suffices then to bound |𝐻( 𝑓 )| by |𝐻( 𝑓1 )| + |𝐻( 𝑓2 )|; if 𝑓 is unbounded, then 𝑓1 and 𝑓2 are as well. But
clearly 𝐻( 𝑓 ) ⊆ 𝐻( 𝑓1 ) ∪ 𝐻( 𝑓2 ); the claim holds.                                                             □
    To prove Lemma 4.9, we first show the following claim.
Claim A.1. Suppose 𝑓 = 𝑖≤𝑘 𝑓 (𝑖) and 𝑔 = 𝑗≤ℓ 𝑔 (𝑗) , where each 𝑓 (𝑖) and 𝑔 (𝑗) are 1-simple, and 𝑓 ≥ 𝑔. Then
                              Ô                     Ô

for each 𝑗 ≤ ℓ , there exists an 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘 so that 𝑓 (𝑖) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) .
Proof. Fix any 𝑗 ≤ ℓ , and let us express 𝑔 (𝑗) (𝑥) = min(𝑤 0 , 𝑤1 𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑤 𝑛 𝑥 𝑛 ). We can assume 𝑤 𝑎 > 0
for all 0 ≤ 𝑎 ≤ 𝑛, as otherwise 𝑔 (𝑗) ≡ 0 and the claim is trivial. First, we show the lemma under the
assumption that 𝑤 𝑎 < ∞ for each 𝑎. Defining 𝑦 = (𝑤0 /𝑤 1 , 𝑤0 /𝑤 2 , . . . , 𝑤 0 /𝑤 𝑛 ), we have 𝑔 (𝑗) (𝑦) = 𝑤 0 ,
and the minimum is achieved simultaneously on all terms. Since 𝑓 ≥ 𝑔, there must be an 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘 with
𝑓 (𝑖) (𝑦) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) (𝑦). Let us denote 𝑓 (𝑖) (𝑥) = min(𝑣0 , 𝑣1 𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 𝑥 𝑛 ). We must have 𝑣0 ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) (𝑦) = 𝑤 0 and
𝑣 𝑎 𝑦 𝑎 ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) (𝑦) = 𝑤 0 for each 1 ≤ 𝑎 ≤ 𝑛. That is, 𝑣 𝑎 𝑤 0 /𝑤 𝑎 ≥ 𝑤 0 , implying 𝑣 𝑎 ≥ 𝑤 𝑎 since 0 < 𝑤 0 < ∞.
Thus, 𝑓 (𝑖) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) as claimed.
      Next, we drop the restriction that every 𝑤 𝑎 is finite. For any positive integer 𝑀, let 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) denote
the function 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) (𝑥) = min(𝑤 0𝑀 , 𝑤1𝑀 𝑥1 , . . . , 𝑤 𝑛𝑀 𝑥 𝑛 ), where 𝑤 𝑖𝑀 := min(𝑤 𝑖 , 𝑀). Then 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) ≤ 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑁) for
𝑀 ≤ 𝑁, and 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) → 𝑔 (𝑗) pointwise as 𝑀 → ∞. For each 𝑀, there is a corresponding 𝑖 𝑀 so that
𝑓 (𝑖 𝑀 ) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) , since we have proved the lemma already in the case that all coefficients are finite. Thus
there is an index 𝑖 so that 𝑓 (𝑖) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗,𝑀) for an infinite sequence of choices of 𝑀; necessarily 𝑓 (𝑖) ≥ 𝑔 (𝑗) as
required.                                                                                                                □
Lemma 4.9. Suppose 𝑓 : R+𝑛 → R+ is 𝑘-simple but not (𝑘 − 1)-simple, with 𝑓 = 𝑖≤𝑘 𝑓 (𝑖) for 1-simple functions
                                                                                            Ô
𝑓 (𝑖) . Then for any description of 𝑓 as 𝑓 = 𝑖≤ℓ 𝑔 (𝑖) for 1-simple functions 𝑔 (𝑖) , there is a set 𝑆 ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , ℓ } with
                                               Ô
|𝑆| = 𝑘 so that { 𝑓 (𝑖) : 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘} = {𝑔 (𝑖) : 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆}.
Proof. By the above claim (applied          with both functions equal to 𝑓 ), for each 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘 there is some 𝜎(𝑖) so
that 𝑔 (𝜎(𝑖)) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑖) . Let 𝑔 ′ := 𝑖≤𝑘 𝑔 (𝜎(𝑖)) . Then
                                  Ô
                                                              Ü
                                                   𝑓 ≥ 𝑔′ ≥         𝑓 (𝑖) = 𝑓 .
                                                              𝑖≤𝑘

Applying the claim again, this time with both functions equal to 𝑔 ′, we determine that for each 𝑔 (𝜎(𝑖))
there exists an 𝑓 (𝑗) with 𝑓 (𝑗) ≥ 𝑔 (𝜎(𝑖)) . Since 𝑓 (𝑗) ≥ 𝑓 (𝑖) , we must have 𝑖 = 𝑗 by the minimal choice of the
representation of 𝑓 . Thus, 𝑔 (𝜎(𝑖)) = 𝑓 (𝑖) for each 𝑖, proving the claim with 𝑆 = {𝜎(𝑖) : 𝑖 ≤ 𝑘}.               □
Lemma 4.18. A flow is an elementary circulation if and only if it is induced by a simple conservative object.
Proof. For the forward direction, let 𝑥 be an elementary circulation. By Theorem 2.6 in [GPT91], 𝑥 is
either supported on a conservative cycle, or induced by a conservative object 𝑈 = (𝐶, 𝑃, 𝐷) where 𝐶 is
a flow-generating cycle, 𝑃 is a path, and 𝐷 is a flow-absorbing cycle. We are clearly done in the former
case, so let us focus on the latter; it remains to show that 𝑈 is simple. Let 𝑠 be the starting node and 𝑡
be the final node in 𝑃. By shortcutting, we may assume that 𝑉(𝐶) ∩ 𝑉(𝑃) = {𝑠} and 𝑉(𝐷) ∩ 𝑉(𝑃) = {𝑡}.
Consider the following two cases:
Case 1: 𝑠 ≠ 𝑡, i.e., 𝐸(𝑃) ≠ ∅. For a contradiction, suppose that there exists a node 𝑟 ∈ 𝑉(𝐶) ∩ 𝑉(𝐷). Let 𝐶 𝑟
and 𝐷𝑟 be cycles at 𝑟 with the same support as 𝐶 and 𝐷 respectively. Then, (𝐶 𝑟 , {𝑟}, 𝐷𝑟 ) is a conservative
object. Any flow induced by this object is supported on a proper subset of supp(𝑥), a contradiction.
Case 2: 𝑠 = 𝑡, i.e., 𝐸(𝑃) = ∅. For a contradiction, suppose that the intersection of 𝐶 and 𝐷 is not a path,
i.e., this intersection has multiple connected components. Let 𝐶1 be a minimal subpath of 𝐶 whose
endpoints lie in different components; its intermediate nodes do not lie in 𝑉(𝐷) by minimality. Let 𝑄 be
a path with 𝐸(𝑄) ⊂ 𝐸(𝐷) and where 𝑅 := 𝐶1 ⊕ 𝑄 is a directed cycle. Let 𝑟 be the starting node of 𝐶1 , and
again let 𝐶 𝑟 and 𝐷𝑟 be cycles at 𝑟 with the same support as 𝐶 and 𝐷 respectively.
     If 𝛾(𝑅) > 1, then (𝑅, {𝑟}, 𝐷𝑟 ) is a conservative object. If 𝛾(𝑅) = 1, then (𝑅, {𝑟}, 𝑅) is a conservative
object. If 𝛾(𝑅) < 1, then (𝐶 𝑟 , {𝑟}, 𝑅) is a conservative object. In each scenario, the induced flow is
supported on a proper subset of supp(𝑥), a contradiction.
    For the converse direction, we observe that removing any single arc from a simple conservative object
yields something that is not strongly connected, and hence cannot have a nonzero circulation.          □

                                                              52
B      An Implementation of the SLLS IPM with Strongly Polynomial
       Iterations
In this section, we prove Theorem 6.10, which is the adapted IPM. This provides a slower version of
the original subspace layered least squares (SLLS) IPM, that satisfies two additional properties. Firstly,
each iteration can be implemented in strongly polynomial time. In particular, the bit-complexity of the
iterates increases at most polynomially with each iteration. Secondly, we provide certificates that the
outputted optimal solutions are close to the analytic centers of the respective optimal faces.
    In terms of analysis, we will mainly focus on correctness and ensuring strongly polynomial iterations.
For the iteration complexity, the analysis is very similar to that of [ADL+ 23], so we only provide a sketch
of how the arguments differ.
    The section is organized as follows. We begin in Appendix B.1 with a primer on standard predictor-
corrector methods. The subspace LLS IPM will follow this framework, while occasionally using more
aggressive predictor steps. The corresponding subspace LLS step is presented in Appendix B.2. The
pseudocode for the IPM is presented in Appendix B.3. In Appendix B.4, we argue the correctness of the
IPM, and in Appendix B.5 we quickly sketch how the iteration complexity analysis differs from [ADL+ 23].
In Appendix B.6, we show how to compute the required steps and step sizes in strongly polynomial
time. We note that the IPM will rely on an approximate SVD that is given in Appendix B.7.
    For the sake of notational simplicity, throughout this section we use the notation
                                                                𝛽              𝛽
                                             𝑥 𝛼 𝑦 𝛽 B (𝑥1𝛼 𝑦1 , . . . , 𝑥 𝑛𝛼 𝑦𝑛 ),

for 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ R𝑛 , 𝛼, 𝛽 > 0, where we will always restrict to choices of 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝛼, 𝛽 where the individual
                                                                         𝑛
coordinates on the right hand side are well-defined. Similarly, for 𝑥 ∈ R++ and 𝛼 > 0 and 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 a
                         𝛼        𝛼
linear subspace, we use 𝑥 𝑊 B {𝑥 𝑤 : 𝑤 ∈ 𝑊 }.

B.1     Predictor-Corrector Methods
Given 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒫++ × 𝒟++ , the search directions commonly used in interior-point methods are
obtained as the solution (Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) to the following linear system for some 𝜈 ∈ [0, 1].

                                                          Δ𝑥 ∈ 𝑊                                                  (57)
                                                                      ⊥
                                                           Δ𝑠 ∈ 𝑊                                                 (58)
                                               𝑠Δ𝑥 + 𝑥Δ𝑠 = 𝜈𝜇1 − 𝑥𝑠                                               (59)

Predictor-corrector methods, such as the Mizuno–Todd–Ye Predictor-Corrector (MTY P-C) algorithm
[MTY93], alternate between two types of steps. In corrector steps, we use 𝜈 = 1. This gives the centrality
direction, denoted as Δ𝑧 c = (Δ𝑥 c , Δ𝑠 c ). In predictor steps, we use 𝜈 = 0. This direction is also called the
affine scaling direction, and will be denoted as Δ𝑧 a = (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ) throughout.
     Let 𝑧 := (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) be our current iterate. In our algorithm, we will first apply a corrector step
to get 𝑧 c := 𝑧 + Δ𝑧 c , which will reduce our centrality error by a factor 2, that is, 𝑧 c ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽/2), without
changing the gap 𝜇(𝑧). Following this, we apply a predictor step to get 𝑧 + := 𝑧 c + 𝛼 a Δ𝑧 a , for 𝛼 a ∈ (0, 1],
                                                                                             2
which will make progress along the central path while maintaining that 𝑧 + ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽). Here we slightly
abuse notation, by letting Δ𝑧 a := (Δ𝑧 c )a , that is the predictor direction computed from the recentered
iterate 𝑧 c . The step length 𝛼 a > 0 will be chosen such that

                             𝛼a ≤ sup{𝛼 ∈ [0, 1] : ∀𝛼′ ∈ [0, 𝛼] : 𝑧 + 𝛼′Δ𝑧 a ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽)}.
                                                2
Thus, we conclude 𝑧 + = 𝑧 c + 𝛼 a Δ𝑧 a ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽). We remark that the closure allows us to take a step that
goes all the way to an optimal solution. If 𝑧 + ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), i.e., if we have not arrived at an optimal solution,
then 𝑧 + remains a valid iterate for the next step.
   The next proposition summarizes well-known properties, see e.g. [Ye97, Section 4.5.1].
Proposition B.1. Let 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) for 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6].
    (i) For 𝑧 ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), let Δ𝑧 c be the corrector direction at 𝑧. Then for 𝑧 c = 𝑧 + Δ𝑧 c , we have 𝜇(𝑧 c ) = 𝜇(𝑧) and
        𝑧 c ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽/2).
                                                                                      2
 (ii) For the affine scaling step, we have 𝜇(𝑧 + ) = (1 − 𝛼 a )𝜇(𝑧) and 𝑧 + ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽).


                                                              53
 (iii) The affine scaling step-length 𝛼a can be chosen in the range

                                                               𝛽
                                                                                                        
                                                                      2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2
                                                  0 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ max √ , 1 −
                                                         a
                                                                                                             .
                                                              2 𝑛        𝛽𝜇(𝑧)

                              √
 (iv) After a sequence of 𝑂( 𝑛𝑡) corrector and predictor steps, we obtain an iterate 𝑧 ′ = (𝑥 ′ , 𝑠 ′) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) such
      that 𝜇(𝑧 ′) ≤ 𝜇(𝑧)/2𝑡 .

B.2      Subspace Layered Least Squares Steps
In this section, we describe the main step directions used by [ADL+ 23] to accelerate the IPM over long
straight parts of the central path. On these segments, the central path will be polarized according to
partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛] that will be guessed by the algorithm. On such polarized segments, the primal
variables indexed by 𝑁 will scale down linearly with respect to parameter, while the primal variables
in 𝐵 will remain roughly constant. For the dual, the situation is reversed, the variables in 𝐵 scale down
while the variables in 𝑁 remain roughly constant. We describe these properties more formally below.
Definition B.2 (Polarized Central Path Segment). A segment CP[𝜇1 , 𝜇0 ] B {(𝑥 cp (𝜇), 𝑠 cp (𝜇)) : 𝜇 ∈
[𝜇1 , 𝜇0 ]}, 0 ≤ 𝜇1 ≤ 𝜇0 , is 𝛾-polarized, 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1], if there exists a partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛] such that

                                     𝑥 𝐵 (𝜇1 ) ≥ 𝛾𝑥 𝐵 (𝜇0 )                         𝑠 𝑁 (𝜇1 ) ≥ 𝛾𝑠 𝑁 (𝜇0 ) ,
                                       cp                 cp                         cp             cp
                                                                      and

where the inequalities are to be interpreted coordinate by coordinate.
   From the standard monotonocity properties of the central path, one derives for any 𝜇 ∈ [𝜇0 , 𝜇1 ] for
the primal side that
        𝛾 cp
   1. 𝑛 𝑥 𝐵 (𝜇0 ) ≤ 𝑥 𝐵 (𝜇) ≤ 𝑛𝑥 𝐵 (𝜇0 ),
                         cp            cp


         𝜇                            𝑛𝜇
   2. 𝜇0 𝑛 𝑥 𝑁 (𝜇0 ) ≤ 𝑥 𝑁 (𝜇) ≤ 𝛾𝜇0 𝑥 𝑁 (𝜇0 ).
              cp           cp               cp


The situation for 𝑠 cp is symmetric with the role of 𝐵 and 𝑁 reversed.
    The main property of the subspace IPM of [ADL+ 23] is that it traverses any 𝛾-polarized segment as
above in poly(𝑛) log(𝑛/𝛾) iterations.
    For this purpose, for any iterate 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) on such a polarized segment, we will search for directions
(Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) for which (𝑥 𝑁 + 𝛼Δ𝑥 𝑁 ) ≈ (1 − 𝛼)𝑥 𝑁 and (𝑥 𝐵 + 𝛼Δ𝑥 𝐵 ) ≈ 𝑥 𝐵 for 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1] as close to 1 as possible,
and vice versa for (𝑠, Δ𝑠) with 𝐵 and 𝑁 reversed. We note that the desired notion of approximation here
is multiplicative. This goal helps motivates the subspace layered least squares step below.
Definition B.3 (Subspace LLS direction). Let 𝑧 B (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑧), 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛], 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅, be a
partition. Let 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊, 𝑈 ⊆ 𝑊 ⊥ be linear subspaces satisfying dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)) = dim(𝑉), and dim(𝜋𝐵 (𝑈)) =
dim(𝑈). The Subspace LLS update direction (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ ) ∈ 𝑊 × 𝑊 ⊥ at 𝑧 with respect to (𝐵, 𝑁 , 𝑈 , 𝑉) is
defined as
                                                      𝑥𝑁 + 𝛿𝑁
                                                                2
                                     Δ𝑥ℓ B arg min
                                               𝛿∈𝑉       𝑥ˆ 𝑁   2

                                                                               𝑠𝐵 + 𝛿𝐵
                                                                                             2
                                                        Δ𝑠 ℓ B arg min                   ,
                                                                     𝛿∈𝑈          𝑠ˆ 𝐵 2

where 𝑥ˆ B 𝑥𝜇/𝑠 ≈ 𝑥 and 𝑠ˆ B 𝑠𝜇/𝑥 ≈ 𝑠. Note that Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ are indeed well-defined, as our
                   p                                p

assumptions that dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)) = dim(𝑉), dim(𝜋𝐵 (𝑈)) = dim(𝑈) allows us to uniquely determine Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ
from their coordinates in 𝑁 and 𝐵 respectively.
    We note that rescaled normsp∥ 𝑥ˆ −1 · ∥ 2 and ∥p𝑠ˆ −1 · ∥ 2 used to measure
                                                                             p error are multiplicatively close
to ∥𝑥 −1 · ∥ 2 and ∥𝑠 −1 · ∥ 2 , since 1 − 𝛽 𝑥ˆ ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 1 + 𝛽 𝑥ˆ and similarly 1 − 𝛽ˆ𝑠 ≤ 𝑠 ≤ 1 + 𝛽ˆ𝑠 using that
                                                                                           p
(1 − 𝛽)𝜇1𝑛 ≤ 𝑥𝑠 ≤ (1 + 𝛽)𝜇1𝑛 (Proposition 6.6). In particular, for all 𝑧 ∈ R𝑛
   p                                        p                                  p                                       p
       1 − 𝛽∥𝑥 −1 𝑧 ∥ 2 ≤ ∥ 𝑥ˆ −1 𝑧 ∥ 2 ≤       1 + 𝛽∥𝑥 −1 𝑧 ∥ 2 ,                 1 − 𝛽∥𝑠 −1 𝑧∥ 2 ≤ ∥ 𝑠ˆ −1 𝑧 ∥ 2 ≤       1 + 𝛽∥𝑠 −1 𝑧 ∥ 2 .   (60)

   The main advantage in the 𝑥,   ˆ 𝑠ˆ rescaling, is that that the subspaces 𝑥ˆ −1𝑊 and 𝑠ˆ −1𝑊 ⊥ remain or-
thogonal since 𝑥ˆ 𝑠ˆ = 𝜇1𝑛 . This property often helps simplify the analyses. Even though 𝑥,    ˆ 𝑠ˆ contain


                                                                          54
square roots, we note that the computation of (Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) can be done in strongly polynomial time given
appropriate representation of the subspaces 𝑈 , 𝑉 (see Proposition B.15). More precisely, (Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) will be
functions of the diagonal inner products diag( 𝑥ˆ −2 ) = diag(𝑠/(𝑥𝜇)) and diag(ˆ𝑠 −2 ) = diag(𝑥/(𝑠𝜇)), which
do not contain square roots. For the sake of notational simplicity, we assume below that the iterate (𝑥, 𝑠)
is on the central path, that is, 𝑥𝑠 = 𝜇1𝑛 . In this case, 𝑥ˆ = 𝑥 and 𝑠ˆ = 𝑠.

The Trust Region Step. We now explain the motivation for subspace LLS steps. The starting point for
subspace LLS steps is the trust region step of Lan, Monteiro and Tsuchiya [LMT09], for which subspace
LLS steps will yield suitably good and strongly polynomial computable approximation (the latter point
is the main goal of this entire section). Given an iterate (𝑥, 𝑠) > 0 and partition (𝐵, 𝑁), 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅, the
trust-region step computes:


                                        𝑥 −1                    −1
                                          𝑁 (𝑥 𝑁 + Δ𝑥 𝑁 ) 2 : 𝑥 𝐵 Δ𝑥 𝐵 2 ≤ 𝛽/100, Δ𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 ,
                                    
                    Δ𝑥 := arg min
                                        𝑠 𝐵−1 (𝑠 𝐵 + Δ𝑠 𝐵 ) 2 : 𝑠 𝑁
                                                                  −1
                                                                     (Δ𝑠 𝑁 ) 2 ≤ 𝛽/100, Δ𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ .
                                    
                    Δ𝑠 := arg min                                                                          (61)

    The above program models the desire for (𝑥 𝑁 + 𝛼Δ𝑥 𝑁 , 𝑠 𝐵 + 𝛼Δ𝑠 𝐵 ) to “scale down” while enforcing
that (𝑥 𝐵 + 𝛼Δ𝑥 𝐵 , 𝑠 𝑁 + 𝛼Δ𝑠 𝑁 ) “barely move” (even for 𝛼 = 1!) as hard constraints. The constant 1/100
above is arbitrary, indeed, any small enough constant would work (though 𝛽 is meaningful as it encodes
the width of the ℓ2 neighborhood we wish to stay inside). In terms of the step length 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1] one can
achieve with these steps, if the maximum value of the primal and dual trust region programs is 𝜀, where
0 ≤ 𝜀 < 𝛽/200, then one can set the step-length 𝛼 = 1 − 100𝜀/𝛽 and satisfy (𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽)
(see Proposition B.16). In particular, the primal-dual gap drops to 200𝜀/𝛽𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) after this step, which is
0 if 𝜀 = 0 (indeed, this is generally how finite termination occurs).
    The main idea of subspace LLS is to approximate trust region steps by restricting the directions
(Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠) to live in subspaces for which the norm constraint 𝑥 𝐵−1 Δ𝑥 𝐵 ≤ 𝛽/100, 𝑠 𝑁      −1
                                                                                            Δ𝑠 𝑁 ≤ 𝛽/100
becomes redundant.
    For this purpose, the definition of a cheap lifting subspace will be fundamental:
                                                                             𝑛
Definition B.4 (Cheap Lifting Subspace). Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a subspace, 𝑢 ∈ R++     , and (𝐵, 𝑁) be a non-trivial
partition of [𝑛]. Then, 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊 is a cheap lifting subspace for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝐵, 𝑁) with lifting cost 𝜏 ≥ 0 if

                                         ∥𝑢𝐵 𝑥 𝐵 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝜏∥𝑢𝑁 𝑥 𝑁 ∥ 2 , ∀𝑥 ∈ 𝑉.

Note that for the above inequality to hold, we must have that dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)) = dim(𝑉), since otherwise
there exists a vector 𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 with 𝑥 𝐵 ≠ 0𝐵 and 𝑥 𝑁 = 0𝑁 .

   In the context of solving the primal trust-region program, if 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊 is a cheap lifting space with
                                                     𝛽
respect to (𝑊 , 𝑥 −1 , 𝐵, 𝑁) with lifting cost 𝜏 = 100√𝑛 , the primal subspace LLS direction with respect to
(𝑊 , 𝑉 , 𝑁 , 𝐵)
                                        Δ𝑥ℓ := arg min ∥𝑥 −1
                                                          𝑁 (𝑥 𝑁 + Δ𝑥 𝑁 )∥ 2
                                                  Δ𝑥∈𝑉

automatically satisfies the trust-region constraint ∥𝑥 𝐵−1 Δ𝑥ℓ𝐵 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽/100. This is because 𝑥 −1 𝑁
                                                                                                     Δ𝑥ℓ𝑁 is the
                                                                                                        √
orthogonal projection of 𝑥 −1  𝑥 = 1𝑁 onto subspace 𝑥 −1
                             𝑁 𝑁                           𝑁
                                                             𝑊, and hence ∥𝑥 −1 𝑁
                                                                                   Δ𝑥ℓ𝑁 ∥ 2 ≤ ∥1𝑁 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛. By
                                                                                      √         𝛽
the lifting cost condition on 𝑉, we then have ∥𝑥 𝐵−1 Δ𝑥ℓ𝐵 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝜏∥𝑥 −1  𝑁
                                                                          Δ𝑥ℓ𝑁 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛𝜏 = 100 , as needed.
Analogously, any cheap lifting subspace 𝑈 ⊆ 𝑊 for (𝑊 , 𝑠 −1 , 𝑁 , 𝐵) with lifting cost at most 𝜏 will also
suffice for the dual subspace LLS direction Δ𝑠 ℓ as in Definition B.3 to be feasible.
    While low lifting cost subspaces are sufficient to get feasible solutions to the trust-region program,
they do not necessarily yield useful approximations. In particular, one can always choose the subspace
𝑉 = {0}, which is trivially cheap. To make significant progress along a polarized segment, we will require
that the use of cheap lifting subspaces of maximum dimension subject to a lifting cost threshold 𝜏. The
main idea will be to show that after every successful subspace LLS step, the dimension of cheap-lifting
subspace will either increase by one in poly(𝑛) additional IPM iterations or we will have past the end of
the polarized segment. For more details on this argument see Appendix B.5.
    We now explain how to find these cheap lifting subspaces and what their achievable dimensions are.
This will be achieved by understanding the singular value decomposition of the lifting maps, as defined
in Definition 6.2. We first recall the basic properties singular values and singular value decompositions.



                                                          55
Definition B.5 (Singular Value Decomposition). A linear operator 𝑇 : 𝑈 → 𝑉, where 𝑈 ⊆ R𝑚 and
                                                                                       Í𝑘
𝑉 ⊆ R𝑛 are linear subspaces, admits a singular value decomposition (SVD) 𝑇 = 𝑖=1           𝜎𝑖 𝑣 𝑖 𝑢𝑖⊤ , 𝑘 = rank(𝑇),
where 𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉 and 𝑢 𝑘 , . . . , 𝑢 𝑘 ∈ 𝑈 are orthonormal vectors in their respective subspaces and
𝜎1 ≥ · · · ≥ 𝜎 𝑘 > 0. We define 𝜎(𝑇) := (𝜎1 , . . . , 𝜎 𝑘 ) to be the vector of singulars values of 𝑇 listed in
non-increasing order. By convention, we define 𝜎𝑖 = 0 for 𝑖 > rank(𝑇). For a matrix 𝑀 ∈ R𝑛×𝑚 , we define
its singular to be those of the induced linear operator from R𝑚 to R𝑛 .
    One of the most useful ways to characterize singular values is via the following variational charac-
terization.

Proposition B.6 (Max-Min Principle for Singular Values). Let 𝑇 : 𝑈 → 𝑉 be a linear operator as in
Definition B.5. Then, for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 B dim(𝑈), we have that

                                                           ∥𝑇𝑥∥ 2                   ∥𝑇𝑥∥ 2
                           𝜎𝑖 (𝑇) =      min         max          = max min                .                         (62)
                                      dim(𝑆)=𝑛−𝑖+1 𝑢∈𝑆\{0} ∥𝑥∥ 2   dim(𝑆)=𝑖 𝑥∈𝑆\{0} ∥𝑥 ∥ 2

where 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑈 ranges over the linear subspaces of the prescribed dimensions above.
    With the above definitions, we link the achievable dimensions for cheap lifting subspaces as follows.
                                                  𝑛
Lemma B.7. Let 𝑊 ⊆ R𝑛 be a linear subspace, 𝑢 ∈ R++  , 𝐵∪𝑁 = [𝑛] be a partition, 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅, 𝑝 = dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)).
      𝑢𝑊                        𝑢𝑊
Let 𝐿 𝑁 : 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊) → 𝑊 and ℓ 𝑁 : 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊) → 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊) be the lifting maps as Definition 6.2. Then, given a
threshold 𝜏 ≥ 0, then the maximum dimension of a cheap lifting subspace 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊 for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝐵, 𝑁) with lifting
cost 𝜏 is
                                                            𝑢𝑊
                                      𝑑 = |{𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : 𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁  ) ≤ 𝜏}|.
Moreover, letting 𝑟𝑖=1 𝜎𝑖 𝑦 𝑖 𝑤 𝑇𝑖 , 𝑟 = rank(ℓ 𝑁     𝑢𝑊
                                                         ) ≤ 𝑝 be the singular value decomposition of ℓ 𝑢𝑊 and C =
                    Í
(𝑤 1 , . . . , 𝑤 𝑝 ) be an extension of the right singular vectors to an orthonormal basis of 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊), then if 𝑑 > 0, the
subspace 𝑉 = 𝑢 −1 𝐿𝑢𝑊      𝑁
                              (im(C≥𝑝−𝑑+1 )) is a cheap lifting subspace for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝐵, 𝑁) with lifting cost 𝜎𝑝−𝑑+1 ≤ 𝜏.
Proof. We first show that upper bound on 𝑑. Let 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊 be a cheap lifting subpace as above with
dim(𝑉) = 𝑑′, and let 𝑉
                     b B 𝑢𝑉 and 𝑊 b B 𝑢𝑊. For any 𝑦 ∈ 𝑉
                                                      b ⊆ 𝑊,
                                                          b by definition of the lifting map, we
             𝑊                 b and ∥ 𝑦𝐵 ∥ ≤ ∥ℓ 𝑊 (𝑦 𝑁 )∥. Therefore, without loss of generality, we may assume
have that (ℓ 𝑁 (𝑦 𝑁 ), 𝑦 𝑁 ) ∈ 𝑊
              b                                    b
                                                  𝑁
that
                                 b = {(ℓ 𝑊
                                 𝑉                                           𝑊
                                         𝑁 (𝑦 𝑁 ), 𝑦 𝑁 ) : 𝑦 𝑁 ∈ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)} = 𝐿 𝑁 (𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)).
                                         b                            b       b       b
since this can only decrease lifting cost while maintaining the dimension (recall that dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)) =
dim(𝑉) for any cheap lifting subspace). Recall that ℓ 𝑊 : 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)
                                                                b → 𝜋𝐵 (𝑊),  b dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)) b = 𝑝 and that
                                                       b

dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)) = 𝑑 and satisfies 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉) ⊆ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊). Therefore, the lifting cost of 𝑉 satisfies
         b      ′                   b         b

                                     ∥𝑢𝐵 𝑥 𝐵 ∥ 2              ∥ 𝑦𝐵 ∥ 2            ℓ 𝑊 (𝑧)
                                                                                        b
                  𝜏≥                             = max                 = max 𝑁                          𝑊
                                                                                          ≥ 𝜎𝑝−𝑑′ +1 (ℓ 𝑁 ),
                                                                                                        b
                          max
                        𝑥∈𝑉 ,𝑥 𝑁 ≠0𝑁 ∥𝑢𝑁 𝑥 𝑁 ∥ 2  𝑦∈𝑉 ,𝑦 𝑁 ≠0
                                                    b         ∥𝑦   ∥
                                                                 𝑁 2    𝑧∈𝜋 𝑁 (𝑉)
                                                                               b    ∥𝑧 ∥

where the last inequality follows from Proposition B.6. Since 𝜏 ≤ 𝜎𝑝−𝑑′ +1 , we have that {𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : 𝜏 ≥
      𝑊
𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁 )} ⊇ {𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : 𝑖 ≥ 𝑝 − 𝑑′ + 1} (recall that singular values are in non-increasing order). Since the first
    b

set has size 𝑑 and the second has size 𝑑′, we conclude that 𝑑 ≥ 𝑑′, as needed.
     We now prove the part, which gives an explicit form for the lower bound. If 𝑑 > 0, then clearly
          𝑊
𝜎𝑛−𝑑+1 (ℓ 𝑁 ) ≤ 𝜏. Then, using C = (𝑤 1 , . . . , 𝑤 𝑝 ) as defined above, it is direct to verify, using the orthogo-
          b

nality properties of the SVD,
                                                                𝑊
                                                               ℓ𝑁 (𝑥)
                                                                b
                                                                                    𝑊
                                                                        = 𝜎𝑛−𝑑+1 (ℓ 𝑁 ).
                                                                                    b
                                               max
                                        𝑥∈im(C≥𝑛−𝑑+1 )\{0𝑁 }   ∥𝑥 ∥ 2

By tracing the reduction from the first part backwards, we conclude that 𝑢 −1 𝐿𝑊 (im(C≥𝑛−𝑑+1 )) ⊆ 𝑊 is a
                                                                                                b
                                                                               𝑁
cheap lifting subspace for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝑁 , 𝐵) with lifting cost at most 𝜎𝑛−𝑑+1 (ℓ 𝑛𝑊 ) ≤ 𝜏, as desired.                     □
                                                                                            b


     We remark that so far we have been treating the tasks of finding primal and dual cheap lifting
subspaces separately. Fortunately, it turns out the singular values of the corresponding primal and dual
lifting maps are identical. Thus, the corresponding problems of finding cheap lifting subspace on both
sides are intimately linked. The formal connection is given below.


                                                                56
                                                                𝑛
Lemma B.8. (Corollary of [ADL+ 23, Lemma 2.18]) Let 𝑥, 𝑠 ∈ R++    , 𝜇 = ⟨𝑥, 𝑠⟩ /𝑛, satisfy 𝑥𝑠 = 𝜇1𝑛 . Then, for
     𝑛                               𝑥 −1 𝑊      𝑠 −1 𝑊 ⊥
                                                          ). Furthermore, if 𝑟𝑖=1 𝜎𝑖 𝑢𝑖 𝑣 ⊤ is the SVD of ℓ 𝑁𝑥 𝑊 ,
                                                                                                              −1
𝑊 ⊆ R and partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛], 𝜎(ℓ 𝑁 ) = 𝜎(ℓ 𝐵
                                                                            Í
                                                                                          𝑖
       Í𝑟                              𝑠 −1 𝑊 ⊥
        𝑖=1 𝜎 𝑖 𝑣 𝑖 𝑢𝑖 is the SVD of ℓ 𝐵
                     ⊤
then                                            .

    Given the above, computing cheap lifting subspaces for either the primal or dual, is closely tied to
the problem of computing an approximate SVD of the lifting map. For the sake of strong polynomial
algorithms, one must design such approximate SVDs to be numerically stable, e.g., to maintain bounded
bit complexity, as well as to take a strongly polynomial number of arithmetic operations (i.e., depending
only the dimension of the underlying matrix).
    In Appendix B.7, we present a very simple approximtae SVD for this purpose based on a modifica-
tion of the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization procedure. We use this approximate SVD in Cheap-Lift-
Subspace.

B.3     The Subspace LLS IPM
In this section, we describe the subspace LLS interior point method.

The associated partition Definition B.3 and Definition B.4 are applicable for any partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛],
𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅ and 𝑧 ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽). Our algorithm chooses a natural partition derived from the relative step lengths
in the affine scaling step:
Definition B.9 (Associated partition). For 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), let (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ) be the affine scaling step as
in (59) with 𝜈 = 0. Let us define the associated partition 𝐵
                                                           e𝑧 ∪ 𝑁
                                                                e𝑧 = [𝑛] as

                                                        Δ𝑥 a𝑖       Δ𝑠 𝑖a
                                                                           
                                        𝐵
                                        e𝑧 B 𝑖 :                <               𝑁
                                                                                e𝑧 B [𝑛] \ 𝐵
                                                                                           e𝑧 .
                                                         𝑥𝑖          𝑠𝑖

The Subspace LLS Algorithm. Let 𝜏 := 16⌈1√𝑛⌉ denote the lifting cost threshold. The algorithm is given
as IPM with subspace LLS below.

B.4     Correctness
In this subsection, we prove that upon termination, the IPM with subspace LLS satisfies its output
requirements, namely it outputs optimal primal and dual solutions that are close to the analytic centers
of the corresponding optimal faces. This will mainly depend on the guarantees on the computed step
lengths for subspace LLS and affine scaling, which are given in Proposition B.16 and Proposition B.14.
We also show that Cheap-Lift-Subspace is correct, which relies on the guarantees of the approximate SVD
in Appendix B.7 and the computation of lifting maps Proposition B.17.
Lemma B.10. The output of IPM with subspace LLS is correct. Furthermore, each iteration of the algorithm runs
in strongly polynomial time.

Proof. We first show that the output (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★ , 𝑣★ , 𝑤★) satisfies the requirements listed in the output de-
scription.
    To argue this, we first claim that during the last iteration of the while loop, either the affine scaling
step length 𝛼a or LLS step length 𝛼ℓ is 1. To see this, note that by assumption 𝜇(𝑥0 , 𝑠0 ) > 0, thus we at
least enter the while loop. Secondly, for any iterate (𝑥, 𝑠), by Proposition B.1(ii), the corrector step leaves
𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) unchanged, whereas the affine scaling step satisfies 𝜇(𝑥 + 𝛼a Δ𝑥 a , 𝑠 + 𝛼a Δ𝑥 a ) = (1 − 𝛼a )𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠).
Similarly, by Proposition B.16, 𝜇(𝑥 + 𝛼ℓ Δ𝑥ℓ , 𝑥 + 𝛼ℓ ) ≥ 3/4(1 − 𝛼ℓ )𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠). Thus, the only to exit the loop,
corresponding to the condition 𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) = 0, is if max{𝛼a , 𝛼ℓ } = 1, as needed.
     Let (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽) be the iterate just after we exit the while loop, and let (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 ℓ ), 𝛼a and (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ ),
                      2

𝛼 be the affine scaling and LLS step during the last iteration. Clearly, (𝑥★ , 𝑠 ★) = (𝑥, 𝑠). By line 20, if
  ℓ

𝛼ℓ = 1, the previous iterate ( 𝑥,                                 ¯ 𝑠¯ ) := (𝑥 − Δ𝑥ℓ , 𝑠 − Δ𝑠 ℓ ) and if 𝛼ℓ < 𝛼 a = 1,
                                   ¯ 𝑠¯ ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽/2) satisfies ( 𝑥,
( 𝑥,
  ¯ 𝑠¯ ) := (𝑥 − Δ𝑥 , 𝑠 − Δ𝑠 ).
                   a         a

     Let 𝐵 := {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑥 𝑖 > 0} and 𝑁 := {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑠 𝑖 > 0} and let 𝜇 := 𝜇( 𝑥, ¯ 𝑠¯ ). Note that 𝜇 equals the value
of the corresponding variable set on either line 25 or line 28.
     Assume first that 𝛼ℓ = 1. Then by the guarantees of Proposition B.16 used on line 17, we must have that
∥Δ𝑥ℓ Δ𝑠 ℓ ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽𝜇/8 and ∥(𝑥¯ +Δ𝑥ℓ )(¯𝑠 +Δ𝑠 ℓ )∥ 2 = 0. For 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛], using that |Δ𝑥ℓ𝑖 Δ𝑠 ℓ𝑖 | ≤ 𝛽𝜇/8 < (1−𝛽/2) ≤ 𝑥¯ 𝑖 𝑠¯ 𝑖


                                                                     57
  Algorithm 2: IPM with subspace LLS
    Input : Instance of (LP) with primal constraint matrix A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , rank(A) = 𝑚, and initial (𝑥 0 , 𝑠 0 ) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽),
              𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6].
    Output: (𝑥★ , 𝑠★ , 𝑣★ , 𝑤★) satisfying:
        1. 𝑥★ ∈ 𝒫, 𝑠★ ∈ 𝒟, 𝑥★ , 𝑠★ = 0,
        2. 𝐵 B {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑥★   𝑖
                                 > 0}, 𝑁 B {𝑖 ∈ [𝑛] : 𝑠★
                                                       𝑖
                                                         > 0} satisfy 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛],
        3. 𝑣 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑣 𝐵 > 0, 𝑤★ ∈ 𝑊, 𝑤★
            ★       ⊥    ★
                                            𝑁
                                               > 0,
        4. ∥(𝑥★ 𝑣★ , 𝑠★ 𝑤★ ) − 1𝑛 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽,
               𝐵 𝐵 𝑁 𝑁
    where 𝑊 ≔ ker(A), 𝑊 ⊥ B im(A⊤ ).
  1 Compute basis P ∈ R
                             𝑛×(𝑛−𝑚) satisfying im(P) = ker(A); D ← A⊤ ;

  2 (𝑥, 𝑠) ← (𝑥 , 𝑠 );
                0   0
  3 while 𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠) > 0 do
  4   Compute corrector direction (Δ𝑥 𝑐 , Δ𝑠 𝑐 ) at (𝑥, 𝑠);
  5   𝑥 ← 𝑥 + Δ𝑥 𝑐 , 𝑠 ← 𝑠 + Δ𝑠 𝑐 ;
  6   Compute affine scaling direction (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ) at (𝑥, 𝑠);
  7   Set 𝛼a for (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ) according to Proposition B.14 with parameter 𝛽;
                   Δ𝑥 a𝑖       Δ𝑠 𝑖a
             n                         o
  8    𝐵
       e← 𝑖 :
                    𝑥𝑖     <    𝑠𝑖         ,𝑁
                                            e ← [𝑛] \ 𝐵
                                                      e;
  9    if 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅ then
 10      MP ← Cheap-Lift-Subspace(P, 𝑥1 , 𝐵,
                                          e 𝑁e , 𝜏);
 11      MD ← Cheap-Lift-Subspace(D, 𝑠 , 𝑁 , 𝐵,
                                       1   e  e 𝜏);
 12      if MP or MD equals 0𝑛 then
 13        𝛼ℓ ← 0;
 14      else
 15        (𝑉
            e , 𝑈)
                e ← (im(MP), im(MD));
 16        Compute the subspace LLS direction (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ ) at (𝑥, 𝑠) with respect to (𝐵,
                                                                                       e 𝑁e, 𝑉
                                                                                             e , 𝑈)
                                                                                                 e using
            Proposition B.15 on input (𝑥, 𝑠, 𝐵, 𝑁 , MP, MD);
 17        Set 𝛼ℓ for (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ ) according to Proposition B.16 with parameters 𝜇 = 𝜇(𝑥, 𝑠), 𝛽;

 18    else
 19      𝛼ℓ ← 0;
 20    if 𝛼a > 𝛼ℓ then
 21      (𝑥, 𝑠) ← (𝑥 + 𝛼a Δ𝑥 a , 𝑠 + 𝛼a Δ𝑠 a );
 22    else
 23      (𝑥, 𝑠) ← (𝑥 + 𝛼ℓ Δ𝑥ℓ , 𝑠 + 𝛼ℓ Δ𝑠 ℓ );

 24 if 𝛼ℓ = 1 then
 25   𝜇¯ ← 𝑥 − Δ𝑥ℓ , 𝑠 − Δ𝑠 ℓ /𝑛;
 26   (𝑣, 𝑤) ← (−Δ𝑠 ℓ /𝜇,
                       ¯ −Δ𝑥ℓ /𝜇);
                                ¯
 27 else
 28   𝜇¯ ← ⟨𝑥 − Δ𝑥 a , 𝑠 − Δ𝑠 a ⟩ /𝑛;
 29   (𝑣, 𝑤) ← (−Δ𝑠 a /𝜇,¯ −Δ𝑥 a /𝜇);
                                    ¯
 30   return (𝑥, 𝑠, 𝑣, 𝑤);



(Proposition 6.6) and ( 𝑥¯ 𝑖 +Δ𝑥ℓ𝑖 )(¯𝑠 𝑖 +Δ𝑠 ℓ𝑖 ) = 0, we conclude that either 𝑥 𝑖 = 𝑥¯ 𝑖 +Δ𝑥ℓ𝑖 > 0 and 𝑠 𝑖 = 𝑠¯ 𝑖 +Δ𝑠 ℓ𝑖 = 0,
and thus 𝑖 ∈ 𝐵, or that 𝑥 𝑖 = 𝑥¯ 𝑖 + Δ𝑥ℓ𝑖 = 0 and 𝑠 𝑖 = 𝑠¯ 𝑖 + Δ𝑠 ℓ𝑖 > 0, and thus 𝑖 ∈ 𝑁. In particular, we see that
(𝐵, 𝑁) partition [𝑛].
    Given the above, for (𝑣, 𝑤) := (−Δ𝑠 ℓ /𝜇, −Δ𝑥ℓ /𝜇) as set on 26, we have that 𝑣 𝐵 = 𝑠¯ 𝐵 /𝜇 > 0 and
𝑢𝑁 = 𝑥¯ 𝑁 /𝜇 > 0. Clearly (𝑣★ , 𝑢★) = (𝑣, 𝑢). Furthermore,

                                                           (( 𝑥¯ 𝐵 + Δ𝑥ℓ𝐵 )¯𝑠 𝐵 , (¯𝑠 𝑁 + Δ𝑠 ℓ𝑁 ) 𝑥¯ 𝑁 )
                      ∥(𝑥 𝐵 𝑣 𝐵 , 𝑠 𝑁 𝑤 𝑁 ) − 1𝑛 ∥ 2 =                                                     − 1𝑛
                                                                                𝜇
                                                                                                                  2
                                                         𝑥¯ 𝑠¯        Δ𝑥ℓ Δ𝑠 ℓ              𝑥¯ 𝑠¯        Δ𝑥ℓ Δ𝑠 ℓ
                                                       =       − 1𝑛 −                     ≤       − 1𝑛 +
                                                          𝜇             𝜇               2    𝜇        2    𝜇          2
                                                       ≤ 𝛽/2 + 𝛽/8 ≤ 𝛽, as needed .                                       (63)
      If 𝛼ℓ < 𝛼a = 1, the analysis is essentially identical with the role (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ ) and (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ) switched. To


                                                                         58
  Algorithm 3: Cheap-Lift-Subspace
      Input : Matrix M ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 , rank(M) = 𝑑, 𝑢 ∈ R++ 𝑛 , partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛], 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅, threshold 𝜏 > 0.

      Output: Matrix C ∈ R𝑛×𝑘 , 𝑘 ≥ 1, such that for 𝑊 B im(M), 𝑉 ≔ im(C) the following holds:
         1. 𝑉 ⊆ 𝑊.
         2. 𝑘 = rank(C) or C = (0𝑛 ).
         3. ∀𝑣 ∈ 𝑉, ∥𝑢𝐵 𝑣 𝐵 ∥ 2 ≤ (𝜏/2)∥𝑢𝑁 𝑣 𝑁 ∥ 2 .
                                       𝑢𝑊 ) ≤
         4. dim(𝑉) ≥ |{𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : 𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁             𝜏√ }|, where ℓ 𝑢𝑊 is in as in Definition 6.2 and 𝑝 = dim(𝜋 (𝑊)).
                                                  2𝑛+1 𝑛           𝑁                                           𝑁

 1 // Compute matrix representation of lifting map 𝐿𝑢𝑊   𝑁
 2 Π
     𝑢𝑊 ← diag(𝑢)M(M⊤ diag(𝑢)2 M)−1 M⊤ diag(𝑢), the orthogonal projection onto 𝑢𝑊;
    𝑢
 3 L ← (Π
           𝑢𝑊 )(Π𝑢𝑊 )+ , the lifting map 𝐿𝑢𝑊 ;
           [𝑛],𝑁 𝑁 ,𝑁                     𝑁
 4
                                                  𝑢𝑊
   // Approximation of “Cheap Lift” subspace of ℓ 𝑁
 5 (P, R, Q) ← Well-Conditioned-GSO(L
                                      𝑢 );
                                      𝐵,𝑁
    𝑙 ← min{𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : ∥Q𝑖 ∥ 22 ≤ 4𝜏𝑛+1 } or −1 if undefined;
                                      2
 6

  7 if 𝑙 ≠ −1 then
  8   C𝑢 ← (PR)≥𝑙 ;
  9   // Lift subspace into 𝑊 and rescale
 10   C ← column basis of 𝑢1 L𝑢 C𝑢 ;
 11   return C;
12    else
 13     return 0𝑛 ;



see this, to ensure 𝛼 a = 1 in Proposition B.14, we must have that ∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 = 0. Since affine scaling step
satisfying 𝑠¯ Δ𝑥 a + 𝑥Δ𝑠
                     ¯ = − 𝑥¯ 𝑠¯ , we have ( 𝑥¯ + Δ𝑥 a )(¯𝑠 + Δ𝑠 a ) = Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a = 0. The analysis now follows as above
with (𝑣, 𝑤) := (−Δ𝑠 a /𝜇, −Δ𝑥 a /𝜇) as set on line (29). Note that by the stronger guarantee Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a = 0, one
can in fact reduce 𝛽 in (63) to 𝛽/2.
    We conclude that the algorithm’s output is correct in all cases.
    For the strongly polynomial bound on each iteration, we must simply show that all the computations
performed within the while loop are strongly polynomial. In particular, we must check the corrector,
affine scaling and subspace LLS steps can all be computed in strongly polynomial, and that calls to
Cheap-Lift-Subspace run in strongly polynomial time. These claims are verified in Proposition B.14
(corrector and affine scaling), Proposition B.15 (subspace LLS direction), Proposition B.16 (subspace LLS
step length) and Lemma B.11 (Cheap-Lift-Subspace). Thus, each iteration runs in strongly polynomial
time as needed.                                                                                                       □
Lemma B.11. Cheap-Lift-Subspace is correct and runs in strongly polynomial time.
Proof. The strongly polynomial running time is direct from the strong polynomiality of Algorithm Well-
Conditioned-GSO, and that elementary matrix operations are strongly polynomial. We thus focus on
correctness. The algorithm is essentially an algorithmic implementation of the second part of Lemma B.7.
The main difference is that one has access only to approximate SVD instead of the exact SVD, and that
we have access to matrix representations of the lifting maps (which affects the behavior of approximate
SVDs). We give the analysis below.
     We run through the steps of the algorithm. We first compute Π𝑢𝑊 the orthogonal projection on 𝑢𝑊.
We the compute L𝑢 = Π𝑢𝑊 (Π𝑢𝑊      𝑁𝑁
                                     )+ . By Proposition B.17, L𝑢 ∈ R𝑛×𝑁 is the matrix that implements the
lifting map 𝐿𝑢𝑊  𝑁
                     and L𝑢𝐵,𝑁 implements ℓ 𝑁
                                            𝑢𝑊
                                               .
     Let 𝑝 = dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊)), (P, Q, R) be the output of Well-Conditioned-GSO on L𝑢𝐵,𝑁 . Let 𝑟 B |{𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] :
      𝑢𝑊
𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁  ) ≤ 2𝑛+1𝜏√𝑛 }|.
    We claim that if 𝑟 ≥ 1, then 𝑙 B min{𝑗 ∈ [𝑝] : ∥Q•,𝑗 ∥ 22 ≤ 4𝜏𝑛+1 } is well-defined and that 𝑝 − 𝑙 + 1 ≥ 𝑟. If
                                                                                 2


𝑟 ≥ 1, then ℎ B 𝑝 − 𝑟 + 1 ∈ [𝑝] satisfies ℎ = min{𝑖 ∈ [𝑝] : 𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁𝑢𝑊
                                                                       ) ≤ 2𝑛+1𝜏√𝑛 }. From here, by Lemma B.19,
for ℎ ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑝, we have that
                                            √                 √                  √                    𝜏
                                ∥Q𝑖 ∥ 2 ≤       𝑛𝜎𝑖 (L𝑢 ) =              𝑢𝑊
                                                                  𝑛𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑁  )≤               𝑢𝑊
                                                                                     𝑛𝜎 ℎ (ℓ 𝑁  )≤        .
                                                                                                     2𝑛+1


                                                                     59
In particular, 𝑙 ≤ ℎ, and thus 𝑝 − 𝑙 + 1 ≥ 𝑟 as needed. If 𝑙 = −1, then by the above, we must have 𝑟 = 0,
and thus the algorithm correctly returns 0𝑛 . Assume now 𝑙 ∈ [𝑝]. We must now show that algorithm
returns a cheap lifting subspace for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝐵, 𝑁) of lifting cost at most 𝜏/2 and dimension at least 𝑟.
    By Lemma B.19, the matrix C𝑢𝑙 B (PR)•,≥𝑖 where satisfies that

                                                   ∥L𝑢 (𝑥)∥ 2
                                       max
                                        𝑢
                                                              ≤ 2𝑛 ∥Q𝑖 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝜏/2.                              (64)
                                    𝑥∈im(C≥𝑙 )\{0}   ∥𝑥∥ 2

   We will need the following claim, whose proof we leave as an exercise.
Claim B.12. Let 𝑉 ⊆ R𝑁 be any subspace containing ker(L𝑢𝐵,𝑁 ). Then L𝑢 (𝑉) = L𝑢 (𝑉 ∩ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊)) and
dim(𝑉 ∩ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊)) = dim(𝑉) + dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊)) − |𝑁 |.
   Assuming the claim, let 𝑉 = im(C≥𝑙 ) as used by the algorithm. First, we note that 𝑉 contains the
kernel of the lifting matrix L𝑢𝐵,𝑁 . If the kernel is trivial, there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, note that
the kernel equals im(C≥𝑘 ) where 𝑘 = min{𝑖 ∈ [|𝑁 |] : Q•,𝑖 = 0𝐵 }, where clearly 𝑙 ≤ 𝑘.
   Therefore, letting 𝑉 ′ = 𝑉 ∩ 𝜋 𝑁 (𝑢𝑊), we use the claim to deduce that

               dim(𝑉 ′) = dim(𝑉) + dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑊)) − |𝑁 | = (|𝑁 | − 𝑙 + 1) + 𝑝 − |𝑁 | = 𝑝 − 𝑙 + 1,

and that L𝑢 (𝑉 ′) = L𝑢 (𝑉). In particular, the lifting cost of 𝑉 ′ with respect (𝑊 𝑢 , 𝐵, 𝑁) is at most 𝜏/2 by (64),
and the dimension of 𝑉 ′ is 𝑝 − 𝑙 + 1 ≥ 𝑟 by the first part. Therefore, the subspace 𝑢 −1 L𝑢 (𝑉) is a cheap
lifting subspace for (𝑊 , 𝑢, 𝐵, 𝑁) with lifting cost 𝜏/2 and dimension at least 𝑟 as needed. Lastly, we make
sure to compute a basis C of 𝑢 −1 L𝑢 (𝑉) = 𝑢 −1 L𝑢 (C≥𝑙 ), to ensure the outputted matrix has full column
rank.
                                                                                                                  □

B.5    Iteration Complexity
We now quickly sketch why the modified subspace LLS algorithms run an 𝑂(𝑛) factor slower in terms
of iterations than [ADL+ 23]. As noted previously, this is immaterial to our main results, and in fact,
any poly(𝑛) slowdown of our IPM, for the sake of achieving strongly polynomial iterations would be
sufficient. We restrict the discussion below to this goal.
    The main insight structural insight in [ADL+ 23] is that the central path can be decomposed in at most
                                                     𝑛
                                                                           !
                                                     Õ
                                                𝑂          SLC𝜂 (𝑥 𝔪
                                                                   𝑖 )
                                                     𝑖=1

𝛾 B 𝜂/poly(𝑛)-polarized segments, where polarization is as in Definition B.2. Thus, the main challenge
is to show that in at most poly(𝑛 log(1/𝜂)) iterations, the subspace LLS IPM can traverse any 𝛾-polarized
segment.
    Let CP[𝜇0 , 𝜇1 ], 0 ≤ 𝜇0 ≤ 𝜇1 be an 𝛾-polarized segment with polarization partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁, 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅.
Note that log(𝜇0 /𝜇1 ) can be arbitrarily large on such a segment (in fact, infinite as 𝜇1 = 0 is possible),
thus standard path following does not suffice to traverse these segments 𝑂(poly(𝑛) log(1/𝛾)) iterations.
To be able to argue rapid progress on such segments, one uses a different, in fact combinatorial quantity,
to serve as a potential. Specifically, one uses the number of singular values of the lifting map above a
threshold as our potential.
    For an iterate 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), define the lifting maps ℓ 𝑧 = ℓ 𝑁𝑥ˆ 𝑊 and ℓ 𝑧⊥ = ℓ 𝐵𝑠ˆ 𝑊 , where 𝑥,
                                                                            −1                 −1 ⊥
                                                                                                          ˆ 𝑠ˆ are
the normalized iterates as in Definition B.3. As the potential, one examines
                                                     n                      𝜏 o
                                          𝜁(𝑧) B =       𝑖 : 𝜎𝑖 (ℓ 𝑧 ) >         ,
                                                                           𝑛 1.5

where 𝜏 := 16⌈1√𝑛⌉ , as above. Recall that the singular values of ℓ 𝑧 and ℓ 𝑧⊥ are identical, and hence the
above serves as a global potential, measuring progress along a segment.
    A main property that drives the analysis is that the singular values evolve predictably over the course
of a polarized segment. This is given the lemma below.




                                                            60
Lemma B.13 (Stability of singular values on polarized segments). Let CP[𝜇1 , 𝜇0 ] be a 𝛾-polarized segment
                                                       𝑧 ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽) for 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6], such that 𝜇 B 𝜇(𝑧) and
of the central path with partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛]. Let 𝑧, e
𝜇 B 𝜇(e
e       𝑧) satisfy 𝜇0 ≥ 𝜇 ≥ e
                            𝜇 ≥ 𝜇1 . Then we have:

                                          𝛾2 e 𝜇                        𝜇
                                                                   4𝑛 2 e
                                              · 𝜎(ℓ 𝑧 ) ≤ 𝜎(ℓe𝑧 ) ≤ 2 · 𝜎(ℓ 𝑧 ).                                     (65)
                                         4𝑛 𝜇
                                            2                       𝛾   𝜇

    In particular, the singular values scale down proportional with the parameter decrease. From here,
the crucial property of our IPM is as follows. After 𝑂(poly(𝑛) log(1/𝛾)) iterations, either we have crossed
the end of the polarized segment, or the number of large singulars values has dropped by at least one.
Clearly, the latter case can occur at most 𝑛 times per polarized segment, since the lifting map has rank at
most 𝑛.
    Note that the above improvement is easy to achieve if the first singular value above the threshold has
size at most poly(𝑛). In this case, it suffices to use regular affine scaling steps to bring the singular value
below the threshold quickly. Thus, the main difficulty is when the singular values themselves are quite
polarized, namely either all at most 1/poly(𝑛) or at least poly(𝑛).
    In this setting, it is shown that for the current iterate 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) on the polarized segment, that the
associated partition (𝐵, e 𝑁)
                            e will match the partition of the current segment (𝐵, 𝑁). Secondly, if the LLS
subspaces 𝑉 , 𝑈 have maximum dimension, then in the next iteration, the first singular value above the
            e   e
threshold will drop to poly(𝑛). The only point where our iteration complexity is affected by the weaker
SVD is the bound on how small the singular values below the threshold need to be before the SVD picks
them up. In particular, if one have a Γ-approximate SVD at hand, as long as all the singular values below
the threshold have size at most 𝛽/(Γ poly(𝑛)), the SVD will be guaranteed to pick them up. For this gap
to appear, we must potentially wait for an addition poly(𝑛) log(Γ) iterations, which is the cause of the
slowdown. Thus, if Γ = 2𝑛 , the slowdown is propertional to log(Γ) = 𝑛. This completes the proof sketch.

B.6    Computing Steps in Strongly Polynomial Time
In this section, we show that all the steps used in the algorithm can be computed in strongly polynomial
time. In this section, we show that this is the case of corrector, affine scaling, and subspace LLS steps.
We also explain how to compute lifting maps, as these are needed for LLS steps.
Proposition B.14 (Computing Corrector and Affine Scaling Steps). Let A ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , rank(A) = 𝑚, 𝑊 =
ker(A) and 𝑊 ⊥ = im(A⊤ ). Let 𝑧 := (𝑥, 𝑠), where 𝑥 ∈ 𝑊 , 𝑥 > 0, 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ , 𝑠 > 0 and 𝑡 ∈ R𝑛 . Then, the solution
to 𝑠Δ𝑥 + 𝑥Δ𝑠 = 𝑡, Δ𝑥 ∈ 𝑊, Δ𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ can be expressed as

                                                                             𝑡
                                        Δ𝑠 = A⊤ (A diag(𝑥/𝑠)A⊤ )−1 A
                                                                             𝑠
                                               𝑡 𝑥 ⊤                    𝑡
                                        Δ𝑥 =    − A (A diag(𝑥/𝑠)A⊤ )−1 A .
                                               𝑠 𝑠                      𝑠
Moreover, both the corrector step (Δ𝑥 c , Δ𝑠 c ) and affine scaling step (Δ𝑥 a , Δ𝑠 a ), corresponding to 𝑡 = 𝜈𝜇(𝑧)1𝑛 − 𝑥𝑠
for 𝜈 ∈ {0, 1} respectively, can be computed in strongly polynomial time. Furthermore, given Δ𝑥, Δ𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 and
𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6], one can in strongly polynomial time compute an affine scaling step-length 𝛼 a ∈ (0, 1] satisfying

                                𝛽                                             𝛽
                                                                                               
                                      3∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2                               2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2
                     max        √ ,1−                       ≤ 𝛼a ≤ max        √ ,1−                 .
                               3 𝑛       𝛽𝜇(𝑧)                               2 𝑛       𝛽𝜇(𝑧)

Proof. It is directly verified by inspection that 𝑠Δ𝑥 + 𝑥Δ𝑠 = 𝑡 and that AΔ𝑥 = 0 and Δ𝑠 ∈ im(A⊤ ).
   To compute the corrector and affine scaling directions, we proceed as follows. First, we solve the linear
system (A diag(𝑥/𝑠)A⊤ )𝑦 = A𝑡/𝑠 for 𝑡 = 𝜈𝜇(𝑧)1𝑛 − 𝑥𝑠, and then we let Δ𝑠 = A⊤ 𝑦 and Δ𝑥 = 𝑠𝑡 − 𝑥𝑠 Δ𝑠. Since
computing matrix vector products as well as solving linear systems can be done in strongly polynomial
time, both steps are strongly polynomially computable.
                                                                 𝛽            √
   For the affine scaling step-length, we first compute 𝑎 = ⌈2√𝑛⌉ , where ⌈2 𝑛⌉ is computed by binary
search in 𝑂(log 𝑛) time. Next, we compute 𝑟 = ∥Δ𝑥 a𝑖 Δ𝑠 𝑖a ∥ ∞ and 𝑏 = 1 − ⌈2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 /𝑟⌉𝑟/(𝛽𝜇(𝑧)), where
                             √
⌈2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 /𝑟⌉ ∈ [2, ⌈2 √𝑛⌉] can also
                                        √ be     √ computed in 𝑂(log 𝑛) time via binary search. We then return
𝛼 a := max{𝑎, 𝑏}. Since ⌈2 𝑛⌉ ∈ [2 𝑛, 3 𝑛] and ⌈2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 /𝑟⌉𝑟 ∈ [2∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 , 3∥Δ𝑥 a Δ𝑠 a ∥ 2 ], we have
       𝛽             𝛽               a Δ𝑠 a ∥                  a Δ𝑠 a ∥
that 3√𝑛 ≤ 𝑎 ≤ 2√𝑛 and 1 − 3∥Δ𝑥     𝛽𝜇(𝑧)
                                              2
                                                ≤ 𝑏 ≤ 1 − 2∥Δ𝑥
                                                             𝛽𝜇(𝑧)
                                                                        2
                                                                          . Thus, 𝛼 a satisfies the requirement.   □


                                                              61
   Similarly to the affine scaling and corrector steps, subspace LLS steps can be computed in strongly
polynomial time given an appropriate representation of the subspaces. The formulas for the LLS step
directions are given in the next proposition. These are computed by solving the linear system which sets
the gradient of the quadratic optimization problems to zero.
Proposition B.15 (Computing the LLS Step Direction). Given an iterate 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠), partition 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛],
𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅, and matrices MP ∈ R𝑛×𝑘 𝑝 , MD ∈ R𝑛×𝑘 𝑑 satisfy 𝑉 B im(MP) ⊆ 𝑊, 𝑈 B im(MD) ⊆ 𝑊 ⊥ , and
dim(𝜋 𝑁 (𝑈)) = rank(MP𝑁 ) = 𝑘 𝑝 , dim(𝜋𝐵 (𝑈)) = rank(MD𝐵 ) = 𝑘 𝑑 . Then subspace LLS direction (Δ𝑥ℓ , Δ𝑠 ℓ )
at 𝑧 with respect to (𝐵, 𝑁 , 𝑈 , 𝑉) can be computed as follows:
                                                                                  −1
                                       Δ𝑥ℓ = MP MP⊤
                                                  𝑁 diag(𝑠 𝑁 /𝑥 𝑁 )MP 𝑁                 MP𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 ,
                                                                                −1
                                       Δ𝑠 ℓ = MP MP⊤
                                                   𝐵 diag(𝑥 𝐵 /𝑠 𝐵 )MP𝐵               MP𝐵 𝑥 𝐵 .
   The next proposition explains how to compute the step length associated with directions which go
very far down the path. We will apply this to compute the subspace LLS step lengths.
Proposition B.16 (Step-length estimate for general directions). Let 𝑧 = (𝑥, 𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 2 (𝛽/2), 𝜇 := 𝜇(𝑧),
𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6]. Consider directions Δ𝑥 ∈ 𝑊, Δ𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 ⊥ that satisfy ∥Δ𝑥Δ𝑠 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽𝜇/8. Let
                                                      ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2  𝛽
                                                𝛾B                         ≤ .
                                                              𝜇             9
                                         2
Then (𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽) and 𝜇(𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) ∈ [1 ± 1/8](1 − 𝛼)𝜇, for all 0 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 1 − 𝛽 .
                                                                                                                8𝛾

Furthermore, given Δ𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 , Δ𝑠 ∈ R𝑛 , 𝜇 > 0, 𝛽 > 0, one can in strongly polynomial time output a step-length
                                                                                                       𝛽
𝛼ℓ ∈ [0, 1] satisfying 1 − 𝛽 ≤ 𝛼ℓ ≤ 1 − 𝛽 if ∥Δ𝑥Δ𝑠 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽𝜇/8 and 𝛾 := ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 /𝜇 ≤ 9 , and
                           9𝛾            8𝛾

output 𝛼ℓ = 0 otherwise.
Proof. Let 𝑧 𝛼 B (𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠) for 0 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 1 − 𝛽 , 𝛼 < 1. We first bound the centrality error using
                                                                   8𝛾

the estimate (1 − 𝛼)𝜇 for 𝜇(𝑧 𝛼 ) as follows:
                                  (𝑥 + 𝛼Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + 𝛼Δ𝑠)
                                                     −1
                                        (1 − 𝛼)𝜇        2
                                       (1 − 𝛼)𝑥𝑠 + 𝛼(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠) − 𝛼(1 − 𝛼)Δ𝑥Δ𝑠
                                 =                                                  −1
                                                          (1 − 𝛼)𝜇                     2
                                    𝑥𝑠         𝛼    (𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)      Δ𝑥Δ𝑠
                                 ≤     −1 +                            +𝛼
                                     𝜇    2  1 − 𝛼         𝜇         2     𝜇 2
                                          𝛼       𝛽    3
                                 ≤ 𝛽/2 +     𝛾+𝛼 ≤ 𝛽,
                                         1−𝛼      8    4
                                         𝛼
where the last inequality follows since 1−𝛼 𝛾 ≤ 𝛽/8 for 0 ≤ 𝛼 ≤ 1 − 8𝛾/𝛽 and 𝛼 < 1 (needed to ensure the
denominator (1 − 𝛼) is positive).                                        √
   By Lemma 6.7 and the above bound, we get that 𝜇(𝑧 𝛼 ) ∈ [1 ± 34 𝛽/ 𝑛](1 − 𝛼)𝜇 ⊆ [1 ± 18 ](1 − 𝛼)𝜇,
                4𝛽
               3        
and 𝑧 𝛼 ∈ 𝒩    1− 34 𝛽
                             ⊆ 𝒩 2 (𝛽), for 𝛽 ∈ (0, 1/6]. If 𝛾 = 0, letting 𝛼 → 1− , we conclude by continuity that
                                   2
𝑧1 := (𝑥 + Δ𝑥, 𝑠 + Δ𝑠) ∈ 𝒩 (𝛽) and 𝜇(𝑧1 ) = 0, as needed.
    For the last part, note that the conditions ∥Δ𝑥Δ𝑠 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝛽𝜇/8 and ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 /𝜇 ≤ 𝛽/9 can
be checked in strongly polynomial time by squaring both sides. If this check fails, output 𝛼ℓ = 0.
Otherwise, compute 𝑟 = ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠√+ Δ𝑠)∥ ∞ (i.e., the largest entry in absolute value) and compute
𝜈 = ⌈8∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 /𝑟⌉ ∈ [8, ⌈8 𝑛⌉] via binary search in 𝑂(log 𝑛) time, and return 𝛼ℓ = 1 − 8𝜈𝑟
                                                                                                    𝜇𝛽 .
For correctness, note that ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 ≤ 𝜈(𝑟/8) ≤ 98 ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 , and thus the desired
inequalities follow recalling that 𝛾 := ∥(𝑥 + Δ𝑥)(𝑠 + Δ𝑠)∥ 2 /𝜇.                                        □
   We now show how to compute lifting maps.
Proposition B.17 (Computing Lifting Maps). Let U ∈ R𝑛×𝑑 , rank(𝑈) = 𝑑, and 𝐵 ∪ 𝑁 = [𝑛] be a partition
with 𝐵, 𝑁 ≠ ∅. Then, for 𝑊 = im(𝑈), 𝑥 ∈ R𝑁 , we have that
                                       𝐿𝑊               +
                                        𝑁 (𝑥) = Π[𝑛],𝑁 Π𝑁 ,𝑁 𝑥,
                                                                         𝑊
                                                                        ℓ𝑁 (𝑥) = Π𝐵,𝑁 Π+𝑁 ,𝑁 𝑥,

where Π = U(U⊤ U)−1 U⊤ is the orthogonal projection onto 𝑊. Furthermore, the matrix Π[𝑛],𝑁 Π+𝑁 ,𝑁 can be
computed in strongly polynomial time.


                                                                  62
Proof. Let 𝑦 ∈ Π𝑁 (𝑊) ⊆ R𝑁 . Since im(Π) = 𝑊, we clearly have that 𝑦 = im(Π𝑁 ,• ). Furthermore, since
Π is positive semidefinite im(Π𝑁 ,• ) = im(Π𝑁 ,𝑁 ). Thus, there exists 𝑥 ∈ R𝑁 such that 𝑦 = Π𝑁 ,𝑁 𝑥. We
now claim that 𝐿𝑊   𝑁
                       (𝑦) = Π•,𝑁 𝑥. Let 𝑦ˆ = Π•,𝑁 𝑥 and take any 𝑦¯ ∈ 𝑊 with 𝑦¯ 𝑁 = 𝑦. We wish to show that
∥ 𝑦∥
  ¯ 2 ≤ ∥ 𝑦ˆ ∥ 2 ⇒ 𝑦 ′ = 𝑦.
    To see this, notice that

                              ∥ 𝑦¯ ∥ 22 = ∥( 𝑦¯ − 𝑦)
                                                  ˆ + 𝑦∥
                                                      ˆ 22 = ∥( 𝑦¯ − 𝑦)∥
                                                                     ˆ 22 + 2 ⟨ 𝑦¯ − 𝑦,
                                                                                     ˆ 𝑦⟩
                                                                                        ˆ + ∥ 𝑦ˆ ∥ 22 .

To prove the claim, it suffices to show that ⟨ 𝑦¯ − 𝑦, ˆ = 0. Let 𝑥¯ ∈ R𝑛 denote the vector with 𝑥¯ 𝑁 = 𝑥 and
                                                    ˆ 𝑦⟩
𝑥¯ 𝐵 = 0𝐵 . Then, noting that 𝑦ˆ = Π𝑥,
                                    ¯ we have that

                              ⟨ 𝑦¯ − 𝑦,
                                     ˆ 𝑦⟩
                                        ˆ = ⟨ 𝑦¯ − 𝑦,
                                                   ˆ Π 𝑥⟩
                                                       ¯ = ⟨Π( 𝑦¯ − 𝑦),
                                                                    ˆ 𝑥⟩¯ = ⟨ 𝑦¯ − 𝑦,
                                                                                   ˆ 𝑥⟩
                                                                                      ¯ = 0,

where the last equality follows since supp( 𝑦¯ − 𝑦)
                                                  ˆ ⊆ 𝐵 and supp( 𝑥)  ¯ ⊆ 𝑁. This proves the claim.
   From the representation above, we note that 𝑦 ∈ ℑ(Π𝑁 ,𝑁 ), then by the properties of pseudoinverses,
we have that 𝑦 = Π𝑁 ,𝑁 Π+𝑁 ,𝑁 𝑦. In particular, 𝐿𝑊
                                                 𝑁
                                                   (𝑦) = Π•,𝑁 Π+𝑁 ,𝑁 𝑦, as needed.
   We note that since matrix products and pseudoinverses can be computed in strongly polynomial
time, the lifting map can be computed in strongly polynomial time.                                   □

B.7    A strongly polynomial singular value approximation
In this section we propose√a simple strongly polynomial algorithm to approximate the singular values of a
matrix within a factor of 𝑛2𝑛 . As mentioned previously, while more sophisticated strongly polynomial
SVDs indeed exists [DTK23, DR24], they are both somewhat complicated (and [DTK23] is randomized).
The simple deterministic alternative we provide below is sufficient for our purposes, and allows for a
more self-contained analysis.
    Recall that the vector 𝜎(M) is the vector of singular values of M, where the vector is in non-increasing
order.
    For a matrix M ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 , assuming M has full column rank for simplicity, consider the following
procedure (Algorithm 4). For all columns 𝑗 of M, consider the projection of the column M•,𝑗 onto the
column-space of all the other columns M•,[𝑛]\{𝑗} . Then, remove the column 𝑗min from the matrix for
which the norm of this projection is the smallest and recurse on the remaining matrix M•,[𝑛]\{𝑗min } . When
this process finishes, we obtain a permutation MP of the columns, given by the order in which they
were removed from the matrix. It turns out, that the norms of the columns of the orthogonal matrix
Q obtained from a Gram-Schmidt process on the permuted matrix MP (the first column removed from
M is the last column in the reordering M̄) provide an exponential approximation of the singular values
of the original matrix M. The main observation for the proof is that the matrix R in the Gram-Schmidt
process, uniquely defined by MPR = Q, has only exponential condition number.
    It is not hard to see that the output of Well-Conditioned-GSO satisfies that Q is precisely the result
of Gram Schmidt orthogonalization (GSO) on the matrix MP, i.e., the matrix M after its columns have
been permuted according to P.
    The following proposition explains why the GSO computed by Well-Conditioned-GSO is “well-
conditioned”.

Proposition B.18. Let R ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 be an upper triangular matrix with diagonal 1𝑛 with entries of absolute value
at most 1. Then R−1 is upper triangular with diagonal 1𝑛 and |R−1
                                                               𝑖𝑗
                                                                  | ≤ max{1, 2 𝑗−𝑖−1 }, 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], 𝑖 ≥ 𝑗. In
particular, ∥R−1 ∥ 2 ≤ 2𝑛 .

Proof. The proof goes proceeds via induction on 𝑛. The base case 𝑛 = 1 is trivial, so assume 𝑛 > 1. Then,
it is direct to verify that
                                      −1
                                                   −R−1
                                                                        
                                      R                         R
                                                     [𝑛−1],[𝑛−1] 𝑛,[𝑛−1] .
                              R−1 = [𝑛−1],[𝑛−1]
                                         0⊤
                                          𝑛−1
                                                             1
By the induction hypothesis, the statement holds for R−1
                                                      𝑖,𝑗
                                                          , 𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛 − 1], 𝑖 ≥ 𝑗. Note that R−1 is upper
triangular as claimed. We now prove the coefficient bound for R−1
                                                               𝑖,𝑛
                                                                   , for 𝑖 ≥ 𝑛. If 𝑖 = 𝑛, R−1
                                                                                           𝑖,𝑖
                                                                                               = 1, as




                                                                63
  Algorithm 4: Well-Conditioned-GSO
      Input : Matrix M ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 with full column rank.
      Output: Matrix Q ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 with orthogonal columns, upper triangular matrix R ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 with diagonal 1𝑛 ,
              permutation matrix P ∈ R𝑛×𝑛 satisfying:
         1. MPR = Q.
         2. ∥Q•,𝑡 ∥ = min 𝑗∈[𝑡] min𝑥∈𝑅 𝑡 ,𝑥 𝑗 =1 ∥MP•,[𝑡] 𝑥∥.
         3. The entries of R have absolute value at most 1.
 1 Compute 𝐵𝑛 ⊆ [𝑛], rank(M•,𝐵𝑛 ) = rank(M);
 2 𝐽𝑛 ← [𝑛]; 𝑘 ← 𝑛 − |𝐵 𝑛 |;
 3 for 𝑡 = 𝑛 down to 𝑛 − 𝑘 + 1 do
 4   Pick 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 \ 𝐵𝑡 ; 𝑢 ← 0𝑛 ;
 5   (𝑢𝑖 , 𝑢𝐵𝑡 ) ← (1, −M−1
                          •,𝐵
                              M•,𝑖 );
                                  𝑡
 6     𝜋(𝑡) ← arg max 𝑗∈supp(𝑣) |𝑢 𝑗 |;
 7     𝑞 𝑡 ← 0𝑚 ; 𝑣 𝑡 B 𝑣 𝑡𝜋(𝑡) ← 𝑢/𝑢𝜋(𝑡) ;
 8     (𝐽𝑡−1 , 𝐵𝑡−1 ) ← (𝐽𝑡 \ {𝜋(𝑡)}, (𝐵𝑡 ∪ {𝑖}) \ {𝜋(𝑡)});
 9  for 𝑡 = 𝑛 − 𝑘 down to 1 do
 10   for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 do
 11     𝑣 𝑡𝑖 ← arg min𝑣∈R𝑛 ,𝑣 𝑖 =1,supp(𝑣)⊆𝐽𝑡 ∥M𝑣 ∥ 2 ;
 12      𝑝 𝑡𝑖 ← M𝑣 𝑡𝑖 ;
 13    𝜋(𝑡) ← arg min 𝑗∈[𝐽𝑡 ] ∥𝑝 𝑡 𝑗 ∥ 2 ;
 14    𝑞 𝑡 ← 𝑝 𝑡𝜋(𝑡) , 𝑣 𝑡 ← 𝑣 𝑡𝜋(𝑡) ;
 15    𝐽𝑡−1 ← 𝐽𝑡 \ {𝜋(𝑡)};
16 P ← (1𝑖=𝜋(𝑗) )𝑖,𝑗∈[𝑛] ;
           ⊤ 𝑣
               1 . . . 𝑣 𝑛 ;
                          
17 R ← P
18 Q ← 𝑞 1      . . . 𝑞𝑛 ;
         

19 return (P, R, Q)




needed. For 𝑖 > 𝑛, using that R has entries at most 1 we get that
                                                                              𝑛−1
                                                                              Õ                     𝑛−1
                                                                                                    Õ
                                 |R−1        −1
                                   𝑖𝑛 | = |(R[𝑛−1],[𝑛−1] R𝑛,[𝑛−1] ) 𝑖 | = |         R−1
                                                                                     𝑖,𝑗 R𝑛,𝑗 | ≤         |R−1
                                                                                                            𝑖,𝑗 |
                                                                              𝑗=𝑖                   𝑗=𝑖
                                             𝑛−1
                                             Õ                              𝑛−𝑖−2
                                                                             Õ
                                         ≤         max{1, 2 𝑗−𝑖−1 } = 1 +           2𝑙 = max{1, 2𝑛−𝑖−1 },
                                             𝑗=𝑖                              𝑙=0

as needed. For the last statement, by a direct calculation
                                                       𝑛 Õ
                                                       Õ 𝑛
                                                                                        2
                          ∥R−1 ∥ 2 ≤ ∥R−1 ∥ 2𝐹 ≤                 max{1, 4 𝑗−𝑖−1 } =       𝑛 − 1/9 + 4𝑛 /9 ≤ 4𝑛 ,
                                                                                        3
                                                       𝑖=1 𝑗=𝑖

as needed.                                                                                                                □
                                                                                                                    √
    We now show how the output of Well-Conditioned-GSO can be used to compute 𝑛2𝑛 -approximation
of the singular values and subspaces of M.
Lemma B.19. Let M ∈ R𝑚×𝑛 be a matrix. Let (P, R, Q) be the output of Well-Conditioned-GSO on M. Let
C≥𝑖 B (PR)•,≥𝑖 , 𝑉≥𝑖 B im(C𝑖 ) and similarly C≤𝑖 B (PR)•,≤𝑖 , 𝑉≤𝑖 B im(C≤𝑖 ), 𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. Then,
                                                          ∥M𝑣∥ 2                   √
                                      𝜎𝑖 (M) ≤       max          ≤ 2𝑛 ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛2𝑛 𝜎𝑖 (M)                           (66)
                                              𝑣∈𝑉≥𝑖 \{0𝑛 } ∥𝑣 ∥ 2

                                                          ∥M𝑣∥ 2    ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2     𝜎𝑖 (M)
                                      𝜎𝑖 (M) ≥ min                ≥           ≥          .                              (67)
                                              𝑣∈𝑉≤𝑖 \{0𝑛 } ∥𝑣 ∥ 2       𝑛          𝑛2𝑛

Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume that P = I𝑛 . The inequalities 𝜎𝑖 (M) ≤ max𝑣∈𝑉≥𝑖 \{0𝑛 } ∥M𝑣  ∥2
                                                                                                          ∥𝑣∥ 2
and 𝜎𝑖 (M) ≥ min𝑣∈𝑉≤𝑖 \{0𝑛 } ∥M𝑣   ∥2
                              ∥𝑣 ∥ 2
                                      are direct consequence of the variational characterization of singular
values (62) using that dim(𝑉≥𝑖 ) = rank(R•,≥𝑖 ) = 𝑛 − 𝑖 + 1 and dim(𝑉≤𝑖 ) = 𝑖.


                                                                      64
   For the first upper bound, we have that

                ∥M𝑣∥ 2                  ∥MR•,≥𝑖 𝑥∥ 2                   ∥Q•,≥𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2
           max          =    max                      =    max
           𝑣∈𝑉≥𝑖 ∥𝑣 ∥ 2   𝑥∈R 𝑛−𝑖+1 \{0} ∥R•,≥𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2   𝑥∈R 𝑛−𝑖+1 \{0} ∥R•,≥𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2
                                                                                                                           
                                                              ∥𝑥 ∥ 2
                          ≤      max          ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2                               Q orthogonal, max ∥Q•,𝑗 ∥ = ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥
                              𝑥∈R𝑛−𝑖+1 \{0}                 ∥R•,≥𝑖 𝑥∥ 2                                𝑗≥𝑖
                                              −1            𝑛
                          ≤ ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 ∥R ∥ 2 ≤ 2 ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 ,
                                                                                               √
where the last inequality follows by Proposition B.18. It remains to prove that ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛𝜎𝑖 (M), ∀𝑖 ∈
[𝑛]. By (62), there exists a subspace 𝑈 𝑖 ⊆ R𝑛 such that max𝑥∈𝑈𝑖 \{0} ∥𝑀𝑥  ∥2
                                                                       ∥𝑥∥ 2
                                                                              = 𝜎𝑖 (M) and dim(𝑈 𝑖 ) = 𝑛 − 𝑖 + 1.
By dimension counting, ∃ 𝑥¯ ∈ 𝑈 𝑖 \ {0} such that supp( 𝑥)
                                                         ¯ ⊆ [𝑖]. Therefore,

                                                     ∥M 𝑥∥ ¯ 2    1 ∥M 𝑥∥ ¯ 2  ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2
                                     𝜎𝑖 (M) ≥                  ≥ √            ≥ √        ,
                                                      ∥ 𝑥¯ ∥ 2     𝑛 ∥ 𝑥¯ ∥ ∞     𝑛

since ± 𝑥/∥
        ¯ 𝑥¯ ∥ ∞ is a candidate solution for one of the least squares programs defining ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ (property 2
of the output description).
    For the second lower bound,

                  ∥M𝑣 ∥ 2          ∥MR•,≤𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2           ∥Q•,≤𝑖 𝑥∥ 2
             min          = min                  = min
             𝑣∈𝑉≤𝑖 ∥𝑣 ∥ 2  𝑥∈R \{0} ∥R•,≤𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2
                              𝑖                   𝑥∈R \{0} ∥R•,≤𝑖 𝑥∥ 2
                                                     𝑖
                                                                                                                       
                                                   ∥𝑥 ∥ 2
                              ≥ min ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2                     Q orthogonal, min ∥Q•,𝑗 ∥ = ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥
                                𝑥∈R𝑖 \{0}        ∥R•,≤𝑖 𝑥 ∥ 2                   𝑗≤𝑖

                                                  ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2     𝜎𝑖 (M)
                              ≥ ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 ∥R∥ −1
                                              2 ≥             ≥        ,
                                                     𝑛           𝑛2𝑛
where ∥R∥ 2 ≤ 𝑛 follows from R having entries of absolute value at most 1 and 𝜎𝑖 (M) ≤ 2𝑛 ∥Q•,𝑖 ∥ 2 comes
from the first part. This concludes the proof.                                                         □
Lemma B.20. Well-Conditioned-GSO is correct and runs in strongly polynomial time.
Proof. We start with correctness. We by show by induction for 𝑛 − 𝑘 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑛 that 𝐵𝑡 ⊆ 𝐽𝑡 forms a basis
the column span of M. Firstly, 𝐵𝑡 does not change size during the course of the for loop, so it suffices to
show that 𝐵𝑡 stays independent. By definition, since 𝐵𝑡 is a basis, for any 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 \ 𝐵𝑡 , M•,𝑖 can be uniquely
expressed as a linear combinations of the columns of M•,𝐵𝑡 . Thus, 𝑢 is well-defined and M𝑢 = 0𝑛 .
Since supp(𝑢) = 𝐵𝑡 ∪ {𝑖}, by the basis exchange property 𝐵𝑡 ← (𝐵𝑡 ∪ {𝑖}) \ {𝑗} remains a basis for any
𝑗 ∈ supp(𝑢). Note that 𝐵𝑡 ⊆ 𝐽𝑡 since the element 𝑖 we add to 𝐵𝑡 is already contained in 𝐽𝑡 . Lastly, since
|𝐵𝑡 | = |𝐵𝑛 | = 𝑛 − 𝑘 and |𝐽𝑡 | = 𝑛 − 𝑡, we see that 𝐽𝑛−𝑘 = 𝐵𝑛−𝑘 . In particular, 𝐽𝑛−𝑘 is a basis of the column
span of M•,𝐽𝑛−𝑘 .
     Using the linear independence of the columns of M𝐽𝑡 , 1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑛 − 𝑘, we explain how to interpret and
solve the least squares problem
                                         𝑣 𝑡𝑖 :=    arg min      ∥M𝑣 ∥ 2                                     (68)
                                                            𝑣∈R𝑛 ,𝑣 𝑖 =1,supp(𝑣)⊆𝐽𝑡

for 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 , 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛]. We first note that 𝑣 𝑖𝑡 is indeed uniquely defined by linear independence of M•,𝐽𝑡 .
Secondly, letting 𝐽𝑡𝑖 B 𝐽𝑡 \ {𝑖}, it is direct to verify that M•,𝐽 𝑖 (𝑣 𝑡𝑖 )𝐽 𝑖 = −Π𝑊 (M•,𝑖 ), where Π𝑊 is the
                                                                  𝑡          𝑡
orthogonal projection onto 𝑊 = im(M•,𝐽 𝑖 ), and hence M𝑣 𝑡𝑖 = M•,𝑖 − Π𝑊 (M•,𝑖 ) = Π𝑊 ⊥ (M•,𝑖 ). Using that
                                                        𝑡


                                               Π𝑊 = M•,𝐽 𝑖 (M⊤
                                                             •,𝐽 𝑖
                                                                   M•,𝐽 𝑖 )−1 M⊤
                                                                               •,𝐽 𝑖
                                                                                     ,
                                                                 𝑡        𝑡           𝑡            𝑡


where linear independence yields the invertibility of (M⊤ 𝑖 M•,𝐽 𝑖 )−1 , we see that
                                                                                  •,𝐽𝑡         𝑡



                                              (𝑣 𝑡𝑖 )𝐽 𝑖 = −(M⊤
                                                              •,𝐽 𝑖
                                                                    M•,𝐽 𝑖 )−1 M⊤
                                                                                •,𝐽 𝑖
                                                                                      M•,𝑖 .
                                                    𝑡                𝑡        𝑡            𝑡


Recalling that (𝑣 𝑡𝑖 )𝑖 = 1, the only other non-zero entry, this gives a strongly polynomial way to solve the
least squares problems.
    We now verify the properties required of the output. Firstly, note that by construction 𝑀𝑣 𝑖 = 𝑞 𝑖 ,
𝑖 ∈ [𝑛]. Therefore MPR = MPP⊤ [𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 ] = M[𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 ] = [𝑞 1 , . . . , 𝑞 𝑛 ] = Q as needed. To show


                                                                         65
that R = P⊤ [𝑣1 , . . . , 𝑣 𝑛 ] is upper triangular diagonal 1𝑛 , note that supp(𝑣 𝑡 ) ⊆ 𝐽𝑡 , (𝑣 𝑡 )𝜋(𝑡) = 1 and that
𝐽𝑡 = {𝜋(𝑖) : 𝑖 ∈ [𝑡]}. Therefore, letting 𝜋−1 denote the inverse permutation, we get supp(P⊤ 𝑣 𝑡 ) ⊆ 𝜋−1 (𝐽𝑡 ) =
{1, . . . , 𝑡} and (P⊤ 𝑣 𝑡 )𝑡 = (𝑣 𝑡 )𝜋(𝑡) = 1, for 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛], as needed. To see that Q has orthogonal columns, it is
sufficient to show that 𝑞 𝑡 is orthogonal to 𝑞 1 , . . . , 𝑞 𝑡−1 , for 2 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑛 − 𝑘, noting that 𝑞 𝑡 = 0𝑚 for 𝑡 > 𝑛 − 𝑘.
By construction, 𝑞 1 , . . . , 𝑞 𝑡−1 are in im(M•,𝐽𝑡−1 ), while by the previous by the paragraph, 𝑞 𝑡 = 𝑞 𝑡𝜋(𝑡) is
                                                                                      𝜋(𝑡)
orthogonal to this subspace, noting that 𝐽𝑡−1 = 𝐽𝑡 \ {𝜋(𝑡)} = 𝐽𝑡 . We now show the second property
of output that characterizes ∥Q•,𝑡 ∥ 2 . By construction, recall that 𝐽𝑡 = {𝜋(1), . . . , 𝜋(𝑡)}, 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛]. For
1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑛 − 𝑘, by definition of 𝑞 𝑡 , we have

                 ∥Q•,𝑡 ∥ 2 = ∥𝑞 𝑡 ∥ 2 = min          min                ∥M𝑥 ∥ 2 = min min                    ∥MP•,[𝑡] 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                       𝑗∈𝐽𝑡 𝑥∈R𝑛 :supp(𝑥)⊆𝐽𝑡 ,𝑥 𝑗 =1                    𝑗∈[𝑡] 𝑥∈R𝑡 :𝑥 𝑗 =1


Similarly, for 𝑛 − 𝑘 + 1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑛, since by construction (𝑣 𝑡 )𝜋(𝑡) = 1, we have that

                           ∥Q•,𝑡 ∥ 2 = ∥𝑞 𝑡 ∥ 2 = 0 = ∥M𝑣 𝑡 ∥ 2 = min min                        ∥MP•,[𝑡] 𝑥 ∥ 2 .
                                                                            𝑗∈[𝑡] 𝑥∈R𝑡 :𝑥 𝑗 =1


   We now show that the |R 𝑗𝑡 | ≤ 1, ∀𝑗, 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛]. Since by construction R 𝑗𝑡 = (𝑣 𝑡 )𝜋(𝑗) , it suffices to show
that ∥𝑣 𝑡 ∥ ∞ ≤ 1, for all 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛]. For 𝑡 ∈ [𝑛], examine 𝑖 ∈ supp(𝑣 𝑡 ) ⊆ 𝐽𝑡 . Then

                                                         ∥𝑞 𝑡 ∥ 2           ∥𝑞 𝑡 ∥ 2
                                          |(𝑣 𝑡 )𝑖 | =                  ≤             ≤ 1,
                                                           𝑞𝑡               ∥𝑞 𝑡𝑖 ∥ 2
                                                         |(𝑣 𝑡 )𝑖 | 2


where in the first inequality we used that 𝑣 𝑡 /(𝑣 𝑡 )𝑖 is a feasible solution for the least squares program
defining 𝑞 𝑡𝑖 (since 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 ) having value ∥𝑞 𝑡 /|(𝑣 𝑡 )𝑖 |∥ 2 ≥ ∥𝑞 𝑡𝑖 ∥ 2 , and for the second inequality we used that
∥𝑞 𝑡 ∥ 2 B arg min 𝑗∈𝐽𝑡 ∥𝑞 𝑡 𝑗 ∥ 2 . We note that in this last proof it is crucial that 𝑞 𝑡𝑖 ≠ 0𝑚 , 𝑖 ∈ 𝐽𝑡 , which follows
by linear independence of M•,𝐽𝑡 .
     For the strongly polynomial guarantees, it remains to check that all the intermediate iterates have
polynomial bit complexity. This follows directly by noting that each of the computed quantities vectors
corresponds to a well-described linear system in the original matrix M. Alternatively, one can use that
the algorithm simply performs a “reverse order” GSO on the matrix MP, and it is well known that that
the intermediate iterates of GSO have polynomial bit complexity (see [GLS88]).                                           □




                                                                 66
