                                           Tensor cumulants for statistical inference on invariant distributions
                                                          Dmitriy Kunisky∗1 , Cristopher Moore†2 , and Alexander S. Wein‡3
                                                                   1
                                                                       Department of Computer Science, Yale University
                                                                                     2
                                                                                       Santa Fe Institute
                                                                          3
arXiv:2404.18735v1 [math.ST] 29 Apr 2024




                                                                            Department of Mathematics, UC Davis


                                                                                         April 29, 2024



                                                                                            Abstract
                                                     Many problems in high-dimensional statistics appear to have a statistical-computational gap:
                                                 a range of values of the signal-to-noise ratio where inference is information-theoretically possi-
                                                 ble, but (conjecturally) computationally intractable. A canonical such problem is Tensor PCA,
                                                 where we observe a tensor Y consisting of a rank-one signal plus Gaussian noise. Multiple lines
                                                 of work suggest that Tensor PCA becomes computationally hard at a critical value of the signal’s
                                                 magnitude. In particular, below this transition, no low-degree polynomial algorithm can detect
                                                 the signal with high probability; conversely, various spectral algorithms are known to succeed
                                                 above this transition. We unify and extend this work by considering tensor networks, orthog-
                                                 onally invariant polynomials where multiple copies of Y are “contracted” to produce scalars,
                                                 vectors, matrices, or other tensors. We define a new set of objects, tensor cumulants, which
                                                 provide an explicit, near-orthogonal basis for invariant polynomials of a given degree. This basis
                                                 lets us unify and strengthen previous results on low-degree hardness, giving a combinatorial ex-
                                                 planation of the hardness transition and of a continuum of subexponential-time algorithms that
                                                 work below it, and proving tight lower bounds against low-degree polynomials for recovering
                                                 rather than just detecting the signal. It also lets us analyze a new problem of distinguish-
                                                 ing between different tensor ensembles, such as Wigner and Wishart tensors, establishing a
                                                 sharp computational threshold and giving evidence of a new statistical-computational gap in
                                                 the Central Limit Theorem for random tensors. Finally, we believe these cumulants are valuable
                                                 mathematical objects in their own right: they generalize the free cumulants of free probability
                                                 theory from matrices to tensors, and share many of their properties, including additivity under
                                                 additive free convolution.




                                             ∗
                                                Email: dmitriy.kunisky@yale.edu. Partially supported by ONR Award N00014-20-1-2335 and a Simons Inves-
                                           tigator Award to Daniel Spielman.
                                              †
                                                Email: moore@santafe.edu. Partially supported by the National Science Foundation through grant BIGDATA-
                                           1838251.
                                              ‡
                                                Email: aswein@ucdavis.edu. Partially supported by an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and NSF CAREER
                                           Award CCF-2338091.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                        1
  1.1 Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  1.2 Main Proof Technique: Tensorial Finite Free Cumulants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           7
  1.3 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9

2 Notation                                                                                            11

3 Preliminaries                                                                                       11
  3.1 Closed Tensor Networks as Invariant Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         11
  3.2 Open Tensor Networks as Equivariant Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           13
  3.3 Invariant Tensors, Brauer Space, and the Weingarten Function . . . . . . . . . . . .            15
  3.4 Low-Degree Polynomial Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16

4 Tensorial Finite Free Cumulants and Invariant Bases                                                 19
  4.1 Frobenius Pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
  4.2 Distinct-Index Graph Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
  4.3 Finite Free Cumulants and Additive Free Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           23
  4.4 Graph Moment Expansion of Finite Free Cumulants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             26
  4.5 Inner Products and Approximate Orthogonality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          29
  4.6 Advantage Bound for Invariant Detection Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          31
  4.7 Bases for Vector-Valued Equivariant Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         33

5 Application 1: Tensor PCA                                                                           36
  5.1 Warmup: Detection with Individual Graph Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             36
  5.2 Detection with General Low-Degree Polynomials: Proof of Theorem 1.6 . . . . . . .               40
  5.3 Reconstruction with Low-Degree Polynomials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          42

6 Application 2: Distinguishing Wigner from Wishart Tensors                                           48

Acknowledgments                                                                                       53

References                                                                                            53

A Characterizations of Invariants                                                                     60

B Properties of Wigner Tensors                                                                     62
  B.1 Basic Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
  B.2 Hardness of Computing Moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

C Conditioning of Weingarten Matrices                                                                 68

D Combinatorial Bounds                                                                                71
1    Introduction
We will study statistical problems formulated over tensors. Here a tensor T is a p-dimensional
table of real numbers, indexed as Ti1 ,i2 ,...,ip with ia ∈ {1, . . . , n} =: [n]. We call p the arity of T ,
say that T is a p-ary tensor, and call n the dimension of T . A 1-ary tensor is an n-dimensional
vector. A 2-ary tensor can be viewed as an n × n matrix or as an n2 -dimensional vector, and so on.
A 0-ary tensor is a scalar, i.e., a real number. We say that T is symmetric if Ti1 ,...,ip = Tσ(i1 ),...,σ(ip )
for any permutation σ ∈ Sp . In this case, each entry of T is specified by a multiset in [n] of size p.
The vector space of symmetric tensors of dimension n and arity p is denoted Symp (Rn ).
    Many statistical problems of broad interest are modeled with tensor observations, representing
collections of estimates of degree p moments of high-dimensional random variables or p-way inter-
action data such as hypergraphs and generalizations thereof. Often, whether in hypothesis testing
(distinguishing two distributions over tensors) or in estimation (recovering some parameter from a
noisy tensor observation) problems, the distributions of tensors involved are reasonably assumed to
be orthogonally invariant, that is, invariant to simultaneous changes of basis of all tensor “axes.”

Definition 1.1 (Change of basis). For T a tensor of dimension n and Q a (usually but not
necessarily orthogonal) matrix, we define the tensor Q · T to have entries

                                                           X                        p
                                                                                    Y
                                  (Q · T )j1 ,...,jp =                Ti1 ,...,ip         Qit ,jt .        (1)
                                                         i1 ,...,ip                 t=1

                                                                                                      p
Alternatively, we may view Q · T = (Q⊤ )⊗p T where T is viewed as a vector in Rn . This makes
the action of the orthogonal group O(n) or the general linear group GL(n) on (Rn )⊗p a right group
action: R · (Q · T ) = (QR) · T , which preserves symmetry and thus is also an action on Symp (Rn ).

For T a matrix one may check that Q · T = Q⊤ T Q coincides with the usual change of basis.

Definition 1.2 (Invariance). A function f : Symp (Rn ) → R is (orthogonally) invariant if f (Q·T ) =
f (T ) for all T ∈ Symp (Rn ) and all Q ∈ O(n). The law of a random T is (orthogonally) invariant
if Q · T has the same law for all orthogonal Q ∈ O(n).

    Tensor networks are a graphical notation that extends linear algebra to tensors, generalizing
operations like the inner product of vectors, matrix products, and traces. This gives a powerful
language for discussing quantities that would be quite tricky to express in conventional notation
(as we already see above for changes of basis). We will discuss general tensor networks later in
Section 3.1, but we mention now that, aside from changes of basis, the following is an important
class of computations that tensor networks can express.

Definition 1.3 (Graph moments). Let T ∈ Symp (Rn ) and G = (V, E) a p-regular graph (not
necessarily simple). Then, we define the G-moment of T as
                                              X Y
                                    mG (T ) =        Ti(∂v) .                        (2)
                                                         i∈[n]E v∈V

where i(∂v) denotes the multiset of indices i(e) associated with the edges e incident to v. If G is
the empty graph with V = E = ∅, then mG (T ) = 1.


                                                             1
                                                         T

                                                   a b c

                                                   d T         e
                                                     f
                                            T                      T

Figure 1: The graph moment mG (T ) where T is a symmetric 3-ary tensor and G = K4 . Summing
over all six indices, one on each edge, contracts the graph and yields the scalar (3).


When T is symmetric—as it always is here—we do not need to order the edges incident to a vertex.1
Example 1.4. Let G = K4 be the complete graph on four vertices, as shown in Figure 1. Then
                                      X
                         mG (T ) =            Tabc Tadf Tbde Tcef ,                       (3)
                                            a,b,c,d,e,f ∈[n]

Note that this is a homogeneous polynomial, of degree 4, of T ’s entries. In general, mG (T ) is a
homogeneous polynomial, of degree |V (G)|, of T ’s entries.
    Linear combinations of the tensor networks mG (T ) are a natural class of scalar functions of a
tensor. In particular, as we will show in Proposition 3.13, they are themselves invariant: mG (Q ·
T ) = mG (T ) for all Q ∈ O(n). Moreover, by classical invariant theory, they span all invariant
polynomials. As we will discuss in Section 3.1, these linear combinations should therefore be
thought of as the correct “space of spectral algorithms” for computing scalar statistics from tensors,
analogous to the linear spectral statistics T 7→ tr(f (T )) of a matrix T .
    We wish to draw a connection between these algebraic facts and the substantial body of litera-
ture that has developed recently around using low-degree polynomial algorithms for tasks like hy-
pothesis testing and estimation. We leave a detailed discussion to Section 3.4, but simple instances
of this approach are to perform hypothesis testing between two distributions of tensors by com-
puting and thresholding a low-degree polynomial of the observed tensor [HS17, HKP+ 17, Hop18],
or estimation by computing an estimator that consists of a vector of low-degree polynomials of
the observation [SW22]. We view the degree of a polynomial as a proxy for the runtime of the
associated algorithm (as, assuming we naively evaluate polynomials without taking advantage of
any special structure, a degree D polynomial in n variables takes time O(nD ) to evaluate), and so
the degree of polynomial required for testing or estimation is taken as a measure of the problem’s
complexity.
    The goal of this paper is to explore the consequences of the following general observation (formal-
ized for low-degree algorithms in our Proposition 3.22): for hypothesis testing tasks over invariant
tensor distributions, the best low-degree polynomials are invariant themselves, and therefore are
linear combinations of graph moments mG (T ). Similarly, the best low-degree estimators are lin-
ear combinations of graph moments with a single “open” edge, which evaluate to vectors rather
than scalars (Proposition 3.24). In addition to giving us a set of tools for reasoning graphically
about low-degree algorithms, this dramatically restricts the space of such algorithms for invariant
  1
    If we considered tensors with complex entries the edges would need to be directed, since the complex inner
product has u∗ v ̸= v ∗ u in general. For us, T ’s entries will always be real, so undirected edges suffice.


                                                         2
problems, and therefore can also reduce the analytical difficulties of proving computational lower
bounds. Indeed, the dimension of the space of low-degree invariant polynomials, corresponding for
degree d to the number of p-regular multigraphs G on d vertices, does not depend on the tensor
dimension n at all! Moreover, the space spanned by the mG (T ) turns out to have a rich algebraic
structure with important ramifications for the computational complexity of statistical problems.
For example, we will see that its dimension (the number of p-regular multigraphs of a given size)
has a direct connection to the tradeoff between signal strength and subexponential runtime of
algorithms for hypothesis testing and estimation.
     We will develop a general theory about the spaces of invariant polynomials (and equivariant
vector-valued polynomials, to be used as estimators), extending classical invariant theory to be
directly useful for the analysis of low-degree algorithms. Surprisingly, a central role will be played
by a notion of finite free cumulants for tensors. These generalize aspects of the theory of free prob-
ability for random matrices, and yield an explicit near-orthogonal basis for the space of invariant
polynomials. Using these tools, we will give new results for two examples of invariant statistical
problems over tensors.
     First, we will consider the well-studied problem of tensor PCA (principal component analysis),
recovering and unifying previous results on hypothesis testing and giving a new and tight analysis
of estimation. Second, we will study a variation on the newer problem of hypothesis testing between
Wigner and Wishart tensors, adapted to our focus on invariant distributions. Through one lens
this is a relative of the task of tensor decomposition, and through another it is a variation on the
question of distinguishing Erdős-Rényi from geometric random hypergraphs (a hypergraph version
of the problem treated for matrices by [BDER16, BBN20, LMSY22, BB24]). Through yet a third
it is a question about a “computational central limit theorem,” a class of questions to which our
results will apply more generally (a closely related tensor problem was studied by [Mik20], and
similar matrix problems by [BDER16, BBH21]).
     Below we first focus on these concrete applications, and then sketch some of the technical ideas
before giving full details in Section 4.

1.1   Main Results
Tensor PCA       Our first subject will be a model of random tensors built as follows:

                                          Y = λv ⊗p + W .                                         (4)

Here λ ≥ 0 is a signal-to-noise ratio, the spike v is chosen from some prior distribution on Rn ,
and W is a tensor of random noise. This model is known as tensor PCA or the spiked tensor
model [MR14].
    In this model, hypothesis testing or detection entails distinguishing the spiked model above from
a null model where Y = W consists only of noise. Estimation or reconstruction entails producing
a vector vb = vb(Y ) that approximates v. A reasonable request is for vb to be more correlated with v
than a random guess, i.e., if ∥v∥2 , ∥b
                                      v ∥2 ≈ n, then |⟨b
                                                       v , v⟩| ≥ ϵn for some constant ϵ > 0.
    Recall that we are interested in the case where the distributions involved above are orthogonally
invariant. To adhere to this setting, we will assume that v is chosen uniformly from the sphere
      √
Sn−1 ( n) = {v ∈ Rn : ∥v∥2 = n} and that W is a Wigner random tensor with Gaussian entries.
To keep Y symmetric, we will symmetrize W as follows.



                                                  3
Definition 1.5. For p ≥ 1 and σ 2 > 0, we write Wig(p, n, σ 2 ) for the law of the symmetric tensor
W ∈ Symp (Rn ) that is given entrywise by
                                                  1 X
                                   Wi1 ,...,ip = √        Giπ(1) ,...,iπ(p)                         (5)
                                                   p! π∈S
                                                          p


where G ∈ (Rn )⊗p is an asymmetric tensor whose entries are i.i.d. as Gi1 ,...,ip ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). We
write Wig for Wig(p, n, 1) when these parameters are clear.

This is the natural tensor analog of the Gaussian orthogonal ensemble (GOE), which is the matrix
case p = 2. As there, the law Wig(p, n, σ 2 ) is orthogonally invariant. Up to symmetry, the entries
are independent but a few have larger variance, just as in the GOE entries on the diagonal have
twice the variance of the rest. See Appendix B for further details.
    Using the tools we develop, we give a new proof of the following result on low-degree polynomial
algorithms. We state this result informally and defer to later the precise notion of “success” of
low-degree polynomials for distinguishing two distributions; see Definition 3.18 and Remark 3.19.
We call Q = Wig the law of the pure noise model, and P the law of Y = λv ⊗p + W with v ∼
            √
Unif(Sn−1 ( n)) and W ∼ Wig independently.

Theoremp 1.6 (Tensor PCA detection; informal; Theorem 3.3 of [KWB22]). Let D = D(n) ∈ N
have D ≤ n/2p2 . There are constants ap , bp > 0 such that:

  1. If λ ≤ ap n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 , then polynomials of degree at most D cannot distinguish P from Q.

  2. If λ ≥ bp n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 and D = ω(1), then polynomials of degree at most D can distinguish
     P from Q.

When p = 2, there is no dependence on D in the thresholds for λ, and the result suggests that, on
the scale λ = Θ(n−1/2 ), the problem transitions from being tractable in polynomial time (which is
                                                                                    √
indeed achieved by various algorithms) to requiring at least time roughly exp(Ω( n)). When p ≥ 3,
the dependence on D means that there are regimes of λ where the problem is tractable but only in
subexponential time exp(O(nδ )) for various δ ∈ (0, 1). In fact, these scalings for low-degree upper
and lower bounds are known (see again [KWB22], which sharpened the results of [HKP+ 17]) to
hold for D ∼ nδ for any δ ∈ (0, 1). It is a technical limitation of our results that they are restricted
          √
to D ≲ n, as it is only in this regime that the basis of invariants we propose is approximately
orthogonal.
     One advantage of our analysis is that it gives an intuitive explanation for the latter subexpo-
                                                                p−2
nential scaling phenomenon. In particular, the factor of D 4 is directly related to the number
of non-isomorphic p-regular multigraphs on D vertices, which (see Proposition 5.9) is of the order
  p−2
D 2 D up to smaller multiplicative factors; the analysis turns out to indicate that this quantity
                                                            p−2   1       p−2
must be compared with λ2D , leading to the factor of D 2 D· 2D = D 4 . Per our remarks above,
this is also the dimension of the space of degree D invariant polynomials of a tensor.
     We also give a new result for the related reconstruction problem. Since reconstruction is a more
difficult task than detection, it is to be expected that degree D polynomials fail to reconstruct in
the same regime of parameters that they fail to detect per Theorem 1.6. However, actually proving
that low-degree polynomials fail to reconstruct—in a precise sense deferred to Section 3.4—does
not follow from Theorem 1.6, and generally such reconstruction lower bounds are more difficult to


                                                      4
prove than their detection counterparts. The first tools for low-degree reconstruction lower bounds
appeared in [SW22], and this approach can be applied to any additive Gaussian model, which in-
cludes tensor PCA. However, to use this machinery, one needs to bound certain recursively-defined
quantities, and existing analyses tend to be loose by factors involving D. That is to say, we expect
the existing approach of [SW22] would not obtain the precise dependence between λ and D in The-
orem 1.6 (likely the exponent on D would be wrong). By using our new machinery in conjunction
with the approach of [SW22], we manage to prove low-degree hardness for reconstruction with the
correct relation between λ and D. To our knowledge, this is the first low-degree reconstruction
result (in any model) that achieves the “correct” exponent on D.
Theorem    1.7 (Lower bound for tensor PCA reconstruction; informal). Let D = D(n) ∈ N have
D ≤ n/2p2 . For all odd p ≥ 3, there is a constant cp > 0 such that if λ ≤ cp n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 , then
     p

polynomials of degree at most D cannot reconstruct x from Y ∼ P with positive correlation.
The restriction to odd p makes estimation of the vector v itself well-defined, since for even p,
v ⊗p = (−v)⊗p . For even p one may seek to estimate v ⊗ v instead, but this would introduce
considerable additional technicalities into our approach.

Computational central limit theorems and Wigner vs. Wishart The second problem we
consider is inspired by the recent work of [Mik20], who considered      P a tensor central limit theorem:
given i.i.d. tensors Xj , how quickly does the distribution of √1r rj=1 Xj converge to a Gaussian
tensor as r increases? That work considered a Wishart tensor model, where each Xj is the rank-one
tensor x⊗p
         j with xj a standard Gaussian vector, with “diagonal” entries of the tensor—those indexed
by tuples (i1 , . . . , ip ) with a repeated entry—zeroed out.2 The author showed that r ≫ n2p−1 suffices
for information-theoretic convergence: past this number of summands, the Wigner and Wishart laws
are close in a suitable distributional distance, and no statistic whatsoever can distinguish them with
high probability.
    Earlier work [BDER16] considered the matrix case p = 2, but considered computational conver-
gence: for what scaling of r can a computationally efficient hypothesis test distinguish the Wigner
and Wishart laws? Their answer was r ≪ n3 , which coincides with the information-theoretic lower
bound, n2p−1 = n3 . Here we ask: how does computational convergence behave when p > 2?
    The distribution studied by [Mik20] is not invariant, and so is not amenable to our tools.
As a substitute, we propose a family of random tensors whose entries are degree p homogeneous
polynomials in Gaussian random variables, just like the x⊗p      j   above, which our methods can treat
and which we believe should behave similarly to Wishart models.
Definition 1.8. The real Ginibre ensemble Gin(n, σ 2 ) is the law of an (asymmetric) n × n random
matrix Z whose entries are i.i.d. with law N (0, σ 2 ).
We write Haar = Haar(n) for the Haar probability measure over the orthogonal group O(n), omit-
ting the n when it is clear from context. The basic idea that will be involved below is that the
distributions Gin(n, 1/n) and Haar(n) behave similarly: both are orthogonally invariant (Proposi-
                                                     √
tion 6.2), and the entries of both are typically O(1/ n). Moreover, “invariantizing” a tensor by
forming Z · T with Z ∼ Gin(n, 1/n) makes its entries homogeneous of degree p in the Gaussian
entries of Z, giving an object resembling x⊗p
                                           j from the model of [Mik20].
   2
   This ensures that the limit tensor has centered and independent Gaussian entries, while including diagonal entries
would introduce correlations.


                                                         5
Theorem 1.9 (Lower bound for Wigner vs. Wishart detection; informal). Suppose that µn are
probability measures on Symp (Rn ) satisfying the following properties for A ∼ µn :
   1. For all i ∈ [n]p having a repeated entry, Ai1 ,...,ip = 0 almost surely.
   2. There is a constant C > 0 such that, for all i ∈ [n]p , |Ai1 ,...,ip | ≤ C almost surely.
   3. ∥A∥2F = np almost surely.
Let Z1 , . P
           . . , Zr ∼ Gin(n, 1/n) be i.i.d. and A1 , . . . , Ar ∼ µn be i.i.d., and write P = Pn,r for the law
     −1/2       r
of r            j=1pZj · Aj . There is a constant ap,C > 0 such that the following holds. Suppose that
D = D(n) ≤ n/2p2 is given and r = r(n) satisfies
                                                  p                       
                                                  n           if p is odd,
                                      r ≥ ap,C ·                             .                              (6)
                                                  n3p/2 if p is even
Then, polynomials of degree at most D cannot distinguish Pn,r(n) from Wig.
    We emphasize one simple example: consider A a deterministic tensor, with
                                Ai1 ,...,ip = c · 1{no entry is repeated in i},                            (7)
where c = c(p, n) is chosen (close but not equal to 1) so that ∥A∥2F = np . If A were simply the
all-ones tensor 1⊗p , then Z · A would have the law of x⊗p j  from the above Wishart model. Thus,
we believe it is reasonable to think of A as an invariant surrogate for the law of x⊗p
                                                                                    j with positions
having repeated indices zeroed out. Note also that, as in the latter model, in our model we have
EZj · Aj = 0 even when p is even, so there is no need to center these terms.
    The result suggests that computational central limit theorem convergence (i.e., with respect to
polynomial-time algorithms) in this Wishart-like model occurs once r ≫ n(2+1{p even})p/2 . For the
special case of the above choice of A, we may bolster this proposal with a matching upper bound.
Theorem 1.10 (Upper bound for Wigner vs. Wishart detection; informal). Let A be as in (7),
and µn be the Dirac delta mass on A. Then, in the setting of Theorem 1.9, if r = r(n) satisfies
                                      p                    
                                       n       if p is odd,
                                 r≪                           ,                                (8)
                                       n3p/2 if p is even
then there is a polynomial of degree D = 3 if p is even and D = 4 if p is odd that can distinguish
Pn,r(n) from Wig.
As in the case of tensor PCA, our diagrammatic approach gives a clear intuitive explanation of the
structure of this threshold. Here, the unusual-seeming dependence on the parity of p arises because
the parity of p controls the smallest possible size of a p-regular multigraph on more than two vertices,
which is 3 when p is even but 4 when p is odd. Our calculations will demonstrate that in this setting
the smallest graphs (or disjoint unions thereof) correspond to the most powerful polynomials for
hypothesis testing, so the above phenomenon accounts for detection being proportionally easier (as
reflected in a larger threshold for r) when p is even.
    We note also that the computational threshold r ≫ n(2+1{p even})p/2 we establish coincides with
the information-theoretic lower bound r ≫ n2p−1 of [Mik20] when p = 2, but is strictly lower
by a polynomial factor once p ≥ 3. In this sense, our result gives initial evidence that testing
Wigner vs. Wishart tensors may exhibit a statistical-computational gap not present in the matrix
case (provided that the information-theoretic lower bound of [Mik20] can be matched by an upper
bound, which to the best of our knowledge is not yet established).

                                                      6
1.2   Main Proof Technique: Tensorial Finite Free Cumulants
The following remarkable objects are at the heart of our approach to analyzing low-degree algo-
rithms for invariant problems.
                                                                          p
Theorem 1.11 (Finite free cumulants of a tensor). For any 0 ≤ D ≤ n/2p2 , there is a collection
of polynomials κG (T ) of degree at most D in the indices of a tensor T , indexed by (non-isomorphic)
p-regular multigraphs on at most D vertices, such that the following hold:

  1. (Empty Graph) κ∅ (T ) = 1.

  2. (Invariance) The κG are invariant polynomials: κG (Q · T ) = κG (T ) for all Q ∈ O(n).

  3. (Basis) The κG are a basis for the invariant polynomials of degree at most D.

  4. (Approximate Orthonormality) The Gram matrix MG,H := ET ∼Wig [κG (T )κH (T )], restricted
     to those G and H none of whose connected components consist of two vertices connected by
     p parallel edges, satisfies
                                  1
                                    < λmin (M ) ≤ λmax (M ) ≤ 2.                           (9)
                                  2
  5. (Wigner Expectations) For any G that is not empty and not a single two-vertex connected
     component of the kind described above,

                                                E      κG (T ) = 0.                              (10)
                                              T ∼Wig


  6. (Additive Free Convolution) For any S, T ∈ Symp (Rn ) and G connected,

                                   E      κG (S + Q · T ) = κG (S) + κG (T ).                    (11)
                                 Q∼Haar

                            p
Remark 1.12. When D > n/2p2 , the finite free cumulants exist and satisfy Conditions 1–3 and
                                                             √
5–6, but Condition 4 breaks down. More dramatically, once D ≫ n the Gram matrix of the finite
free cumulants no longer has a bounded condition number, so they are no longer approximately
orthogonal. See Appendix C for further details.

Of course, by basic linear algebra over the space of polynomials endowed with inner product ⟨f, g⟩ =
ET ∼Wig [f (T )g(T )], there must exist polynomials satisfying Claims 1–5, and indeed if this were all
we were interested in we could demand exact orthonormality in Claim 4. What is surprising is,
first, that we can identify such polynomials explicitly (analogous to, say, the Boolean Fourier basis
or the Hermite basis, as opposed to arbitrary abstract collections of orthogonal polynomials), and
second, that those same polynomials happen to satisfy the exact algebraic Condition 6.
     We will see that these objects are useful tools for the analysis of low-degree polynomial algo-
rithms in models having both invariance and additive structure. Consider the case of hypothesis
testing. The analysis of low-degree polynomials, given an approximate basis of this kind, boils down
to evaluating expectations ofP  κG under the alternative hypothesis—the distribution of Y = λv ⊗p +W
                           −1/2  r
in tensor PCA, or of r           i=1 Zi · Ai in a computational central limit theorem. But, Claim 6




                                                    7
above gives a powerful tool to handle such situations, as is especially apparent for tensor PCA:
combining Claims 5 and 6, we see that
                ⊗p                     ⊗p                   ⊗p                       ⊗p
     E κG (λv        + W) =    E κG (λv + Q · W ) = E κG (λv ) + E κG (W ) = E κG (λv ),             (12)
    v,W                       v,W,Q                     v              W            v

and the last expression is simple to compute in closed form (Proposition 5.8). To give some
intuition, the result is equal to leading order to Ev mG (λv ⊗p ) (generally, the κG are built by a series
of “adjustments” to the corresponding mG ), which, even inside the expectation, is easily computed
by hand as λ|V (G)| ∥v∥2|E(G)| (Proposition 5.5).
     As we have mentioned, there is a deeper mathematical meaning to the κG : as Claim 6 hints
at, the κG are really the correct generalization to tensors of finite free cumulants from the free
probability theory of random matrices. In this regard, our κG are the third step in a chain of
generalizations in the literature, which we review below.
                                                        (1)
     First, the classical cumulants are polynomials κt in the moments of a random variable with
the property that, if A and B are independent scalar random variables, then the cumulant of their
convolution A + B is the sum of their cumulants: κ(A + B) = κ(A) + κ(B). For instance, the first
cumulant is the expectation, and the second cumulant is the variance, for which these additivity
rules are familiar.
     Second, the theory of free probability considers the less straightforward question of how addition
affects the spectra of matrix-valued random variables A and B. To make this as tractable as the
scalar case, it is not enough to assume that A and B are independent—the typical spectrum of A+B
still depends on the extent to which A and B commute. Free probability restricts its attention to
freely independent pairs A, B whose frames of eigenvectors are “maximally uncorrelated” with each
other. For our purposes, we may take this to mean that we are interested in the typical spectrum of
A + Q⊤ BQ = A + Q · B for Q ∼ Haar drawn independently of A and B. The finite free cumulants
  (2)                                                            (2)                (2)       (2)
κt then satisfy this additivity property in expectation, EQ κt (A + Q · B) = κt (A) + κt (B), just
as in Claim 6. They are a relatively recent innovation in free probability [AP18, AGVP23], but a
notion of their limit as n → ∞, called just the free cumulants, was crucial to the earlier origins of
the theory (see, e.g., the reference [MS17]).
     Given that they satisfy Claim 6, it should now be clear that our κG generalize this notion of
finite free cumulant to tensors. Even for matrices, it seems not to have been noticed previously
that finite free cumulants lead two parallel lives: on the one hand, they are statistics of random
matrices that behave well under freely independent summations; on the other, as our work shows,
they yield a natural, explicit, near-orthogonal basis of invariant functions under the inner product
induced by the Wigner distribution, which for matrices is the Gaussian orthogonal ensemble. Also
interesting is that there is no clear notion of limiting free cumulants for tensors, because there is
also no clear notion of eigenvalues or empirical spectral distribution. Still, finite free cumulants are
sensible and useful objects.
     The astute reader will notice that Claim 6 is restricted to connected graphs—a simple issue
that we address in Proposition 4.27—and that Claims 4 and 5 make exceptions for a particular
type of connected component, namely a two-vertex multigraph, which we call a Frobenius pair (see
Section 4.1). The associated cumulant may be viewed as a formal analog of the variance (the second
classical cumulant), and like the variance is always non-negative. To actually use the finite free
cumulants as a basis, we will have to define and work carefully with a suitable re-centering that
accounts for this, which will be one of our main tasks in Section 4.


                                                    8
    We also have not said anything about the application of these ideas to estimation, which re-
quires vector-valued functions of a tensor. This turns out to admit a parallel theory concerning
equivariant functions, ones f : Symp (Rn ) → Rn satisfying f (Q · T ) = Q · f (T ), which are spanned
by constructions like mG (T ) but where G has an “open” edge corresponding to the vector output.
These modified graph moments also are spanned by a basis of objects similar to the κG . Our lower
bound for reconstruction is obtained by using this basis in conjunction with the existing strategy
of [SW22].

1.3    Related Work
Eigenvalues of tensors There are several reasonable different definitions of eigenvalues and
eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs for tensors [Qi05, Qi07, QCC18]. It is non-trivial to compute these
eigenvalues [CDN14], and, under the common notion of “E-eigenvalues,” typical tensors have ex-
ponentially many eigenvalues in their dimension, per the analysis of the critical points of spherical
spin glass models [ABAČ13, Sub17]. Most importantly, there seems to be no natural analog for
tensors of the spectral decomposition for matrices, making it seemingly impossible in general to
reduce the evaluation of tensor invariants to computations with eigenvalues. This is in contrast
                                                                                            Pn to
the matrix setting where the invariants are just power sums of the eigenvalues, tr(T ) = i=1 λℓi ,
                                                                                      ℓ

and polynomials thereof.

Random tensor theory Aspects of random matrix theory that have been generalized to the
tensor setting3 include the derivation of the maximum eigenvalue of a Gaussian random tensor by
a “tensorial power method” [Evn21], a definition of a resolvent, a spectral density, and Wigner’s
semicircle law for Gaussian random symmetric tensors [Gur20], universality of this generalization
of Wigner’s law [Gur14] (with applications to spherical spin glass models [BGS13]), and Harish-
Chandra–Itzykson–Zuber integrals [CGL23b, CGL23a]. See also the book [Gur17] for many details.
We will both elaborate on some of these results (see, e.g., our Theorem 5.3 on the scaling of
graph moments of Gaussian random tensors) and will show generalizations to the tensor setting
of aspects of free probability theory, including the notion of free cumulants, properties of additive
free convolution, and Voiculescu’s theorem on the asymptotic freeness of matrices under random
rotation of their eigenvectors.
    Very recently, and independently of our work, another approach to free probability for tensors
based on Gurau’s tensor resolvent was proposed in [Bon24]. This line of work differs from our
results in focusing on a coarser collection of invariants which is, in our notation, the sum of the
moments mG (T ) over all connected G on a given number of vertices.

Tensor PCA Starting with the work of [MR14], the tensor PCA problem is now well-studied. A
variety of different polynomial-time algorithms are known to achieve the scaling λ ∼ n−p/4 [MR14,
HSS15, HSSS16, ADGM17, Has20, BCRT20]. While information-theoretically it is possible to
succeed for smaller λ [JLM20], we expect that no poly-time algorithm can achieve this due to
lower bounds against low-degree polynomials [HKP+ 17] and a reduction from a variant of the
planted clique problem [BB20]. Furthermore, various algorithms are known to achieve a particular
   3
     Some works, such as [AHH12], also use the term “random tensor theory” to describe their results, though they
really concern random matrices built out of random tensors, say by taking sample covariances of vectorizations of
these tensors.



                                                       9
                                                                    i
                                          i           k
                                              T                         T

                                                      𝓁                         𝓁
                                                  z                         z
                                          j                     j
                                              T                         T

Figure 2: On the left, a tensor network defining a 4-index tensor from two copies of a 3-ary tensor;
we sum over all n values of the internal index z. It can be viewed, among other things, as an
n2 -dimensional matrix M(i,j),(k,ℓ) . This matrix is used in a spectral algorithm for tensor PCA
in [HSS15]. On the right, a partial trace where we also sum over i, giving an n-dimensional matrix
Mjℓ used by [HSSS16] for another spectral algorithm.


tradeoff between the SNR λ and the (super-polynomial but sub-exponential) runtime, when λ ≪
n−p/4 [RRS17a, BGG+ 16, BGL17, WAM19].4 The low-degree result of [KWB22] that we recalled
in Theorem 1.6 suggests that this tradeoff cannot be improved. Most closely related to our results,
there is a line of work considering the application of tensor invariants to tensor PCA, using the
“random tensor theory” machinery mentioned above [Gur20, OTR22, OR20, Oue22].

Algorithms using tensor networks and distinct indices Our notion of “tensorial free cumu-
lants” arose from seeking an invariant version of the “distinct-index” tensor networks used in the
recent work [Wei23] on tensor decomposition. In the matrix setting, if A is the adjacency matrix
of a graph, the distinct-index trace
                                        X
                                A(ℓ) =        Ai1 ,i2 Ai2 ,i3 · · · Aiℓ−1 ,iℓ
                                          i1 ,i2 ,...,iℓ
                                           distinct

counts self-avoiding walks. This was used previously by [Mas14] in the context of community
detection in the stochastic block model, and by [DHS20] as a variance reduction technique for
estimators and test statistics in matrix PCA. Other previous uses of tensor networks in tensor PCA
                                   2
                                                                     P
include [HSS15], which uses the n -dimensional matrix M(i,j),(k,ℓ) = z Tikz Tjℓz shown in Figure 2
on the left, and [HSSS16] which uses its partial trace on the right. Algorithmic applications of
more elaborate tensor networks can be found in [MW19, DdL+ 22]. The recent work of [Sem24]
uses similar ideas of optimizing over invariant and equivariant polynomials as well, but, working in
the matrix setting, does not use the graphical tensor network notation.
    The graph matrices widely used to analyze the pseudocalibration construction in lower bounds
against the sum-of-squares hierarchy also feature a restriction of similar summations to distinct
indices, and through this give an orthogonal basis for the polynomials invariant under a group
action (in that case the action of the symmetric group). See [BHK+ 19, GJJ+ 20, PR22, JPRX23]
for applications of pseudocalibration, and Remark 2.3 of [AMP16] for discussion of the orthogonality
properties of graph matrices. Finally, the combinatorial structure of a nearly-orthogonal basis for
a special class of tensor networks arising in [GJJ+ 20] was studied by [JP21].
  4
   Notably, unlike in the matrix case, once p ≥ 3 the tensor analog of power iteration—which may be viewed as
computing a tree-shaped tensor network—performs suboptimally [MR14, WZ24].




                                                           10
Cumulants in low-degree lower bounds The work of [SW22] also treats reconstruction using
low-degree polynomials, and also encounters a quantity that is referred to as a “cumulant.” Those
quantities are simply the classical (joint) cumulants of scalar random variables. In contrast, our
cumulants are firstly the free cumulants of free probability, and secondly are polynomial functions
of a matrix or tensor, rather than statistics of an entire probability distribution.


2     Notation
We write 1 for the identity matrix, J for the all-ones matrix, and 1 for the all-ones vector (when
it is used in linear-algebraic context). We write nb := n!/(n − b)! for the falling factorial, and use
the less conventional nb := n!!/(n − 2b)!! for the falling double factorial.


3     Preliminaries
3.1   Closed Tensor Networks as Invariant Polynomials
First, let us motivate the family of linear combinations of tensor networks as a natural class of
algorithms. For computations over symmetric   Pn matrices T , an important role is played by linear
spectral statistics, the quantities F (T ) = i=1 f (λi (T )) for some function f : R → R.
    The space of all linear spectral statistics is a natural limit of the same space where f are
polynomials. That space admits a more algebraic interpretation: it is the same as the space of all
symmetric polynomials of the eigenvalues of T , which is also the space of all invariant polynomials
of a matrix T : if F (QT Q⊤ ) = F (T ) for all Q ∈ O(n) for a polynomial F , then F must be a
symmetric polynomial of (λ1 (T ), . . . , λn (T )).
    In the matrix case, when f (λ) is a polynomial, then we have F (T ) = tr(f (T )). These are
linear combinations of tr(T k ), and one may check that tr(T k ) = mCk (T ), where Ck is the k-cycle.
In summary, then, the linear spectral statistics for f a polynomial—a natural class of “spectral
algorithms” over matrices—have two coinciding interpretations: on the one hand, they are all
invariant functions of a matrix T ; on the other, they are linear combinations of the mG (T ) where
T is a 2-regular multigraph.
    These interpretations do not depend on the notion of “eigenvalue.” While there is no one clear
definition of eigenvalues for tensors, this algebraic interpretation of linear spectral statistics does
admit a tensorial generalization. In particular, we have:
Definition 3.1 (p-regular multigraphs). Write Gd,p for the set of (non-isomorphic) p-regular multi-
graphs on d unlabelled vertices.
Theorem 3.2. Let R be the ring of invariant polynomials F f : Symp (Rn ) → R. Then R is generated
as a vector space by the polynomials mG (T ) over G ∈ d≥0 Gd,pP    . In particular, any invariant
homogeneous polynomial f (T ) of degree d is a linear combination i αi mGi (T ) for Gi ∈ Gd,p .
In this sense, we propose that the space of linear combinations of mG (T ) should be viewed as the
“right” tensorial generalization of linear spectral statistics. (The analogy between mG (T ) for T a
tensor and mCk (T ) = tr(T k ) for T a matrix, the latter of which is, up to renormalization, the kth
moment of the empirical spectral distribution of T , is also why we call the mG (T ) “moments.”)
    Theorem 3.2 is a classical result in invariant theory, namely the “First Fundamental Theorem”
for the orthogonal group [Wey46]; see [GW98, §4.3] for a modern treatment, following [ABP73,

                                                  11
                                              U
                      U      V     U              W     U          V      W      V      U
                                              U

Figure 3: Three examples of mixed moments of tensors. Here U , V , and W have arity 1, 2, and 3
respectively. From left to right, these yield the bilinear form ⟨U, V U ⟩, the trilinear form ⟨W, U ⊗3 ⟩,
and the quantity in (14).


pp. 285–6].5 However, these proofs may be opaque to some readers, and lack graphical panache.
We provide a graphical proof in the style of our other calculations in Appendix A for the reader’s
appreciation.
   We can also consider mixed moments of multiple tensors, possibly with different arities:
Definition 3.3. Let T be a set of symmetric tensors, and let G = (V, E) be a multigraph associated
with a function T : V → T that labels each vertex v ∈ V with a tensor T (v) ∈ T of arity deg v.
Then define the mixed moment mG (T ) as the contraction
                                             X Y
                                  mG (T ) =          T (v)i(∂v) .                             (13)
                                                   i∈[n]E v∈V


Example 3.4. Let U , V , and W be tensors of arity 1, 2, and 3 respectively. The rightmost
multigraph G in Figure 3 yields
                                                X
                                mG (U, V, W ) =   Vij Wijk Vkℓ Uℓ ,                   (14)
                                                      ijkℓ

which is quadratic in V and multilinear in W and U .
Example 3.5. Let U and V be matrices of the same dimension. Then, the mixed connected graph
moments of these matrices are the mixed traces, tr(U k1 V ℓ1 · · · U km V km ) for ki , ℓj ≥ 1. These are
the quantities to which the concept of freeness in free probability theory pertains; we will see later
that graph moments of tensors admit a generalization of parts of this theory.
A version of Theorem 3.2 also holds for this setting:
Theorem 3.6. Let R be the ring of invariant polynomials f : Symp1 (Rn ) × · · · × Sympm (Rn ), in
the sense that f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) = f (Q · T1 , . . . , Q · Tm ) for all Q ∈ O(n). Then, R is generated as a
vector space by the mG (T1 , . . . , Tm ): any invariant homogeneous polynomial f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) of degree
di in Ti for each i ∈ [m] is a linear combination of mixed moments mG (T1 , . . . , Tm ) where each Ti
corresponds to di vertices of G.
We again give a proof in Appendix A, which is essentially identical to that of Theorem 3.2. This
is a non-trivial generalization even in the case di = 2 of matrices, due to [Pro76], and we give a
simple and unified proof for either setting.
   These results are usually stated for the action of O(n) on all “axes” of a general tensor T ∈ (Rn )⊗p , but by
   5

Proposition A.1 they also immediately apply to invariants of symmetric tensors.


                                                       12
3.2   Open Tensor Networks as Equivariant Polynomials
We can also consider vector-, matrix-, or tensor-valued functions f (T ) whose outputs transform
properly when T is transformed. This will include, for instance, an optimal algorithm for recon-
structing the spike in tensor PCA.
Definition 3.7. Let f be a function from p-ary tensors to ℓ-ary tensors. We say that f is equiv-
ariant if for any T and any orthogonal matrix Q ∈ O(n),
                                         f (Q · T ) = Q · f (T ) ,
and similarly if f is a function from multiple tensors to ℓ-ary tensors.
Example 3.8. Let Q be a matrix. If v is a left eigenvector of T , then Q·v = vQ is a left eigenvector
of Q · T = Q⊤ T Q. Thus the output of a spectral algorithm that returns the dominant eigenvector
of a matrix is equivariant.
   Given the machinery we have set up, it is easy to generalize Theorem 3.2 to show that the
equivariant polynomials are linear combinations of “open graph” moments where the graph has ℓ
open edges; see [Wey46, p.64] and [ABP73, p.286]. These are also known as partial contractions.
Definition 3.9. An t-open multigraph G is a triple (V, E, E ′ ) where each edge e ∈ E ∪ E ′ is a
multiset e ⊆ V with |e| = 2 if e ∈ E and |e| = 1 if e ∈ E ′ , and where |E ′ | = t. We say E and E ′
are the sets of closed and open edges respectively. The degree of a vertex v ∈ V is the total number
of times it appears in E ∪ E ′ , including self-loops in E where it occurs twice. We say G is p-regular
if every vertex has degree p.
Definition 3.10. Let T ∈ Symp (Rn ) and let G = (V, E, E ′ ) be a p-regular open multigraph with
                                      ′
|E ′ | = ℓ open edges. Let i ∈ [n]E∪E denote a labeling of the edges with indices in [n]. Let i(E) and
i(E ′ ) denote the labels of the closed and open edges respectively, and as in Definition 1.3 let i(∂v)
denote the multiset of indices i(e) associated with the edges e incident to v. Then, the associated
open graph moment mG (T ) is the following ℓ-ary tensor,
                                                     X Y
                                    mG (T )i(E ′ ) =          Ti(∂v) .
                                                    i(E)∈[n]E v∈V

For a set of tensors T , we similarly define
                                                     X      Y
                                mG (T )i(E ′ ) =                   T (v)i(∂v) .
                                                   i(E)∈[n]E v∈V

where for each v ∈ V , T (v) ∈ T has arity deg v.
In words, these partial contractions are graph moments where we sum only over the indices on
closed edges, and leave the indices on open edges as unbound variables.
Example 3.11. We show three 3-regular open multigraphs in Figure 4. The first two have one
                                                                               P mG (T )i(E ′ ) result
open edge each, and the third has two open edges. Thus their partial contractions
in a vector or matrix. For the first graph we have the partial trace mG (T )i = j Tijj , and for the
third one we have the matrix
                                            X
                               mG (T )ii′ =     Tijk Tjℓm Ti′ ℓn Tkmn .                          (15)
                                             jkℓmn


                                                      13
                             j
                                     i                              i                i´




                                                          P mG (T ) yield vectors or matrices, i.e.,
Figure 4: Three open multigraphs whose partial contractions
1-ary or 2-ary tensors. The first is the vector mG (T )i = j Tijj . The third is the matrix mG (T )ii′
given by (15).

                                 T               T
                         Q       Q       Q   Q       Q          =       QT   T   Q



Figure 5: On the left, conjugating a 3-ary tensor T by an orthogonal matrix Q. Each index of
T undergoes the same orthogonal basis change. On the right, for a 2-ary tensor, i.e., a matrix,
this coincides with the usual notion of conjugation Q⊤ T Q. Arrows indicate that T ’s indices are
contracted with the left index i of Qij . Reversing an arrow converts Q to its transpose Q⊤ .


This is the graph moment GK4 (T ) given by (3) except that i and i′ are open indices rather than
being set equal and summed over. Taking the trace of this matrix closes this loop and yields GK4 (T ).

    We may already start to glean some of the benefits of this graphical language. For example, it
lets us understand more clearly the change of basis from Definition 1.1.

Remark 3.12. As shown in Figure 5, Q · T consists of placing a copy of Q on each “outward”
edge of T . Since Q is not symmetric, we place arrows on the edges to indicate which of its indices
is contracted with an index of T ; reversing this arrow swaps Q’s indices and thus converts it to its
transpose Q⊤ . In the matrix case p = 2, Q · T corresponds to standard matrix conjugation, since
Q⊤ T Q can also be written T · Q⊗2 :
                              X                       X
                   Q⊤ T Q ′ =        Q⊤                   Tii′ Qij Qi′ j ′ = T · Q⊗2 jj ′ .
                                                                                    
                                      ji Tii′ Qi′ j ′ =
                           jj
                                     i,i′                 ii′

Using this, the proof that graph moments are invariant functions becomes straightforward.

Proposition 3.13. For any T ∈ Symp (Rn ), any multigraph G, and any Q ∈ O(n), mG (Q · T ) =
mG (T ). The same holds for mixed moments mG (T ) as in Definition 3.3.

Proof. Since reversing the direction of an edge changes Q to Q⊤ , placing outgoing Q’s on the
edges of each vertex creates a pair QQ⊤ on each edge. Since Q is orthogonal, Q⊤ = Q−1 and
QQ⊤ = 1.

    Finally, analogous results hold for open graph moments as did for closed ones. First, just as
closed graph moments are invariant, open graph moments are equivariant:

Proposition 3.14. For any T ∈ Symp (Rn ), any open multigraph G, and any Q ∈ O(n), mG (Q ·
T ) = Q · mG (T ). The same holds for mixed moments mG (T ) as in Definition 3.10.



                                                     14
Proof. As in Proposition 3.13, placing an outgoing Q on the edges of each vertex causes a canceling
pair QQ⊤ = 1 on each closed edge, and an outgoing Q on each open edge. The latter transform
mG (T ) to Q · mG (T ).

   And, as for closed graph moments and invariant polynomials, the open graph moments span all
equivariant polynomials.

Theorem 3.15. Let p be an equivariant function from p-ary tensors to          P ℓ-ary tensors. If f is a
homogeneous polynomial of degree d, then f (T ) is a linear combination i αi mGi (T ) where the Gi
are p-regular open multigraphs with d vertices and ℓ open edges.
    More generally, let f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) be an equivariant function that yields ℓ-ary tensors. If p is
a homogeneous polynomial of degree di in each Ti , then is a linear combination of mixed moments
mG (T1 , . . . , Tm ) where G has ℓ open edges and each Ti corresponds to di vertices of G.

Once again, we defer a proof to Appendix A.

3.3    Invariant Tensors, Brauer Space, and the Weingarten Function
An important role in our calculations will be played by the subspace of vectors in (Rn )⊗ℓ that is
invariant under the action of O(n) on this space, i.e., the vectors w such that Q⊗ℓ w = w for all
Q ∈ O(n) (not to be confused with our other discussion of invariant polynomials). In our case
we will have ℓ = pd for working with G ∈ Gd,p . This is sometimes called the Brauer space after
Brauer’s early work on its structure.
     In particular, his classic results in the representation theory of Lie groups [Bra37] show that this
subspace is spanned by vectors of the following form. Assume ℓ is even; otherwise, since −1 ∈ O(n),
only the zero vector is invariant. Then, for each perfect matching µ = {(t1 , t′1 ), . . . , (tℓ/2 , t′ℓ/2 )} of
[ℓ], define                                                Y
                                          w(µ)i1 ,...,iℓ =     δit ,it′                                     (16)
                                                         (t,t′ )∈µ

where δ is the Kronecker delta δi,i′ = 1 if i = i′ and 0 otherwise. In tensor network notation, we can
regard these matching vectors as ℓ-ary tensors consisting of a set of “cups,” each of which ensures
that two indices are identical. Alternatively, one may view them  P as tensor powers of the identity
matrix, though viewed as a tensor rather than a matrix, i.e. ( ni=1 ei ⊗ ei )⊗ℓ/2 , subject to various
permutations of the vector axes. Note in particular that the w(µ), unlike the tensors discussed
earlier, are not symmetric tensors; indeed, their symmetrizations are all the same, not depending
on the matching µ.
    For instance, if ℓ = 6 and µ = {(1, 3), (2, 5), (4, 6)} then w(µ) =            . These vectors are
invariant since, if we apply an orthogonal matrix Q to both indices of a cup, Q and Q⊤ meet in
the middle and cancel (just as we will discuss in Proposition 3.13). Brauer’s result cited above is
that these are all of the invariant tensors.

Definition 3.16. For a finite set X, write M(X) for the set of perfect matchings of X.

Proposition 3.17. The subspace of O(n)-invariant tensors in (Rn )⊗ℓ is spanned by the w(µ) over
µ ∈ M([ℓ]).




                                                      15
   We will also need to work with the orthogonal projection to this invariant subspace. On the one
hand, by general representation theory, this object is just the averaging operator over all rotations,

                                              Πℓ := E Q⊗ℓ ,                                       (17)
                                                      Q

viewed as an operator on (Rn )⊗ℓ (equivalently, as a large matrix formed as the Kronecker power).
In particular, Πℓ contains as its entries the moments of the Haar measure over O(n). This gives
an elegant connection between the probability theory of the Haar measure and the representation
theory of O(n).
   On the other hand, by elementary linear algebra, Πℓ is given by some linear combination of
rank one matrices,                        X
                                    Πℓ =      Wgµ,ν w(µ) ⊗ w(ν).                             (18)
                                          µ,ν

Indeed, the matrix Wg can be taken to be the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse of the Gram matrix
of the w(µ). Its entries as a function of µ, ν are known as the (orthogonal) Weingarten function.
    In particular, Πℓ therefore admits a diagrammatic description, as a linear combination of op-
erator “switching” one matching to another (the outer products of two matching vectors). For
instance, Π2 is the “cupcap”
                                                        1
                                       Π2 = E Q ⊗ Q =         ,
                                              Q         n
namely the outer product of w({(1, 2)}) =            with itself. The normalization 1/n comes from the
fact that
                                          2
                                              = tr        =     = n,

corresponding to the trace of the identity matrix equaling n. Π4 is already more complicated:

                                  
                         1
             Π4 =                  (n + 1)                       −              −
                  (n + 2)n(n − 1)


                                           −              + (n + 1)             −

                                                                                        
                                           −                     −      + (n + 1)

Fortunately, there is a combinatorial description of the Weingarten function that aids in computing
these coefficients, as we discuss in Appendix C.

3.4   Low-Degree Polynomial Algorithms
The idea to consider polynomials as algorithms for statistical problems with degree as a measure of
complexity first arose from [BHK+ 19, HS17, HKP+ 17] and the framework has been subsequently
refined over the years, e.g., by [Hop18, KWB22]; see, for instance, [BEAH+ 22] for a modern account.
Originally this line of work considered simple “planted versus null” hypothesis testing problems, but
later extensions treated other styles of questions such as estimation [SW22], optimization [GJW24],

                                                     16
and refutation [KVWX23], as well as more complex testing problems [RSWY23]. The low-degree
polynomial framework has by now found numerous applications and is a leading approach to un-
derstand computational complexity of statistical problems.
   We will next specify what it means for a polynomial to solve a detection or reconstruction
problem.
Definition 3.18 (Low-degree advantage).
                                                                     E     f (Y )
                            Adv≤D (Q, P) :=          sup            p Y ∼P         .             (19)
                                                 f ∈R[Y ]≤D          EY ∼Q f (Y )2
                                               EY ∼Q f (Y )2 ̸=0

Remark 3.19. This notion has been standard since the work of [HS17, HKP+ 17, Hop18], where
its boundedness, i.e., Adv≤D (Q, P) = O(1), indicates hardness at degree D. The value Adv is also
called the norm of the low-degree likelihood ratio [Hop18] but the terminology Adv avoids defining
likelihood ratios and low-degree projections. While boundedness of Adv does not completely rule out
low-degree polynomials as a test statistic, it means that we cannot use Chebyshev’s inequality to show
that one succeeds. If Adv = ω(1), this may suggest success of low-degree tests, but a number of recent
examples show that this is not necessarily the case [BEAH+ 22, COGHK+ 22, DMW23, DDL23].
    In light of this, one should really define “success” for low-degree tests not in terms of Adv but
by the notion of “strong separation” first coined in [BEAH+ 22]. This way, “success” legitimately
implies a high-probability distinguisher, and furthermore “success” can be precluded by showing
Adv = O(1) (or even by bounding a conditional variant of Adv). There is also a related notion of
“weak separation”; again, see [BEAH+ 22].
    Our Theorem 1.6 (or rather, the formal version Theorem 5.7) will focus on showing Adv is
either O(1) or ω(1), but we expect that our proof of Adv = ω(1) could be strengthened to a proof of
strong separation.
   For reconstruction tasks, success is naturally measured in terms of mean squared error.
Definition 3.20 (Low-degree minimum mean squared error [SW22]).
                           MMSE≤D (P) :=          inf           E      ∥f (Y ) − x∥2 .           (20)
                                              f ∈R[Y ]n
                                                      ≤D (x,Y )∼P


   Similar to Fact 1.1 of [SW22], this can be equivalently formulated in terms of “correlation”:
                               MMSE≤D (P) = E∥x∥2 − Corr≤D (P)2                                  (21)
where Corr is defined below.
Definition 3.21 (Low-degree correlation).
                                                                E(x,Y )∼P ⟨x, f (Y )⟩
                          Corr≤D (P) :=          sup             p                    .          (22)
                                             f ∈R[Y ]n
                                                     ≤D
                                                                   EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2
                                          EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2 ̸=0

In tensor PCA we have ∥x∥2 = n, so to rule out non-trivial reconstruction we will aim to show
Corr≤D (P)2 = o(n).
    Finally, to relate low-degree polynomial algorithms to our study of invariant polynomials, we
show that both the advantage and correlation may be restricted to invariant polynomials without
changing their value, provided the underlying distributions have certain invariance properties.

                                                     17
Proposition 3.22. Suppose that both Q and P are invariant distributions. Then,

                                                                          E     f (Y )
                             Adv≤D (Q, P) =                  sup         p Y ∼P         .         (23)
                                                      f ∈R[Y ]≤D          EY ∼Q f (Y )2
                                                     f invariant
                                                    EY ∼Q f (Y )2 ̸=0


Proof. Consider f¯(Y ) := EQ∼Haar(n) f (Q · Y ). Then, f¯ is invariant. And, we have

                            E f¯(Y ) =          E            E f (Q · Y ) = E f (Y ),             (24)
                           Y ∼P           Q∼Haar(n) Y ∼P                          Y ∼P


by the invariance of P. The same holds for Q with f replaced by f 2 , and the result follows.

Remark 3.23. By the same operations on f , one may also show that, outside of the low-degree
framework but under the same assumptions on P and Q, if there is a test statistic achieving given
Type I and II error probabilities, then there is an invariant test statistic achieving the same.

Proposition 3.24. Suppose that P is a distribution over Rn × Symp (Rn ) such that (x, Y ) ∼ P has
the same law as (Qx, Q · Y ) for any Q ∈ O(n) (that is, so that P viewed as a distribution over
x ⊗ Y is invariant). Then,

                                                                       E(x,Y )∼P ⟨x, f (Y )⟩
                           Corr≤D (P) =              sup                p                    .    (25)
                                                 f ∈R[Y ]n
                                                         ≤D
                                                                          EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2
                                               f equivariant
                                              EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2 ̸=0


Proof. Consider f¯(Y ) := EQ∼Haar(n) Q⊤ f (Q · Y ). f¯ is equivariant, since

                  f¯(R · Y ) =      E        Q⊤ f (QR · Y ) = E RQ⊤ f (Q · Y ) = Rf¯(Y ).         (26)
                                 Q∼Haar(n)                              Q

And we have

                            E     ⟨x, f¯(Y )⟩ =          E             E     ⟨x, Q⊤ f (Q · Y )⟩
                         (x,Y )∼P                 Q∼Haar(n) (x,Y )∼P

                                              =E          E       ⟨Qx, f (Q · Y )⟩
                                                  Q (x,Y )∼P

                                              =       E       ⟨x, f (Y )⟩,
                                                  (x,Y )∼P

and similarly for the denominator,

                                E ∥f¯(Y )∥ = E ∥
                                          2
                                                                   E        Q⊤ f (Q · Y )∥2
                            Y ∼P                  Y ∼P       Q∼Haar(n)
                                                                        ⊤            2
                                              ≤        E            E ∥Q f (Q · Y )∥
                                                  Q∼Haar(n) Y ∼P
                                                                                   2
                                              =        E            E ∥f (Q · Y )∥
                                                  Q∼Haar(n) Y ∼P

                                              = E ∥f (Y )∥2
                                                  Y ∼P



                                                             18
where we have used Jensen’s inequality followed by the invariance of the marginal distribution of P
on Y . The result then follows. We note here that, because of the inequality in the last calculation,
f¯ can actually have strictly larger objective function in the correlation than f ; on the other hand,
the equivariant polynomials are included in the original maximization for the correlation, so the
stated result is in fact an exact formula and not just a bound for Corr≤D (P).

Remark 3.25. When p is even, the reconstruction problem has an ambiguity since v is only
identifiable up to a sign. In this case we can define g(Y ) as returning v ⊗ v, or the entire rank-1
tensor v ⊗p . More generally if we define the accuracy of g as ⟨g(Y ), v ⊗p ⟩, the same equivariance
argument applies.


4     Tensorial Finite Free Cumulants and Invariant Bases
4.1    Frobenius Pairs
A special role in our techniques will be played by the following multigraph, which is called the
“melon” in high energy physics.6

Definition 4.1. The Frobenius pair F of degree p is the p-regular multigraph on two vertices with
p parallel edges connecting the vertices.

We call this the Frobenius pair because the associated graph moment is the Frobenius norm:
                                                     X
                                mF (T ) = ∥T ∥2F =         Ti21 ,...,ip .                  (27)
                                                                     i1 ,...,ip ∈[n]

For instance, for a 3-ary tensor we have
                                                          T         X
                                                                              2
                                                        i j k   =           Tijk .
                                                          T         i,j,k

For 2-ary tensors F is a 2-cycle, and we recover the matrix case
                                                T
                                            i       j   = ∥T ∥2F = tr(T ⊤ T ) .
                                                T

For multigraphs that include multiple Frobenius pairs as connected components, we use “Frobenii”
as a plural and urge others to do the same.
    As we have mentioned in the Introduction, the issue that Frobenii raise is that they are the
only connected graph moment whose terms are not centered for generic (or, say, Gaussian as in the
Wigner law) tensors T . This will create an obstruction to orthogonality for our initial definition of
finite free cumulants, which we will need to circumvent with an additional centering operation.
   6
     A related recursive structure gives the class of “melonic graphs” (the melon among them) that play an important
role in other diagrammatic computations; see, e.g., [Evn21] or Chapter 4 of [Gur17].




                                                                19
4.2   Distinct-Index Graph Moments
In order to define tensor cumulants, we first follow recent work [Wei23] that modifies graph moments
by requiring that the indices on the edges be distinct.

Definition 4.2. Given a p-ary symmetric tensor T and a p-regular multigraph G with |E| = b
edges, define                              X      Y
                             m!G (T ) =               Ti(∂v) ,                         (28)
                                                             i∈[n]E          v∈V
                                                    i1 , . . . , ib distinct

where the ! connotes distinctness.

Clearly m!G (T ) = 0 unless n ≥ b. As with ordinary graph moments, we define m!G (T ) = 1 if G is
empty.

Remark 4.3. If T is a random tensor whose law is invariant under conjugation by orthogonal
matrices, or even just conjugation by permutation matrices, then every term in the sum arising
from E m!G (T ) is equal. In that case, E m!G (T ) is just the number of distinct tuples of indices, i.e.,
nb = n(n − 1)(n − 2) · · · (n − b + 1), times the expectation of any one of them.

   Requiring distinct indices has an important consequence: except in a Frobenius pair, vertices
cannot have matching edge neighborhoods. To deal with Frobenii we also define a centered version
of m!G as follows.

Definition 4.4. Let T be a p-ary symmetric tensor and let G = (V, E) be a p-regular multigraph
with |E| = b edges. Let U be the set of vertices forming Frobenius pairs, and for a given pair
π = {u, v} ⊆ U let i(π) = i(∂u) = i(∂v) be the p indices appearing on the edges of π. Then define
                                                                         
                                    X           Y           Y          
                     mcG (T ) =                     Ti(∂v)       2
                                                                Ti(π) −1  .                 (29)
                                          i∈[n]E            v∈V \U             π⊆U
                                 i1 , . . . , ib distinct

This definition centers the Frobenii so that mcG has zero expectation in the Wigner model for all
G. Recall that we abbreviate Wig(p, n, σ 2 ) as Wig when σ 2 = 1 and p and n are clear.

Proposition 4.5. Let G be a nonempty p-regular multigraph, and let W ∼ Wig. Then

                                                   E mcG (W ) = 0 .
                                                   W

Proof. We will show that the summand in (29) has zero expectation for each fixed set of indices
i ∈ [n]E . If G has a connected component which is not a Frobenius pair, then the Wi(∂v) in the
first product are all distinct and independent for different v ∈ V \ W . They are also independent
from the Wi(π) , which are independent from each other for different Frobenii p.
     Thus the expectation is a product of expectations. For any i ∈ [n]p we have E Wi = 0, so the
first product has zero expectation if V \ U is nonempty. For the second products, the p indices in
                                     2
i(π) are distinct, and therefore E Wi(π) = 1. Thus the second product has zero expectation if G has
any Frobenii.



                                                             20
    Note what has happened here. As in Proposition 5.2, the only nonzero contributions to
EW mG (W ) correspond to even colorings of G’s edges, where vertex neighborhoods i(∂v) are re-
peated. By requiring all indices to be distinct, we force the vertex neighborhoods to be distinct,
except on Frobenius pairs where we center the normal distribution.
    More generally, in planted models Y = T + W where W is Wigner noise, the expectation of
mcG (Y ) is simply the distinct-index moment of the signal T . This addresses one of the drawbacks of
ordinary graph moments, namely that their expectations in the spiked model involves mixed terms
with the signal at some vertices and the noise at others.
Proposition 4.6. For any p-regular multigraph G and T ∈ Symp (Rn ) we have

                                     E      mcG (T + W ) = m!G (T ) .                           (30)
                                   W ∼Wig

Proof. Fix i ∈ [n]E . Then as in Proposition 4.5, the entries Yi(∂v) at distinct vertices v which
are not part of Frobenius pairs are independent, and have expectation Ti(∂v) . Similarly, the terms
  2 − 1 on distinct Frobenius pairs are independent, and have expectation
Yi(π)

                E[(T + W )2i(π) − 1] = Ti(π)
                                         2                          2
                                             + 2Ti(π) E Wi(π) + E[Wi(π)           2
                                                                        ] − 1 = Ti(π) ,
which for a pair π = (u, v) is the same as Ti(∂u) Ti(∂v) . Since the expectation of a product of
independent variables is the product of their expectations, we are left with v∈V Ti(∂v) = m!G (T ).
                                                                            Q



    Helpfully, these centered distinct-index moments have zero covariance in the Wigner model if
their graphs are nonisomorphic. That is, they are orthogonal with respect to the inner product
⟨f, g⟩ = ET ∼Wig f (T ) g(T ).
Proposition 4.7. Let G, H be p-regular multigraphs. If they are not isomorphic, then

                                       E     mcG (W )mcH (W ) = 0 .
                                    W ∼Wig

Proof. With the restriction that the edge indices in each graph are distinct, we have a sum of
products like that in (29), but where i(G) and i(H) are each tuples of distinct indices. (This is not
to be confused with mcG⊔H , in which case all |EG | + |EH | indices would be distinct.)
    Fix i ∈ [n]EG ⊔EH . We will show that if i makes a nonzero contribution to EmcG (W )mcH (W ),
then G and H are isomorphic. First, if v ∈ VG is not part of a Frobenius pair, then Ti(∂v) appears
exactly once in G, and similarly if v ∈ VH is not in a Frobenius pair. Thus each such vertex in G
must be matched with one in H, with corresponding indices on their edges. This establishes an
isomorphism between the components of G with those of H that do not consist of Frobenii.
    It remains to prove that G and H have the same number of Frobenii and are hence isomorphic.
Suppose without loss of generality that G has more Frobenii than H does. Then for some Frobenius
pair π = (u, v) in G, the indices i(π) do not appear in H. Since the entries of T are independent,
                     2 − 1] = 0 to the product, in which case i’s contribution to Emc (W )mc (W )
this contributes E[Ti(π)                                                                G     H
is zero.
    Thus if any i makes a nonzero contribution to the inner product, G ∼  = H.
   We can also compute the variances of the centered moments by counting a slightly nontraditional
kind of graph automorphism. These automorphisms will appear again in the inner products of
cumulants.

                                                   21
Definition 4.8. Let G = (V, E) be a multigraph. Give each edge e ∈ E an arbitrary direction,
and write it as an ordered pair (e1 , e2 ). Then let an edge automorphism be a one-to-one mapping
ϕ : E → E such that, for all e, e′ ∈ E, and for each j, j ′ ∈ {1, 2}, ϕ(e)j = ϕ(e′ )j ′ if and only
if ej = e′j ′ . In other words, ϕ preserves whether e and e′ share their “heads” or their “tails”, or
whether one’s head is the other’s tail. Note that ϕ(e) = e means that ϕ(e) is either (e1 , e2 ) or
(e2 , e1 ), where the latter reverses e’s direction. Finally, let eAut(G) be the group of such mappings.
    Clearly an edge automorphism determines a traditional vertex automorphism, i.e., a mapping
ψ : V → V such that (ψ(u), ψ(v)) ∈ E if and only if (u, v) ∈ E. For simple graphs, the equivalence
between the two types of automorphism is one-to-one. This more elaborate definition includes
permuting parallel edges in a multigraph, as well as reversing the direction of a self-loop without
moving its endpoint. In terms of the group Aut(G) of vertex automorphisms, we have
                                                         Y
                     |eAut(G)| = 2#{self-loops in G} ×        t! × |Aut(G)| .                  (31)
                                                             bundles of t
                                                            parallel edges

Proposition 4.9. Let G be a p-regular multigraph with b edges. Then

                                      E      mcG (W )2 = nb |eAut(G)| .                            (32)
                                    W ∼Wig

Proof. First suppose that G has no Frobenii or self-loops. The nonzero contributions to the second
moment consist of even colorings of the disjoint union of two copies of G, but now where the colors
within each copy of G are distinct. The only such colorings are those like Figure 9, where each
edge e on the left copy of G has a counterpart ϕ(e) on the right with the same index, and where
each vertex v on the left has a counterpart ψ(v) on the right with the same neighborhood. This
describes a vertex automorphism and a permutation of each bundle of parallel edges. Along with
the n!/(n − b)! distinct labelings of the left copy, we obtain
                                            2
                                                      Y
                                     c           b
                               E mG (W ) = n               t! × |Aut(G)| .
                           W ∼Wig
                                                      bundles of t
                                                     parallel edges

    Now suppose that some vertex v has t self-loops. Their indices can be permuted, but we already
have the factor t! since these count as a bundle of parallel edges. The other effect is that the entry
Ti(v) has variance larger than 1 since some indices are repeated. Specifically, if i(v) contains t pairs
                                                      2
of repeated indices, by Proposition B.1 we have E Ti(v)   = 2t . Taking the product over all vertices
gives the factor 2#{self-loops in G} .
    Finally we consider the possibility that G contains one or more Frobenii. As in Proposition 4.7,
for each Frobenius pair π in the left copy of G, its indices i(π) must appear in a counterpart pair
on the right; otherwise Ti(π) is independent of the other entries, and centering gives a factor of
    2 − 1] = 0. The p parallel edges of π and its counterpart can be matched in p! ways, and for
E[Ti(π)
each matching they contribute a factor of
                                                   2 
                                              2
                                         E Ti(π) − 1      = 2,

where we use the fact that Ti(π) ∼ N (0, 1). Finally, if we have t Frobenius pairs, they can be
matched with each other in t! ways, and their total contribution is (2p!)t t!. But this is also the
number of edge automorphisms of the disjoint union of t Frobenii, so (32) continues to hold.

                                                     22
4.3   Finite Free Cumulants and Additive Free Convolution
The orthogonality of the distinct-index graph moments suggests that they are a good basis for the
space of polynomial functions of T with respect to the Gaussian inner product. However, they are
not invariant with respect to orthogonal basis changes. This motivates the following definition,
where we symmetrize them with random orthogonal rotations.

Definition 4.10. Let T be a symmetric p-ary tensor and let G be a p-regular multigraph. Define
the free cumulant κG (T ) as                h            i
                                 κG (T ) = E m!G (Q · T ) ,                               (33)
                                                        Q

and the centered free cumulant κcG (T ) as

                                              κcG (T ) = E [mcG (Q · T )] ,                               (34)
                                                         Q

where Q is a Haar-random orthogonal matrix. If G is the empty graph then κG = κcG = 1.

Remark 4.11. Recall that m!G (T ) and mcG (T ) are both summations over assignments of distinct
indices to the edges of G. If there are b edges, then there are nb such assignments. After sym-
metrizing T to Q · T and taking the expectation over Q ∼ Haar(n), by symmetry each of these terms
will be equal. If we view the original summation as splitting each edge in half and connecting either
end to the matrix ei ⊗ ei , where i is the label that that edge gets in that term of the summation,
then the symmetrization yields an expectation where the e1 , . . . , en are replaced by a Haar-random
orthonormal basis of Rn . In notation, we may fix i ∈ [n]E an arbitrary distinct index labelling of
the edges, in which case we have
                                    Y
                κG (T ) = nb E         (Q · T )i(∂v) ,                                            (35)
                               Q∼Haar
                                        v∈V
                                               Y                            Y
               κcG (T ) = nb     E                       (Q · T )i(∂v)            ((Q · T )2i(F ) − 1).   (36)
                               Q∼Haar
                                        v∈V (G\Frob(G))                  F ∈Frob(G)

    These functions κG are manifestly invariant, and κG coincides with κcG unless G includes one
or more Frobenii. We call them free cumulants because, if p = 2 and G is the cycle of size t, they
coincide—up to an appropriate scaling factor—with the classic free cumulant κt of free probability
in the limit n → ∞ (e.g. [MFC+ 19, Eq.27]). If G is a disjoint union of two or more cycles, the
n → ∞ limit yields the so-called higher-order free cumulants [CMSS06] which [Sem24] used recently
for orthogonally-invariant denoising problems in matrices.
    One of the most useful properties of the free cumulants is additivity [NŚ11]. In classical statis-
tics, cumulants are polynomials κ in the moments of a random variable with the property that,
if A and B are independent random variables, then the cumulant of their convolution A + B
is the sum of their cumulants: κ(A + B) = κ(A) + κ(B). For instance, the first, second, and
third cumulants are the expectation κ1 (A) = E[A], the variance κ2 (A) = E[A2 ] − E[A]2 , and
κ3 (A) = E[A3 ] − 3 E[A2 ] E[A] + 2 E[A]3 . The tth cumulant κt is homogeneous in the sense that it is
a linear combination of products of moments with total order t.
    In the nonabelian setting of free probability (e.g. [MS17]), A and B are matrix-valued random
variables in Rn×n , and a central question is to determine the typical spectrum of A + Q⊤ BQ where


                                                             23
Q ∈ O(n) is a Haar-random orthogonal matrix. (One can also study complex-valued matrices
where R is unitary.) While A + Q⊤ BQ is a random matrix even for fixed A and B, in the limit
n → ∞ its empirical spectral distribution converges to a particular probability measure under mild
conditions provided the same convergence holds for A and B. Moreover, this limiting measure is a
function of the limiting spectral distributions of A and B individually. If we call these distributions
α and β respectively, then the limiting law of the spectrum of A + Q⊤ BQ is written α ⊞ β and
called the free convolution of α and β. The free cumulants are like the classical cumulants in that
they are polynomials in the moments of a measure, but they are additive with respect to this free
convolution operation rather than ordinary convolution (which is the operation on distributions
induced by addition of independent scalar random variables), i.e.,

                                          κt (α ⊞ β) = κt (α) + κt (β) .                                         (37)

The analogy with classical cumulants is that, since conjugating by Q randomizes B’s eigenvectors,
A and Q⊤ BQ are as independent as two matrices can be given their spectra. We say that they are
freely independent.
    We call the κG free cumulants of a tensor both because they coincide with matrix free cumulants
in the limit n → ∞ when G is a cycle, and because they satisfy an exact additivity property even
for finite n.7 The latter is closely related to the additivity property for distinct index moments we
gave in Proposition 4.6.

Proposition 4.12. Let G = (V, E) be a connected p-regular graph with b = |E| edges, and let A
and B be symmetric p-ary tensors. Let Q ∈ O(n) be a Haar-random orthogonal matrix. Then

                                     E κG (A + Q · B) = κG (A) + κG (B) .                                        (38)
                                     Q

More generally, if G is not necessarily connected,
                                                       X     nb
                           E κG (A + Q · B) =                       κGA (A) κGB (B).                             (39)
                           Q
                                                  G ⊔G =G
                                                          nb A nb B
                                                   A    B


Here the sum is over pairs of graphs GA = (VA , EA ) and GB = (VB , EB ) such that G = GA ⊔ GB ,
and where bA = |EA | and bB = |EB | with bA + bB = b. In particular, GA and GB are disjoint
unions of connected components of G.

Proof. We start with connected graphs. We will prove a partial additivity for the distinct-index
moments,
                             E m!G (A + Q · B) = m!G (A) + κG (B) .                          (40)
                                    Q

Symmetrizing and replacing A with R · A for a Haar-random R, and using the fact that QR is also
Haar-random, yields (38).
    First we give a more diagrammatic picture of m!G . Extracting a given product of entries in (28)
corresponds to placing a basis vector ei on each edge i—or rather two copies of ei , pointing in each
direction—and contracting these vectors with the tensors at their endpoints as in Figure 6.
   7
    While it seems technical to verify, it is natural to conjecture that in the case p = 2, our κCk for Ck the k-cycle
should be closely related to the finite free cumulants defined by [AP18] in terms of characteristic polynomials.



                                                         24
                             1                    3                  T         T
                                       2
                                  T         T
                                                                e1 e1 e2 e2 e3 e3

Figure 6: A given term in (28) corresponds to placing basis vectors ei on each edge i, and contracting
them with i’s endpoints. That is, m!G (T ) is the sum of the diagram on the right over all distinct
tuples e1 , e2 , e3 in the orthogonal basis.


      Expanding m!G (A + B) gives 2|V | terms, where A appears on some vertices and B appears on
the others. (Except for the distinct-index requirement, these cross-terms are mixed graph moments
as in Definition 3.3.) Call these two sets of vertices VA and VB respectively.
      Now consider the effect of replacing B with Q · B. This applies the projection operator Πℓ =
E Q⊗ℓ defined in (108) with ℓ = d|VB |, which is a linear combination of outer products of matching
vectors. However, unlike in the proof of Theorem 3.2, these matchings only apply to the half-edges
incident to vertices in VB . Since G is connected, if VA and VB are both nonempty, there is at
least one edge i in the cut between them. But in each matching contributing to Πℓ , the copy of ei
incident to VB is matched with ej for some other edge j incident to VB as shown in Figure 7. Since
⟨ei , ej ⟩ = 0, any such term is zero.
      This implies that the only nonzero contributions to m!G (A + Q · B) come from the terms where
VA or VB is empty, i.e., where the vertices are either all labeled with A or all labeled with Q · B.
But these terms are exactly m!G (A) and κG (B) as stated.
      For graphs with multiple connected components, the same argument implies that each com-
ponent is labeled entirely with A or with B. Call the unions of these components GA and GB
respectively; then each such partition contributes κGA (A) κGB (B). Since all the indices in G are
distinct, not just those within GA or GB , we need to divide the prefactor nb appearing in κG (see
Remark 4.11) by the analogous prefactors nbA and nbB for κGA and κGB . This yields (39).

   In fact, this additivity phenomenon is more general and a version of it is enjoyed both by the
centered κcG and further generalizations thereof. To present this version, it is convenient to work
over a more general family of centered cumulants.

Definition 4.13. Write conn(G) for the set of connected components of G. Given x ∈ Rconn(G) ,
define
                                                                     !
                                    X          Y       Y
                   mcG (T ; x) :=                         Ti(∂v) − xC ,
                                                i∈[n]E       C∈conn(G)   v∈C
                                         i1 ,...,ib distinct

                          κcG (T ; x) := E mcG (Q · T ; x).
                                         Q

Our definition from earlier is mcG (T ) = mcG (T ; x) where xC = −1{C is a Frobenius pair} := −1Frob .

Proposition 4.14 (General additivity after centering). Suppose x = xA + xB . Then,

                      c
                                                     X     nb
                  E κG (A + Q · B; x) =                        κc (A; xA )κcGB (B; xB ).
                                                          bA bB GA
                                                                                                 (41)
                  Q
                                                G ⊔G =G
                                                        n   n
                                                 A    B




                                                           25
                                             A⨂s            Q·B⨂t
                                                     i



                                                           B⨂t                              B⨂t        …

       A⨂s           Q·B⨂t         =       A⨂s       Q     Q     Q    =      A⨂s
      … ei      ei    ej     ek …        … ei        ei    ej    ek …      … ei        ei    ej   ek …

Figure 7: Illustrating the proof of Proposition 4.12. As in (40), we consider m!G (A + Q · B).
Expanding the tensor product creates 2| V | cross-terms, where vertices in VA and VB are labeled
with A and Q · B respectively. Applying Q to the half-edges of VB creates a linear combination
of matchings. But if any edge i crosses from VA to VB , this matching creates an inner product
between its vector ei with some other ej , contributing ⟨ei , ej ⟩. Thus only partitions where VA and
VB are unions of connected components of G contribute to m!G (A + Q · B). In particular, if G is
connected then either VA = V and VB = ∅ or vice versa.

The proof is essentially identical to that of Proposition 4.12.
    Proposition 4.12 is recovered as the special case x = xA = xB = 0, which is formally pleasing
but not useful for analyzing low-degree polynomials,      because one of the free cumulants is the
symmetrized distinct index Frobenius pair i distinct (Q · T )2i , which is non-zero for any non-zero
                                              P
tensor. But, by choosing x, xA , and xB prudently, we may arrange for even the expected centered
free cumulants with G including Frobenii to vanish exactly.
    In particular, when we are using this with B ∼ Wig, then it is most natural to take xB = x =
−1Frob and xA = 0, because of the following.

Proposition 4.15. For any G, EW ∼Wig κcG (W ) = 0.

Proof. By orthogonal invariance of the law Wig, we have EW ∼Wig κcG (W ) = EW ∼Wig mcG (W ), and
the result then follows from Proposition 4.5.

   However, for other applications other ways of “distributing” the correction x are also useful, as
we will see in Section 6 on computational central limit theorems and distinguishing Wigner from
Wishart tensors.

4.4    Graph Moment Expansion of Finite Free Cumulants
Since the κG are invariant, by Theorem 3.2 they must admit an expansion in the graph moments
mH . Below we give an explicit such expansion, which will also prove useful below.

Definition 4.16 (Graph Weingarten function). Say that a perfect matching µ of [dp] realizes a
p-regular multigraph G on d unlabelled vertices if, when µ is viewed as a graph on [dp] and the sets
of vertices {1, . . . , p}, {p + 1, . . . , 2p} and so forth are each identified into a single vertex, then the




                                                      26
resulting graph is isomorphic to G. For two p-regular graphs G, H on a vertices, we write
                                                 X
                                   WgG,H :=             Wgµ,ν .                                      (42)
                                                   µ realizes G
                                                   ν realizes H

As a convention, if G and H have different numbers of vertices, we set WgG,H := 0.

   To attend to the normalizations that will appear in the calculations below, the following will
be useful.

Proposition 4.17. The number of matchings realizing G ∈ Gd,p is p!d d!/|eAut(G)|.

Proof. We may expand the claimed quantity as

                  p!d d!      d!                             p!d
                         =         · #{self-loops in G} Q                                     .      (43)
               |eAut(G)|   |Aut(G)| 2                     bundles of t parallel edges in G t!

Here the first term is the number of permutations of vertices that map any matching realizing G
to another different matching realizing G, and the second term is the same for permutations of
half-edges around each vertex.

Lemma 4.18. For any p-regular multigraph G with d vertices and b edges,

                                         nb                 X
                            κG (T ) =     d
                                              · |eAut(G)| ·   WgG,H mH (T ).                         (44)
                                        p! d!
                                                             H

The sum may be taken over all p-regular multigraphs H, but only those with d vertices will con-
tribute.

Proof. The graph moments may be defined in terms of matching vectors: if µ is a matching realizing
G, then mG (T ) = ⟨T ⊗d , w(µ)⟩. To be more explicit, for i ∈P[n]pd , call i compatible with µ if i
is constant on each pair matched under µ. Then, w(µ) =             i compatible with µ ei , which recovers
Definition 1.3 of mG (T ).
    Let us describe a variant of this for the distinct index moments. We say that i is distinctly
compatible with µ if i is compatible with µ and if i is distinct on distinct pairs in µ: that is, the
level sets of i are exactly the pairs in µ. Then if we define
                                                     X
                                       w! (µ) :=              ei ,
                                                     i distinctly
                                                  compatible with µ

then by the same token we have
                                         m!G (T ) = ⟨T ⊗d , w! (µ)⟩.




                                                     27
   Moreover, in the symmetrization we may take the adjoint of the application of Q and find

                           κG (T ) = E m!G (Q · T )
                                     Q

                                  = E⟨Q · T ⊗d , w! (µ)⟩
                                     Q

                                  = E⟨T ⊗d , Q⊤ · w! (µ)⟩
                                     Q

                                  = E⟨T ⊗d , Q⊗dp w! (µ)⟩
                                    Q
                                         X
                                                         ⊗d ⊗dp
                                  =                 E⟨T , Q ei ⟩
                                                           Q
                                        i distinctly
                                     compatible with µ


and using that every term is equal and does not depend on i (as may be seen by multiplying Q by
a permutation matrix),

                                  = nb E⟨T ⊗d , Q⊗dp eµ ⟩
                                           Q

                                  = n E⟨T ⊗d , Πd eµ ⟩
                                       b
                                           Q


where we write eµ = ei for some choice of i = i(µ) compatible with µ. Next, substituting in the
Weingarten function expression for Πd (see Appendix C) gives
                                           X
                                  = nb           Wgρ,ν ⟨w(ρ), eµ ⟩ ⟨T ⊗d , w(ν)⟩
                                           ρ,ν


and we have ⟨w(ρ), eµ ⟩ = 1{ρ = µ}, so this reduces to
                                           X
                                  = nb           Wgµ,ν ⟨T ⊗d , w(ν)⟩
                                           ν
                                           X
                                       b
                                  =n             Wgµ,ν mG(ν) (T ),
                                           ν


where, as before, G(ν) is the graph resulting from identifying groups of p vertices suitably in ν. We
notice that a given mH (T ) appears many times in this formula, once for each ν such that H = G(ν),
i.e., for each ν that realizes H. We can give a proper expansion of κG (T ) in graph moments by
combining these terms,
                                                                         !
                                           X          X
                                  = nb                           Wgµ,ν       mH (T ) .
                                           H      ν realizes H

   This expansion does not depend on the choice of µ realizing G. Indeed, this independence even
holds over the inner summations giving the coefficient of each mH (T ): choosing a different µ does
not affect the terms in this summation, since Wgµ,ν = Wgπµ,πν for a permutation π of the indices



                                                      28
being matched. By Proposition 4.17, we may then rewrite

                                                nb          X
                            κG (T ) =                         WgG,H mH (T )
                                        #{µ : µ realizes G}
                                                                     H
                                         nb                      X
                                   =             · |eAut(G)| ·       WgG,H mH (T ),
                                        p!d d!
                                                                 H

as claimed.

   Lastly, let us derive the simple relationship between the κcG and the κG .

Proposition 4.19. For any p-regular multigraph G on d vertices and b edges,
                                X
                    κcG (T ) =        (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S| κG\S (T ).                   (45)
                                    S⊆Frob(G)

Proof. Expanding the product in the definition of mcG (T ), we have
                                  X
                     mcG (T ) =         (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S| mG\S (T ),                 (46)
                                    S⊆Frob(G)

since there are p|S| indices in the summation forced to be distinct from the others but otherwise
playing no rule in the summands. Projecting each side to invariant polynomials (by averaging over
Q the value applied to Q · T ) gives the result.

4.5   Inner Products and Approximate Orthogonality
We now turn to computing the inner products EW ∼Wig κcG (W )κcH (W ), which will show that the κcG
form an approximately orthogonal basis for the invariant polynomials. We first establish a simple
preliminary.

Proposition 4.20. Suppose |V (G)| ≥ |V (H)|. Then, EW ∼Wig mcG (W )mH (W ) = 0 unless G and
H are isomorphic, and

                        E     mcG (W )mG (W ) =          E     mcG (W )2 = nb · |eAut(G)|.    (47)
                    W ∼Wig                            W ∼Wig

The proof is a simple extension of the argument for Propositions 4.7 and 4.9 on the values of
EW ∼Wig mcG (W )mcH (W ), as changing mcH to mH does not change the value of these inner products.
   The following is the main calculation of the inner products we are interested in. In fact, these
inner products are very close to the values of the graph Weingarten function.

                                         ̸ |V (H)|, then EW ∼Wig κcG (W )κcH (W ) = 0. If |V (G)| =
Lemma 4.21. For G, H ∈ Gd,p , if |V (G)| =
|V (H)| = d, then

                                                   (nb )2
                    E       κcG (W )κcH (W ) =            · |eAut(G)| · |eAut(H)| · WgG,H .   (48)
                  W ∼Wig                           p!d d!




                                                         29
Proof. Suppose without loss of generality that |V (G)| ≥ |V (H)|. We have

   E     κcG (W )κcH (W )
W ∼Wig

    =      E        mcG (U · W )mcH (V · W )
         W ∼Wig
        U,V ∼Haar

    =     E       mcG (W )mcH (V · W )
        W ∼Wig
        V ∼Haar
    =     E       mcG (W )κcH (W )
        W ∼Wig


and using Proposition 4.19 followed by Lemma 4.18, we find
           X
    =               (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S|     E       mcG (W )κcH\S (W )
                                                 W ∼Wig
        S⊆Frob(H)
           X                                      nb                 X
    =               (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S|     d
                                                       |eAut(H \ S)|   WgH\S,K E mcG (W )mK (W )
                                                 p! d!                        W ∼Wig
        S⊆Frob(G)                                                           K


By Proposition 4.20, we immediately find that all terms are zero unless |V (G)| = |V (H)|. If this
holds, then all terms with S ̸= ∅ are zero, and among those the only non-zero term has K = G,
and we are left with simply

         nb              X
    =          |eAut(H)|   WgG,H E mcG (W )mG (W )
        p!d d!                  W ∼Wig
                            K
     (nb )2
    = d · |eAut(G)| · |eAut(H)| · WgG,H ,
     p! d!
completing the proof.

    Finally, we may construct a nearly orthonormal basis by normalizing these polynomials as
follows.

Definition 4.22. For each G a p-regular multigraph, define

                                                               nb/2
                                          c (T ) :=
                                         κc
                                          G                p               κcG (T ).           (49)
                                                      nb       |eAut(G)|

For the sake of simplicity, we do not try to exactly normalize these polynomials to have norm 1.
On the other hand, they obey the following conditioning property.

Lemma 4.23. If |V (G)| =                           c (W )κ
                          ̸ |V (H)|, then EW ∼Wig κc     cc (W ) = 0. Let M ∈ RGd,p ×Gd,p have
                                                   G     pH
                         c (W )κ
entries MG,H := EW ∼Wig κc      c (W ). Suppose that d ≤
                                c                           n/2p2 . Then,
                         G      H

                                         1
                                           ≤ λmin (M ) ≤ λmax (M ) ≤ 2.                        (50)
                                         2



                                                            30
Proof. By Lemma 4.21,
                                        p
                                         |eAut(G)| · |eAut(H)|
                                           b
                             MG,H = n ·                        WgG,H .                                      (51)
                                               p!d d!
The result then follows by the result of Corollary C.4 on the conditioning of the graph Weingarten
function.

Roughly, the idea of the normalization in Definition 4.22 is that Wg ≍ n−ℓ/2 1, so if we want
the diagonal of M in the proof above to be roughly constant, we must make the diagonal entries
normalized by #{µ realizes G} for each G, which is given in terms of |eAut(G)| in Proposition 4.17.
See also Remark C.3 for an argument showing that the upper bound on d is necessary for such a
condition to hold.

4.6   Advantage Bound for Invariant Detection Problems
Using the tools developed above, we derive the following general bound on the advantage between
the Wigner tensor law and any invariant distribution, which for the purposes of applications to
hypothesis testing is the final prize of our work with finite free cumulants.

Corollary 4.24. Let P be p
                         any probability measure on symmetric tensors that is orthogonally in-
variant. Suppose that D ≤ n/2p2 . Then,
                                            D                                                     2
                                     2
                                            X      1      X             1
                  Adv≤D (Wig, P) ≍                                                  E   κcG (Y )        ,   (52)
                                            d=0
                                                  npd/2 G∈G         |eAut(G)|   Y ∼P
                                                              d,p


where the sum is over p-regular multigraphs up to isomorphism.

Concretely, the constant in an upper bound may be taken to be 2, and the constant in a lower
bound to be 12 exp(− 18 ) ≥ 31 .

Proof. Recall that, by Proposition 3.22, under these assumptions we have the formula for the
advantage
                                                          E   f (Y )
                      Adv≤D (Wig, P) =        sup     p Y ∼P             .              (53)
                                           f ∈R[Y ]≤D    EW ∼Wig f (W )2
                                                     f invariant
                                                  EW ∼Wig f (W )2 ̸=0

By Lemma 4.23, the κc   c over G ∈ G
                        G              0,p ⊔ · · · ⊔ Gd,p are a basis for the invariant polynomials in
R[Y ]≤D . Thus, consider f in the optimization stated, and write the expansion
                                                 X
                                 f (T ) =                       c (T ).
                                                          αG · κc                                 (54)
                                                                G
                                               G∈G0,p ⊔···⊔Gd,p

Again by Lemma 4.23, we have
           1        1        X                                                      X
             ∥α∥2 =                         2
                                           αG ≤ EW ∼Wig f (W )2 ≤ 2                           2
                                                                                             αG = 2∥α∥2 .   (55)
           2        2
                        G∈G0,p ⊔···⊔Gd,p                                  G∈G0,p ⊔···⊔Gd,p




                                                         31
Define
                                                      c (Y ).
                                             βG := E κc                                               (56)
                                                      G
                                                     Y ∼P

Then, we have by linearity
                                             E f (Y ) = ⟨α, β⟩,                                       (57)
                                           Y ∼P

and thus by basic linear algebra, with lower and upper bound constants 12 and 2 respectively,
                                                           !2
                                              ⟨α, β⟩
                 Adv≤D (Wig, P)2 ≍       sup
                                        ∥α∦=0 ∥α∥

                                   = ∥β∥2
                                     X             2
                                             c
                                   =      E κc
                                             G (Y )
                                              Y ∼P
                                       G

                                          c ,
and substituting in the normalization of κc
                                          G

                                     X nbG                          2
                                                   1           c
                                   =      bG 2 |eAut(G)| Y E
                                                              κG (Y )
                                     G
                                       (n   )              ∼P

                                     D                                     2
                                        npd/2 X
                                                                 
                                     X                    1             c
                                   =                               E κ (Y )
                                       (npd/2 )2      |eAut(G)| Y ∼P G
                                       d=0             G∈Gd,p


and finally by Proposition D.1 on the falling factorial,

                                       D                                                    2
                                       X       1      X            1
                                   ≍                                            E     κcG (Y )    ,
                                       d=0
                                             npd/2 G∈G         |eAut(G)|       Y ∼P
                                                         d,p


as stated, with lower and upper bound constants exp(− 81 ) and 1, respectively, in the last step.

    At a high level, this bound is making the following reasonable claim: the EκcG (Y ) are quantities
that are zero when Y ∼ Wig, and their magnitude for a given distribution—a kind of “cumulant
distance” between a distribution and the Wigner law—controls the difficulty of hypothesis testing
against a Wigner null hypothesis. Let us give some more intuition about what “critical scaling” of
the cumulants—around the threshold of computational hardness—this implies.
    As we will see, in the models we will consider all cumulants EκcG (T ) with |V (G)| = d will have
roughly the same size. The number of p-regular multigraphs on d vertices, as we will see later in
Proposition 5.9, grows roughly as |Gd,p | ≈ dO(d) for fixed d. Thus, in order for the advantage to be
bounded, it will suffice to have |EκcG (T )| ≲ npd/4 /poly(d), as then the sum will be a truncation of
a convergent geometric series. This is sensible: recall that the cumulant is a sum of npd/2 centered
terms (as this is the number of labellings of the edges of G by [n]), so npd/4 is the “usual” value of
the cumulants of a law P whose entries are on the same scale as Wig.




                                                      32
4.7   Bases for Vector-Valued Equivariant Polynomials
Finally, we develop some parallel theory for the case of equivariant polynomials and open multi-
graphs. For the sake of simplicity, we only work with 1-open multigraphs, i.e., ones with a single
open edge. Similar results should hold for general t-open multigraphs, albeit with more elaborate
combinatorics. We will be brisk in our presentation, as the ideas are similar to the case of closed
multigraphs.
    We slightly abuse notation and reuse the notations mG , m!G , mcG , κG , κcG , and Gd,p . However,
to remind the reader that we are working with vector-valued functions and open multigraphs, we
replace “G” with “G →”, a visual indication of the one “loose” or “dangling” edge on a 1-open
multigraph. We also use:
Definition 4.25 (1-open p-regular multigraphs). Write Gd,p→ for the set of (non-isomorphic)
1-open p-regular multigraphs on d unlabelled vertices. Equivalently, these may be viewed as multi-
graphs on d + 1 vertices, all of which have degree p except for one, which has degree p − 1.
Remark 4.26 (Arity parity). In order for Gd,p→ to not be empty, pd must be odd, and in particular
p, the tensor arity, must be odd.
    For G ∈ Gd,p→ , we write mG→ : Symp (Rn ) → Rn for the ordinary 1-open graph moments
previously defined in Definition 3.10. We also write m!G→ (T ) ∈ Rn for the same quantities with all
indices in the summation involved restricted to be distinct: letting e0 be the open edge of G,
                                                 X       Y
                                m!G→ (T )i :=                 Tj(∂v) .                         (58)
                                                        j∈[n]E        v∈V
                                                        j(e0 )=i
                                                  j1 ,...,jb distinct

Note that this restriction means that the summation defining m!G→ (T )i depends on i, since all
other indices in this summation must be different than i. We similarly define the centered version
of these summations, where our handling of Frobenius pairs only affects connected components
other than the one containing e0 :
                                   X           Y                Y
                 mcG→ (T )i :=                         Tj(∂v)           2
                                                                      (Tj(F ) − 1).           (59)
                                    j∈[n]E        v∈V (G\Frob(G))           F ∈Frob(G)
                                    j(e0 )=i
                              j1 ,...,jb distinct

    We likewise define the symmetrized versions κG→ and κcG→ . Note here that, as we used previ-
ously in Proposition 3.24 on the low-degree correlation, the “right” mapping from a general function
to an equivariant one is f (T ) 7→ EQ∼Haar Q⊤ f (Q · T ). Indeed, 1-open graph moments, being equiv-
ariant already, are easily checked to be unchanged by this operation. For the other two quantities,
we define analogs of the closed cumulants, which we call 1-open finite free cumulants:
                                 κG→ (T ) :=        E        Q⊤ m!G→ (Q · T ),
                                                Q∼Haar

                                 κcG→ (T ) :=       E        Q⊤ mcG→ (Q · T ).
                                                Q∼Haar

   We now derive analogs of our results for closed graph moments and the associated finite free
cumulants for these quantities. First, we give the analogous additivity property. A general state-
ment like Proposition 4.14 holds, but we will not need it, so for the sake of simplicity we restrict
our attention to the following special case.

                                                        33
Proposition 4.27. For any G ∈ Gd,p→ and A, B ∈ Symp (Rn ),
                                                    X          nb−1
                      E    κG→ (A + Q · B) =                            κGA → (A)κGB (B),             (60)
                  Q∼Haar
                                                G=GA ⊔GB
                                                             nbA −1 nbB
                                                 GA open
                                                GB closed
                                                    X          nb−1
                      E    κcG→ (A + Q · B) =                          κcG → (A)κGB (B).              (61)
                  Q∼Haar
                                                G=GA ⊔GB
                                                             nbA −1 nbB A
                                                 GA open
                                                GB closed

Again, the proof is a simple variation on that of Proposition 4.12.
   Next, we describe the expansion of each of the κG→ and κcG→ in open graph moments.
Definition 4.28. For G ∈ Gd,p→ , write chop(G) for the (closed) graph formed by deleting the open
edge of G. This is a graph where every vertex has degree p, except for one vertex (the one that used
to be the only endpoint of the open edge in G) that has degree p − 1.
    We will need some generalizations of the ideas discussed previously involving the Weingarten
function. First, note that the notion of a matching realizing a graph is sensible for a graph with
any fixed degree sequence: for a graph G with degree sequence p1 , . . . , pd , we may similarly say
that µ ∈ M([p1 + · · · + pd ]) realizes G if G is isomorphic to the graph formed by identifying
{1, . . . , p1 }, {p1 + 1, . . . , p1 + p2 }, and so forth in µ. Accordingly, the graph Weingarten function
of Definition 4.16 may be generalized to graphs with arbitrary specified degree sequence, and in
particular Wgchop(G),chop(H) is defined for G, H ∈ Gd,p→ . Lastly, the notion of edge automorphisms
from Definition 4.8 is still valid for graphs that are not p-regular, and we may again make sense of
eAut(chop(G)) for G ∈ Gd,p→ . With these tools in hand, we may formulate:
Proposition 4.29. For G ∈ Gd,p→ , the number of matchings realizing chop(G) is p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d −
1)!/|eAut(chop(G))|.
Proof. The proof is the same as for Proposition 4.17, except that permutations of vertices must
preserve the unique vertex of degree p − 1, and permutations of the half-edges around this vertex
contribute (p − 1)! rather than p!.

Lemma 4.30. For any G ∈ Gd,p→ with d vertices and b edges (including the open edge),

                               nb−1                              X
         κG→ (T ) =                          · |eAut(chop(G))| ·   Wgchop(G),chop(H) mH→ (T ).        (62)
                      p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d − 1)!
                                                                     H

Proof. As in Lemma 4.18, we think in terms of matchings. We will use the notations w(µ) and
w! (µ) used there for tensors associated to matchings µ.
    If µ is a matching of [pd − 1] = [2(b − 1)] realizing chop(G), then mG→ (T )i = ⟨T ⊗d , w(µ) ⊗ ei ⟩,
and m!G→ (T )i = ⟨T ⊗d , w! (µ) ⊗ ei ⟩. Following the argument from Lemma 4.18, we find
                                           X
                                                            ⊗d    ⊗pd−1
                       κG→ (T )i =                     E ⟨T , (Q        ej ) ⊗ ei ⟩
                                                        Q∼Haar
                                       j distinctly
                                    compatible with µ

                                 = nb−1 ⟨T ⊗d , (Πpd−1 eµ ) ⊗ ei ⟩


                                                        34
and by the Weingarten formula,
                                                   X
                                        = nb−1         Wgµ,ν ⟨T ⊗d , w(ν) ⊗ ei ⟩
                                                   ν
                                                   X
                                             b−1
                                        =n             Wgµ,ν mG(ν)→ (T )i ,
                                                   ν

and the rest of the calculations proceed identically to Lemma 4.18.

   The following is the analog of Proposition 4.19 for 1-open multigraphs, and follows from exactly
the same simple expansion.
Proposition 4.31. For any p-regular open multigraph G on d vertices and b edges,
                                 X
                   κcG→ (T ) =         (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S| κG\S→ (T ).                            (63)
                                         S⊆Frob(G)

Proposition 4.32. Suppose that G and H are 1-open p-regular multigraphs with |V (G)| ≥ |V (H)|.
Then, EW ∼Wig ⟨mcG→ (W ), mH→ (W )⟩ = 0 unless G and H are isomorphic, and

        E       ⟨mcG→ (W ), mG→ (W )⟩ =            E    ⟨mcG→ (W ), mcG→ (W )⟩ = nb · |eAut(chop(G))|.   (64)
     W ∼Wig                                    W ∼Wig

Lemma 4.33. Suppose that G and H are 1-open p-regular multigraphs. If |V (G)| =
                                                                              ̸ |V (H)|, then
EW ∼Wig ⟨κcG→ (W ), κcH→ (W )⟩ = 0. If |V (G)| = |V (H)| = d, then

            E    ⟨κcG→ (W ), κcH→ (W )⟩
       W ∼Wig

                             nb−1 nb
                 =                          · |eAut(chop(G))| · |eAut(chop(H))| · Wgchop(G),chop(H) .
                     p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d − 1)!

If the overall scaling factor of n2b−1 appears unusual, the reader may consider, at an intuitive level,
that while the inner product of two closed graph moments each on b edges has 2b edges, the inner
product of two 1-open graph moments each on b edges only has 2b − 1 edges, since the two open
edges “fuse” to become one.

Proof. We again proceed similarly to the closed case in Lemma 4.21. Suppose without loss of
generality that |V (G)| ≥ |V (H)|. We have:

            E    ⟨κcG (W ), κcH (W )⟩
       W ∼Wig

            =        E     ⟨Q⊤ mcG (Q · W ), R⊤ mcH (R · W )⟩
                 W ∼Wig
                Q,R∼Haar

            =        E     ⟨mcG (Q · Q⊤ · W ), QR⊤ mcH (R · Q⊤ · W )⟩
                 W ∼Wig
                Q,R∼Haar

            =        E   ⟨mcG (W ), Q⊤ mcH (Q · W )⟩
                W ∼Wig
                Q∼Haar

            =        E   ⟨mcG (W ), κcH (W )⟩
                W ∼Wig



                                                             35
and, using Lemma 4.30 and Proposition 4.31,

                X                                            nbH −1
          =            (−1)|S| (n − bH + p|S|)p|S|
                                                     p!d−1 (p − 1)(d − 1)!
              S⊆Frob(H)
                                    X
                |eAut(chop(H))| ·       Wgchop(H\S),chop(K)       E     ⟨mcG→ (W ), mK→ (W )⟩
                                                               W ∼Wig
                                    K

Here, by Proposition 4.32 all terms are zero unless |V (G)| = |V (H)|. In that case, only the term
K = G and S = ∅ contributes, and we are left with

                      nb−1 nb
          =                          · |eAut(chop(G))| · |eAut(chop(H))| · Wgchop(G),chop(H) ,
              p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d − 1)!
completing the calculation.

   Lastly, as in the closed case, we construct a nearly orthonormal basis with respect to this inner
product.

Definition 4.34. For each G a p-regular 1-open multigraph having b edges, define

                                                   nb/2
                               c (T ) :=
                              κd
                               G→              p                κcG→ (T ).                       (65)
                                           nb · |eAut(chop(G))|

Lemma 4.35. If |V (G)| =                         c (W ), κ
                       ̸ |V (H)|, then EW ∼Wig ⟨κd         c                       Gd,p→ ×Gd,p→
                                                           H→ (W )⟩ = 0. Let M ∈ R
                                                         [
                                                 G→
have entries
                           MG,H := EW ∼Wig ⟨κdc (W ), κc
                                                       H→ (W )⟩.                           (66)
                                                      [
                                              G→
                p
Suppose that d ≤ n/2p2 . Then,
                                    1
                                      ≤ λmin (M ) ≤ λmax (M ) ≤ 2.                               (67)
                                    2
In particular, the κcG→ (T ) are linearly independent as vectors of polynomials.

Proof. By Lemma 4.33, we have
                            p
                      b−1    |eAut(chop(G))| · |eAut(chop(H))|
             MG,H = n     ·                                    Wgchop(G),chop(H) .               (68)
                                  p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d − 1)!

The result then follows by Corollary C.5, where we observe that b = (pd + 1)/2 for G ∈ Gd,p→ .


5     Application 1: Tensor PCA
5.1   Warmup: Detection with Individual Graph Moments
Before proceeding to the analysis of general low-degree polynomials, let us consider the simpler
question of whether individual graph moments mG (T ) can distinguish between the two distributions
associated with tensor PCA. In order to do this, we will need to understand how these moments
behave under both the null and planted distributions.

                                                     36
   The question for the null model is perhaps of independent interest, and we will see that it holds
some surprises already. Recall that, for k = 2 and G = Cℓ a cycle of length ℓ, classical random
matrix theory tells us that
                                                        
                                            ℓ            1
          E       [mG (T )] =     E    [tr(T )] = 1 + O       1{ℓ even} Cat(ℓ/2) nℓ/2+1 ,       (69)
     T ∼Wig(2,n,1)            T ∼GOE(n)                  n
                1 2t
                    
where Cat(t) = t+1 t is the t’th Catalan number. What is the tensor analog of this calculation?

Definition 5.1. Let G = (V, E) be a p-regular graph. For C a finite set of colors, let σ : E → C be
an edge coloring. We call σ an even coloring if, among the σ(∂v) over v ∈ V , viewed as multisets
of colors, each multiset occurs an even number of times. We write cmax (G) for the largest possible
number of colors in an even edge coloring of G. For σ an even edge coloring, suppose that the
distinct colorings of neighborhoods (i.e., the multisets σ(∂v) over vertices v) occurring in σ are
N1 , . . . , Nm , where Ni occurs fi ∈ 2N times. Also, write cj (Ni ) for the number of times that j ∈ C
occurs in Ni . We call the weight of σ the quantity
                                             m
                                             Y                  Y
                                 w(σ) :=           (fi − 1)!!         cj (Ni )!fi /2 .                      (70)
                                             i=1                j∈C

Proposition 5.2. Define
                                                             X
                               wmax (G) :=                                      w(σ),                       (71)
                                                σ even edge coloring of G
                                                    |σ(E)|=cmax (G)

where the sum is over non-isomorphic edge colorings with the given number of colors. Then,
                                                    
                                                     1
                         E       [mG (T )] = 1 + OG        wmax (G) ncmax (G) .            (72)
                    T ∼Wig(p,n,1)                    n

Actually, as we show in Propositions B.13 and B.14, any maximum even edge coloring σ has w(σ) =
1 (that is, no vertex is adjacent to several edges of the same color, and every colored neighborhood
occurs exactly twice). Therefore, wmax (G) is purely a counting problem of a particular type of
coloring.

Proof. We expand the definition of the tensor moment and use linearity:
                                    X Y
                 E     mG (T ) =        E     Ti(∂v)                                                        (73)
              T ∼Wig(p,n,1)
                                       i∈[n]E   v∈V

                                                                      n|σ(E)| w(σ)
                                                    X
                                   =                                                                        (74)
                                       σ even edge coloring of G
                                                  
                                                   1                        X
                                   =       1 + OG                                           n|σ(E)| w(σ),   (75)
                                                   n
                                                                σ even edge coloring of G

and extracting the leading order contribution completes the proof. Here we sum over all non-
isomorphic even edge colorings σ; labeling the colors of such colorings by distinct values in [n]
enumerates all i ∈ [n]E that contribute to the sum.

                                                        37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i
                                              <latexit sha1_base64="dl2flNL4bIjNUcHRo+qMPCp9iPU=">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</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="dl2flNL4bIjNUcHRo+qMPCp9iPU=">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</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           `                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              `

                                         i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i    j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         j     i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i   j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="dl2flNL4bIjNUcHRo+qMPCp9iPU=">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</latexit>            <latexit sha1_base64="dl2flNL4bIjNUcHRo+qMPCp9iPU=">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</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="dl2flNL4bIjNUcHRo+qMPCp9iPU=">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</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                `                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     `                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  `
            k            j


        j       j   i            k
                                         j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     j    k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i       k     j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k   i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      i

            i            j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k              j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               j                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i           k
i   j




Figure 8: Examples of legal edge colorings for the matrix case p = 2. In the cycle of length 2 there
is one legal coloring with two distinct colors (up to permutations of the colors) recovering the fact
that tr A2 = ij Aij Aji = n2 . There are two P
                P
                                                 legal colorings of the cycle of length 4: the one on
the left, for instance, corresponds to the term ijk Aij Ajk Akj Aji . There are five legal colorings of
the cycle of length 6. Each coloring corresponds to the matching of vertices shown below it, where
we show the pairs of vertices with the same neighborhoods: these matchings are the non-crossing
partitions familiar in combinatorial free probability [NS06]. This recovers the leading behavior
tr Aℓ = Cat(ℓ/2)nℓ/2+1 where Cat(t) = 1, 2, 5, . . . is the tth Catalan number.


    As an aside, we mention the following ancillary result. Despite this characterization, unlike in
the matrix case, and perhaps surprisingly, it is difficult in general to compute even the scaling of a
given moment of a Wigner tensor for large n.

Theorem 5.3. It is NP-hard to decide whether cmax (G) ≥ c given c ≥ 0 and a regular graph G.

We give a proof in Appendix B.
  In particular, we may understand the scaling of variances of mG (T ) as follows.

Corollary 5.4. For any G, for W ∼ Wig, Var mG (W ) ≥ n|E(G)| .

Proof. First, note that, in general, mG (T )mH (T ) = mG⊔H (T ), where ⊔ denotes disjoint union of
graphs. Thus

                                                                        n|σ(E)| w(σ).
                                                            X
                              2
                 E mG (W ) = E mG⊔G (W ) =                                                    (76)
                W ∼Wig                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     W ∼Wig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    σ even coloring of G⊔G

On the other hand, we have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n|σ(E)| w(σ)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X
                                     E       mG (W ) =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (77)
                             W ∼Wig
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        σ even coloring of G

which is at most the sum of the terms in (76) where each colored vertex neighborhood occurs
at least twice within one of the two copies of G. There is another coloring in the summation
in (76), which is not of this kind: it is the coloring that colors every edge in one copy of G
with a different color, and then repeats the same coloring on the other copy of G. This is an
even coloring which uses |E(G)| colors, and which is not cancelled in computing Var mG (W ) =
EW ∼Wig mG (W )2 − (EW ∼Wig mG (W ))2 . See Figure 9 for an illustration.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              38
   For the planted model, we are interested in the special case of rank one tensors. On these,
evaluating the graph moments is easy:
Proposition 5.5. Let v ⊗p be the pth tensor power of v: that is, vi⊗p
                                                                   1 ,...,ip
                                                                             = vi1 vi2 · · · vip . Then if
                         ⊗p
G = (V, E), we have mG (v ) = ∥v∥ 2|E|      p|V
                                       = ∥v∥ .  |


Proof. The summation over the index associated to each edge gives a factor of ⟨v, v⟩ = ∥v∥2 on
each edge, for a total of ∥v∥2|E| . Since G is p-regular, |E| = p|V |/2.

   We now sketch an argument of [OTR22] that no single graph moment can solve the detection
problem for tensor PCA below the conjectured threshold.
Proposition 5.6. Let G be a p-regular graph. If λ ≪ n−p/4 , then
                                                      r
                          E mG (Y ) − E mG (Y ) ≪ Var mG (Y ).                                       (78)
                             Y ∼P           Y ∼Q                Y ∼Q


Proof Sketch. Suppose G has d vertices and b edges. First we consider the expected difference in
mG between the two models. If Y = λv ⊗p + W , then expanding mG (Y ) creates 2d terms, including
cross-terms where the spike λv ⊗p appears at some vertices and the noise W appears at others. For
some graphs these cross-terms can be neglected [OTR22]. In this proof sketch we look only at the
contribution of the all-spike term. By Proposition 5.5 this is λd nb , since we get a factor of λ at
each vertex and a factor of |v|2 = n on each edge.
    On the other hand, by Corollary 5.4, we have Var mG (Y ) ≳ nb . Comparing the spike’s contri-
bution to the expectation with the standard deviation in the null model, we see that mG fails as a
test statistic whenever
                                           λa nb ≪ nb/2 .                                       (79)
But since G is p-regular, we have b = pa/2. Then (79) becomes

                                           λa npa/2 ≪ npa/4 ,

and solving for λ gives λ ≪ n−p/4 as stated.

    This argument is tight for some graphs [OTR22]. However, while graph moments are fascinating,
for general G they are not ideal quantities to prove upper and lower bounds on problems such as
tensor PCA, for three reasons:

   1. By Theorem 5.3, even computing how the expectations of mG (W ) scales with n in the null
      model W ∼ Wig is computationally hard.

   2. As discussed above, the expectation of mG (Y ) in spiked models involves cross-terms where
      the spike appears at some vertices and the noise appears at others. These mixed moments
      are often nonzero, making precise calculations combinatorially challenging.

   3. Different graph moments mG and mH can be correlated in the Wigner model, even when G
      and H are non-isomorphic. This raises the possibility that, while the variance of any one graph
      moment is too large to beat the threshold, it might be possible to construct linear combina-
      tions of small graphs that cancel out much of each others’ variance. Indeed, Proposition 5.6
      applies to graphs of any size, even where a grows with n, but there are subexponential-time

                                                   39
                                       T                                T

                                 i     j k                        i     j k

                                 𝓁 T         m                    𝓁 T           m
                            T      n                T         T     n               T



Figure 9: Even colorings of the disjoint union of two copies of K4 where each vertex is matched to
its counterpart. The colors or indices i, j, k, ℓ, m, n in one copy must match their counterparts, but
within each copy these indices can range freely over [n]. Thus they contribute n6 to the variance
of T K4 when T is a Wigner random tensor.


      algorithms of growing degree that succeed even when λ ≪ n−p/4 [BGG+ 16, BGL17, WAM19]
      (see also [RRS17b] for analogous algorithms for random XOR-SAT). Low-degree algorithms
      matching this performance must somehow involve linear combinations of many graph mo-
      ments.

    We therefore proceed to full lower bounds against low-degree polynomials, now leaning on the
machinery we have developed based on finite free cumulants, which will allow us to circumvent all
of these difficulties.

5.2   Detection with General Low-Degree Polynomials: Proof of Theorem 1.6
Before proceeding, let us state the formal version of Theorem 1.6 that we will prove here. Recall
we are in the setting where Q = Wig and P the spiked tensor model Y = λv ⊗p + W .

Theorem
p        5.7 (Low-degree analysis for tensor PCA detection). Let D = D(n) ∈ N have D ≤
     2
 n/2p . There are constants ap , bp > 0 such that:

  1. If λ ≤ ap n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 , then Adv≤D (Q = Wig, P) = O(1).

  2. If λ ≥ bp n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 and D = ω(1), then Adv≤D (Q = Wig, P) = ω(1).

    First we compute the expectation of a graph cumulant in the spiked model. In fact, the cumulant
of v ⊗p is the same as its ordinary graph moment mG (v ⊗p ) given by Proposition 5.5 with a correction
term.

Proposition 5.8. Let v ∈ Rn . If G = (V, E) with |V | = a and |E| = b, then

                                                             nb
                                     κG (v ⊗p ) =                     ∥v∥2b .
                                                    (n + 2b − 2)b

Proof. Recall that κG (T ) = EQ m!G (Q · T ), and that Q · v ⊗p = (Q · v)⊗p . Since Q is Haar-random,
u = Q · v is uniformly chosen from the sphere of radius ∥v∥. As in Proposition 5.5, we have a copy
of u on the outgoing half-edges of each vertex. But rather than the inner product ⟨u, u⟩ = ∥v∥2 on

                                                        40
each edge, we have ⟨u, e⟩⟨e, u⟩ = ⟨e, u⟩2 where e is the basis vector associated with that edge. Since
all nb tuples of distinct indices will contribute the same expectation, we can fix an orthogonal basis
e1 , . . . , eb and write
                                                        b
                                                        Y
                                             ⊗p
                                        κG (v ) = n E ⟨ei , u⟩2 .
                                                    b
                                                                                                  (80)
                                                        u
                                                            i=1
We can write this product as an inner product of tensors,
                               b
                                           * b        !⊗2         +
                              Y               O
                                       2                      ⊗2b
                             E ⟨ei , u⟩ =          ei     , Eu      .                             (81)
                                u                                 u
                                    i=1               i=1

    Since Eu u⊗2b is fixed under conjugation by any Q ∈ O(n), it lies in the trivial subspace of R⊗2b .
As in the proof of Theorem 3.2, this implies that it is a linear combination of matchings of the 2b
half-edges, each of which corresponds to a “rewiring” of G à la the configuration model. Moreover,
by symmetry, all of these matchings have equal weight. Using the representation theory of the
orthogonal group (e.g. [MR11]) we can obtain

                                           ∥u∥2b                           X
                    E u⊗2b =                                                              wµ .    (82)
                    u          n(n + 2)(n + 4) · · · (n + 2b − 2)
                                                                    µ: matching of [2b]

This is analogous to Isserlis’s or Wick’s theorem for the Gaussian measure [Iss18, Wic50] where the
denominator would simply be nb .
    However, since the ei are orthogonal, any matching µ that partners one with another yields a
zero inner product. Thus the only nonzero contribution to (81) comes from      Nthe matching given
by the original wiring of G, where for each i Q ∈ [b] the two copies of ei in ( i ei )⊗2 are matched
with each other. That matching contributes i ⟨ei , ei ⟩ = 1 to (81), and combining this with (80)
and (82) gives

                                   n(n − 1)(n − 2) · · · (n − b + 1)               nb
              κG (v ⊗p ) = ∥v∥2b                                      = ∥v∥2b               .
                                   n(n + 2)(n + 4) · · · (n + 2b − 2)         (n + 2b − 2)b
                                             2
This correction factor is roughly e−(3/2)b /n , and in any case is 1 − O(b2 /n).

Proposition 5.9. The number of (non-isomorphic, unlabelled) p-regular multigraphs on d vertices
is asymptotically as d → ∞
                                                                   !d
                                                  p pp/2 − p−2 p−2
                                                r
                                   (pd − 1)!!
                         |Gd,p | ∼            ∼         e 2 d 2       .                   (83)
                                     d!p!d        π  p!

We also have the concrete upper bound:
                                           (pd − 1)!!  p+1 −p/2 p−2 d
                               |Gd,p | ≤             ≤ e p      d 2     .                         (84)
                                             d!p!d
Proof. The asymptotics follow from the proof of [Bol82], repeated without the restriction to simple
graphs, and Stirling’s approximation. The initial upper bound follows since every p-regular multi-
graph on d vertices corresponds to at least d!p!d perfect matchings of [pd], as in the configuration
model. The second bound follows by a non-asymptotic version of Stirling’s approximation.

                                                     41
Proof of Theorem 5.7. We begin by computing the centered cumulants under P:
                            c                           c    ⊗p
                       E κG (T ) =           E √ κG (λv + W )
                     T ∼P             v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))
                                          W ∼Wig
                                                                           ⊗p
                                     = E κcG (W ) +            E √ κG (λv )
                                      W ∼Wig            v∼Unif(S n−1 ( n))
                                                                           ⊗p
                                     =           E √ κG (λv                     )                  (Proposition 4.15)
                                          v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))

                                     ≍ λd npd/2 .                                                   (Proposition 5.8)

Now, substituting this into Corollary 4.24,
                                    D
                                    X         1                     X          1
            Adv≤D (Wig, P) ≍                  pd/2
                                                   · λ2d npd
                                          n                                |eAut(G)|
                                    d=0                        |V (G)|=d
                                    D
                                    X              d
                                ≤         d! λ2 np/2 #{p-regular multigraphs on d vertices}
                                    d=0

and bounding the number of p-regular multigraphs by Proposition 5.9, we have

                                    D
                                    X               d (pd − 1)!!
                                ≤         d! λ2 np/2
                                                            d!
                                    d=0
                                    XD              d pdpd/2
                                ≤          λ2 np/2
                                                        (d/e)d
                                    d=0
                                    XD                                             d
                                ≤          λ2 · ep+1 p−p/2 d(p−2)/2 np/2                 ,
                                    d=0

and the result follows since, under the stated assumptions and by a suitable choice of the constant
ap , the quantity being raised to a power will be, say, smaller than 1/2. For the lower bound, we
may use our asymptotic formula for the advantage and use that a positive proportion of d-regular
multigraphs are simple and almost all have trivial automorphism group (see, e.g., [Bol82]).
                                                                                             p−2
    We elaborate on a remark from the Introduction: the factor of d 2 d in the final summation
governs the tradeoff between the power of detection algorithms and their subexponential runtime
budget. In our calculation, this quantity has a clear and direct source: it is just the asymptotic
value of the number of non-isomorphic p-regular multigraphs (Proposition 5.9), and therefore also
the dimension of the space of degree d invariant polynomials.

5.3   Reconstruction with Low-Degree Polynomials
We first state the formal result we will show.
Theorem   5.10 (Low-degree lower bound for tensor PCA reconstruction). Let D = D(n) ∈ N have
D ≤ n/2p2 . For all odd p ≥ 3, there is a constant cp > 0 such that if λ ≤ cp n−p/4 D−(p−2)/4 , then
    p
                √                                          √
Corr≤D (P)2 = O( n), and therefore MMSE≤D (P) = n − O( n).

                                                               42
                                                                      √
Remark 5.11 (Better-than-random reconstruction). The O( n) scaling of the correlation even
in the computationally hard regime is perhaps surprising, since a uniformly random estimator vb ∈
       √                                                                √
Sn−1 ( n) achieves squared correlation with the signal v ∈ Sn−1 ( n) of ⟨v, vb⟩2 /∥b    v ∥2 = O(1) with
high probability. Indeed, estimation slightly better than this is always possible: consider the estimator
vb = vb(Y ) formed by the open graph moment mG→ (Y ) where G is the graph on one vertex with
(p − 1)/2 self-loops and one open edge (for p odd). This is a linear function, so mG→ (λv ⊗p + W ) =
λ∥v∥p−1 v +mG→ (W ) = λn(p−1)/2 v +mG→ (W ). Let us write g := mG→ (W ). This is independent of
v and distributed roughly as N (0, n(p−1)/2 I). Thus, proceeding heuristically, the squared correlation
is typically
                                      ⟨v, vb⟩2        λ2 np+1
                                               ≈                    .                                (85)
                                       ∥bv ∥2    λ2 np + n(p+1)/2
When λ ≪ n−p/4 , the first term in the denominator is smaller than the second, so this is roughly
λ2 n(p+1)/2 , which when λ ∼ n−p/4 becomes as large as n1/2 , as claimed. Indeed, once λ ≫ n−(p−1)/4 ,
this expression is Ω(n), so this simple estimator achieves linear correlation.

    We begin with a number of preliminaries. We will use the following analog of Proposition 5.9
for counting open multigraphs.

Proposition 5.12. The number of (non-isomorphic, unlabelled) 1-open p-regular multigraphs on
d vertices is bounded by

                                    (pd − 2)!!          
                                                              p+1        −(p−1)/2 p−2
                                                                                      d
                  |Gd,p→ | ≤                          ≤   (2e)    (p − 1)        d 2     .                      (86)
                               (d − 1)!p!d−1 (p − 1)!

Proof. The initial upper bound follows first by associating a 1-open multigraph to a closed multi-
graph with all vertices having degree p except for one having degree p − 1. The total number of
edges in this graph is pd−1
                         2 , and the remaining bounds follow as in Proposition 5.9.

Proposition 5.13. For any 1-open p-regular multigraph G and any T ∈ Symp (Rn ),
                                                   X                      nb−1
            E     √      κcG→ (λv ⊗p + T ) =                                        bB
                                                                                         λdB nbB κcGA → (T ).   (87)
                                                                bA −1
     v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))                         G=GA ⊔GB n               (n + 2bB − 2)
                                                GA open
                                               GB closed

Proof. We combine Proposition 4.27 with Proposition 5.8:

                                                nb−1
                                      X                              
                     c  ⊗p                                         ⊗p   c
          E √ κG→ (λv + T ) =                 bA −1 bB    E κGB (λv ) κGA → (T )
   v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))               G=G ⊔G
                                            n      n      v
                                                  A    B
                                               GA open
                                               GB closed
                                                 X           nb−1        dB         nb B
                                        =                             · λ   ·                 nbB κcGA → (T ),
                                            G=GA ⊔GB
                                                           nbA −1 nbB                      b
                                                                              (n + 2bB − 2) B
                                             GA open
                                            GB closed

and simplifying gives the stated result.




                                                           43
Proposition 5.14. For any 1-open p-regular multigraph G,
                                                                                       nb
                                E   √         ⟨v, κcG→ (λv ⊗p + W )⟩ =                            λd nb .    (88)
                       v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))                                          (n + 2b − 2)b
                           W ∼Wig

Proof. Proceeding similarly to the above using Proposition 4.27 with respect to the randomness in
W,
                        E    √      ⟨v, κcG→ (λv ⊗p + W )⟩
                v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))
                    W ∼Wig
                                                        X           nb−1
                   =            E   √                                       κcG (W )⟨v, κGA → (λv ⊗p )⟩
                       v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n)) G=G ⊔G                   nbA −1 nbB B
                                             A    B
                           W ∼Wig         A open
                                          B closed

where the only non-zero term is when B = ∅, so that

                   =            E       √     ⟨v, κG→ (λv ⊗p )⟩
                       v∼Unif(Sn−1 (        n))
                        d                                            ⊗p
                   =λ              E √ ⟨v, κG→ (v                         )⟩
                            v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))

                   = λd             E        √          ⟨v, m!G→ (v ⊗p )⟩
                            v∼Unif(Sn−1 (         n))

and now the same calculations as in Proposition 5.8 apply, giving
                               nb
                   =                        λ d nb ,
                       (n + 2b − 2)b
which is the final result.
Proof of Theorem 5.10. Recall that we are interested in producing an upper bound on the corre-
lation, which we may restrict to equivariant polynomials without loss of generality by Proposi-
tion 3.24.
                                                    E(v,Y )∼P ⟨v, f (Y )⟩
                        Corr≤D (P) =        sup      p                    .                (89)
                                         f ∈R[Y ]n
                                                 ≤D
                                                        EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2
                                                          f equivariant
                                                         EY ∼P ∥f (Y )∥2 ̸=0
Consider a particular equivariant f . By Theorem 3.15 and Lemma 4.35, it admits an expansion in
the κ
    [c ,
     G→
                          X               X              nbG /2
                 f (T ) =   αG κ[c (T ) =
                                 G→             bG
                                                     p                αG κcG→ (T ).        (90)
                          G                G
                                              n    ·   |eAut(chop(G)|
where the sum is over p-regular 1-open multigraphs on at most D vertices. We now apply the
technique of [SW22], using Jensen’s inequality to give a lower bound on the norm of f :
                                   2
                         E ∥f (Y )∥ =                         E√           ∥f (λv ⊗p + W )∥2                 (91)
                       Y ∼P                       v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))
                                                            W ∼Wig
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                        ⊗p
                                             ≥          E             E √ f (λv              + W)        .   (92)
                                                  W ∼Wig       v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))



                                                                     44
We can write the inner quantity as:
                     ⊗p
       E √ f (λv          + W)
v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))
     X     nbG /2                                  c        ⊗p
 =    bG
         p               αG         E √ κG→ (λv + T )
   G
     n · |eAut(chop(G))|     v∼Unif(S n−1 ( n))

   X        b
           nG  /2               X                    nbG −1
 =    bG
         p               α G                                   bB
                                                                  λdB nbB κcGA → (T )
     n · |eAut(chop(G))|                   b   −1
                             G=GA ⊔GB n           (n + 2bB − 2)
                                             A
   G
                                    GA open
                                    GB closed
     X               nbG /2                X                  1
 =                   p                αG                               bB
                                                                          λdB nbB κcGA → (T )
       (n − bG + 1) · |eAut(chop(G))|               b  −1
                                         G=GA ⊔GB n       (n + 2bB − 2)
                                                     A
     G
                                                GA open
                                                GB closed



                                                    nbA |eAut(chop(GA ))|
                                                          p
     X              nbG /2                 X
 =                  p                 αG                                       bB
                                                                                  λdB nbB κ\
                                                                                           c
                                                                                           GA → (T )
     (n − b  + 1) ·   |eAut(chop(G))|               b  /2   b  −1
   G       G                             G=GA ⊔GB n  A    n  A    (n + 2bB − 2)
                                                GA open
                                                GB closed
     X                1
 =                   p                αG
     G
       (n − bG + 1) · |eAut(chop(G))|
                            p
         X      (n − bA + 1) |eAut(chop(GA ))|
                                         bB
                                                      λdB n3bB /2 κ\
                                                                   c
                                                                   GA → (T ).
       G=GA ⊔GB           (n + 2bB − 2)
        GA open
       GB closed

Switching the order of summations, we find that we can write
                                                                                       !
                                         X                        X X
                           ⊗p                          c (T ) =                             c (T ).
             E √ f (λv          + W) =        (Lα)G · κ
                                                      [
                                                       G→                    RG,H αH       κ
                                                                                           [
                                                                                            G→        (93)
      v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))                   G                       G      H

Here, R is an upper-triangular matrix when graphs are ordered by increasing number of vertices,
with rows and columns indexed by G1,p→ ⊔ · · · ⊔ GD,p→ . More specifically, we have RG,H ̸= 0 only
when a subset of the connected components of H yield G. When this is so, then the entries of L
are given by
                                      s
                         n − bG + 1     |eAut(chop(G))|         n3bH\G /2
           RG,H = cG,H ·            ·                    ·                  bH\G
                                                                                 · λdH\G ,    (94)
                         n − bH + 1     |eAut(chop(H))| (n + 2b        − 2)
                                                                        H\G

where cG,H is the number of ways that it is possible to choose the connected components of G out
of those of H (i.e., the product of m H (C)
                                           
                                    mG (C)
                                             over all connected components C of G, where mG (C) is
the number of times C occurs in G and likewise for mH (C)).
    Now, using Lemma 4.33 on the near-orthonormality of the κ     c , we find
                                                                  [
                                                                  G→

                                            2 1    2 1 ⊤ ⊤
                                  E ∥f (Y )∥ ≥ ∥Rα∥ = α (R R)α.                                       (95)
                                Y ∼P          2      2

                                                    45
We define and rewrite using Proposition 5.14
                       βG :=                        ⟨v, κ
                                                        [c (λv ⊗p + W )⟩
                                        E   √            G→
                               v∼Unif(Sn−1 ( n))
                                    W ∼Wig

                                           nbG /2               nb G
                          =                                                λdG nbG
                                b
                                      |eAut(chop(G))| (n + 2bG − 2)bG
                                  p
                               nG
                                             n3bG /2
                          =                 b p
                                                               λdG .
                               (n + 2bG − 2) G |eAut(chop(G))|
   We have RG,G = 1 for all G, so R is invertible. For our bound on the correlation, we then may
compute
                                                ⟨α, β⟩2        −1
                          Corr≤D (P)2 ≤ 2 sup         2
                                                        = 2∥R⊤ β∥2 .                         (96)
                                           α̸=0 ∥Rα∥
                                      −1
Let us compute the inverse γ := R⊤ β. R⊤ is lower triangular and its diagonal is identically equal
to 1, so we may compute the inverse recursively by back substitution:
                                                X
                                   γH = β H −       RG,H γG .                                 (97)
                                                       G<H

We may bound both the entries of β and of R as:
                                       nbG /2 λdG
                          |βG | ≲ p
                                    |eAut(chop(G))|
                                                   d
                                   1/4       np/4 λ G
                                =n p
                                        |eAut(chop(G))|
                                                 p−2 dG
                                                    
                                           cp D− 4
                                ≤ n1/4 p                ,
                                        |eAut(chop(G))|

                                    s
                                        |eAut(chop(G))|
                       |RG,H | ≤                        cG,H nbH\G /2 λdH\G
                                        |eAut(chop(H))|
                                    s
                                        |eAut(chop(G))|            dH\G
                                =                       cG,H np/4 λ
                                        |eAut(chop(H))|
                                    s
                                        |eAut(chop(G))|          p−2 dH\G
                                                                     
                                ≤                       cG,H cp D− 4       .
                                        |eAut(chop(H))|

Thus inductively we have, with C(|conn(H)|) denoting the number of distinct chains of subsets of
the connected components of H,
                                        X
                        |γH | ≤ |βH | +   |RG,H | · |γG |
                                            G<H
                                            C(|conn(H)|)
                                                             p−2 dH
                                                                 
                               ≲ n1/4 p                  cp D− 4
                                       |eAut(chop(H))|


                                                      46
and bounding the number of chains using Proposition D.2,

                                                    3|conn(H)| (|conn(H)|)!       p−2 dH
                                                                                      
                                              ≤ n1/4 p                        cp D− 4     .
                                                        |eAut(chop(H))|

    Note that every closed connected component of any H ∈ Gd,p→ must have size at least 2 since
p is odd, and only the open connected component can have size 1. Therefore, the number of
connected components, if there are d vertices, is at most 1 + d−1    d+1
                                                                  2 = 2 . Also, if c1 , . . . , cm are the
frequencies with which various closed connected components happen in G, then, since permutations
of connected components are automorphisms and the “chop” operation does not affect the closed
components of a graph,
                                                        Ym
                                     |eAut(chop(H))| ≥      ci !.                                     (98)
                                                                                 i=1

More specifically, suppose the total number of connected components of size 2 in H is ℓ. There are
p+1
 2 non-isomorphic connected p-regular graphs on two vertices (two vertices with an odd number
of edges between them and a suitable number of loops on the ends). Suppose the numbers of these
components are c1 , . . . , c(p+1)/2 . We then have by a convexity argument

                                                       (p+1)/2                                     ℓ
                                                           Y                   2ℓ    p+1        2
                         |eAut(chop(H))| ≥                       ci ! ≥             ! 2 ≥            ℓ .                             (99)
                                                                              p+1           e(p + 1)
                                                           i=1

   We may organize the calculation of the norm of γ according to the number of connected com-
ponents k, and the sizes a1 of the open component and a2 , . . . , ak of the closed components:
                                            d+1
                   D                       2
                                         d X
                   X           p−2
    2
∥γ∥ ≲ n      1/2
                         c2p D− 2                 9k k!2
                   d=1                      k=1
                                                                    −|{i:ai =2}|            k
                           X                      2                                           Y
                                                       |{i : ai = 2}|              |Ga1 ,p→ |   |Gai ,p |
                                              e(p + 1)
                           a1 ≥1                                                                   i=2
                       a2 ,...,ak ≥2
                    a1 +a2 +···+ak =d


and in bounding the sizes of the sets of graphs by Propositions 5.9 and 5.12, let us replace c2p with
a larger c′p that absorbs constants depending only on p, so that we obtain
                                                                                                                                         
                                                             d+1
                   D                    d              2                                                               k      p−2
                                                                                                                                          
                   X
                                 − p−2
                                                         X                       X                                        Y          ai
             1/2
                         c′p D                               9k k!2                                        −|{i:ai =2}|
                                                                                                                                         
        ≤n                          2       9|Gd,p→ | +
                                                                                             |{i : ai = 2}|                    ai2       
                                                                                                                                          
                   d=1                                  k=2                     a1 ≥1                                    i=1             
                                                                             a2 ,...,ak ≥2
                                                                          a1 +a2 +···+ak =d




                                                                     47
Here, again by a convexity argument, the choice of ai that maximizes the expression in the inner
sum will have the form a1 = 1, a2 = · · · = as+1 = 2, as+2 = · · · = ak−1 = 3, ak = d−3k +s+5. The
                                                p−2      p−2                     p−2
value of a term with these choices is at most 3 2 d s−s d 2 (d−3k+s+5) . Since d 2 ≥ s, to maximize
this bound we take s as large as possible, i.e., s = k − 2. Thus we may bound, again replacing c′p
with c′′p and absorbing a constant depending only on p,
                                                                                                                  
                                                        d+1
                 D                     d         2
                                                                                                                    
                                − p−2
                 X                          p−2 d X                      p−2                        X
           1/2
                       c′′p D                          k!2 (k − 2)−(k−2) d 2 (d−2k+3)
                                                                                                                    
      ≤n                           2       d 2 +
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                    
                 d=1                              k=2                                                a1 ≥1         
                                                                                                  a2 ,...,ak ≥2
                                                                                               a1 +a2 +···+ak =d


                  √ sum is at most the number of integer partitions of d, which per Proposition D.3
Here, the remaining
is of order exp(O( d)). We have k!/(k − 2)k−2 ≲ k 2 ≤ d2 , and k!d−(p−2)k ≤ k k d−k ≤ 1. Putting
everything together, we find

                 D                √     d                   
                 X                                    3
      ≤n   1/2
                       c′′p eO(1/ d)            1 + d 2 (p−2)+3 .
                 d=1

Finally, for c′′p sufficiently small, the remaining summation is bounded by a series of the form
             d K for some constant K, which is a convergent series. Thus we find Corr        2
P
  d≥1 (1 − ϵ) d                                                                        ≤D (P) ≤
2∥γ∥2 = O(n1/2 ), completing the proof.


6     Application 2: Distinguishing Wigner from Wishart Tensors
We first state the result we will prove formally (combining the upper and lower bound claims from
the Introduction in Theorems 1.9 and 1.10).

Theorem 6.1 (Low-degree analysis for Wigner vs. Wishart detection). Suppose that µn are prob-
ability measures on Symp (Rn ) satisfying the following properties for A ∼ µn :

    1. For all i ∈ [n]p having a repeated entry, Ai1 ,...,ip = 0 almost surely.

    2. There is a constant C > 0 such that, for all i ∈ [n]p , |Ai1 ,...,ip | ≤ C almost surely.

    3. ∥A∥2F = np almost surely.

Let Z1 , . P
           . . , Zr ∼ Gin(n, 1/n) be i.i.d. and A1 , . . . , Ar ∼ µn be i.i.d., and write P = Pn,r for the law
of r−1/2 rj=1 Zj · Aj . There is a constant ap,C > 0 such that the following holds. Suppose that
                  p
D = D(n) ≤ n/2p2 is given and r = r(n) satisfies

                                                                  np    if p is odd,
                                                                                      
                                                r ≥ ap,C ·          3
                                                                      p                    .                            (100)
                                                                  n 2 if p is even

Then, Adv≤D (Q = Wig, Pn,r(n) ) = O(1).



                                                                     48
    Further, suppose that µn is supported on a single tensor A having all entries with no repeated
indices in their position equal to c = c(p, n) > 0. Let D = 3 if p is even and D = 4 if p is odd, and
suppose that r = r(n) satisfies
                                           p
                                             n     if p is odd,
                                                                
                                     r≪        3                  .                             (101)
                                             n 2 p if p is even
Then, Adv≤D (Q = Wig, Pn,r(n) ) = ω(1).
   We establish some preliminary facts about the Ginibre ensemble.
Proposition 6.2. Gin(n, σ 2 ) is orthogonally invariant: if Z ∼ Gin(n, σ 2 ) and Q ∈ O(n), then QZ
and ZQ both again have the law Gin(n, σ 2 ).
Corollary 6.3. For any random tensor T , the law of Z · T when Z ∼ Gin(n, 1/n) independently
of T is orthogonally invariant.
    A version of the Weingarten formula for EQ∼Haar(n) Q⊗ℓ (see Appendix C) also holds for tensor
powers of Z ∼ Gin(n, σ 2 ). In fact, the formula is simpler: it only contains the leading order terms
of the Weingarten formula.
Proposition 6.4. EZ∼Gin(n,σ2 ) Z ⊗ℓ = σ ℓ µ w(µ) ⊗ w(µ).
                                           P

Proof. The result follows directly from an application of the Isserlis–Wick formula.

This simple fact implies remarkable simplifications for the cumulants of a tensor formed as Z · T .
Corollary 6.5. Let G be a p-regular multigraph on d vertices. Then,
                                                                             npd/2
                                              E            κG (Z · T ) =           mG (T ).                      (102)
                                      Z∼Gin(n,1/n)                           npd/2

Moreover, let G(0) := G \ Frob(G) be G with all Frobenii removed. Then,

                                                             npd/2
                           E           κcG (Z · T ) =              m (0) (T )(∥T ∥2F − np )|Frob(G)| .           (103)
                      Z∼Gin(n,1/n)                           npd/2 G
Proof. Write b := pd/2 as usual. For the first claim, we observe by Corollary 6.3 that

       E        κG (Z · T ) =           E         m!G (Z · T )
 Z∼Gin(n,1/n)                   Z∼Gin(n,1/n)
                                                           X
                           =            E                               ⟨e⊗2            ⊗2
                                                                          i1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eib , T
                                                                                               ⊗d ⊗pd
                                                                                                 Z    ⟩
                                Z∼Gin(n,1/n)
                                                  i1 ,...,ib distinct
                             1              X              X
                           = b                                 ⟨e⊗2            ⊗2
                                                                 i1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ eib , T
                                                                                      ⊗d
                                                                                         w(µ) ⊗ w(µ)⟩ (Proposition 6.4)
                            n
                                     i1 ,...,ib distinct µ

and here only the matching that corresponds to the one of equal indices in the first term in the
inner product contributes, whereby
                                1           X
                           =                               mG (T )
                                nb
                                     i1 ,...,ib distinct

                                nb
                           =       mG (T ),
                                nb

                                                                  49
as claimed. For the second result, we first expand by definition over subsets of Frobenii, and then
use the first result on each term:
                                X
        E       κcG (Z · T ) =      (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S|    E      κG\S (Z · T )
   Z∼Gin(n,1/n)                                                               Z∼Gin(n,1/n)
                               S⊆Frob(G)
                                                                                   b−p|S|
                                                                          p|S| n
                                 X
                                                 |S|
                          =                 (−1) (n − b + p|S|)                             mG\S (T )
                                                                              nb−p|S|
                               S⊆Frob(G)


and by multiplicativity of the ordinary graph moments,

                                                X                                               nb−p|S|
                          = mG(0) (T )                 (−1)|S| (n − b + p|S|)p|S|                       (∥T ∥2F )|Frob(G)|−|S|
                                                                                                nb−p|S|
                                            S⊆Frob(G)


and writing f := |Frob(G)| and introducing s := |S|, we have

                                        f  
                                       X    f                        nb−ps
                          = mG(0) (T )        (−1)s (n − b + ps)ps b−ps (∥T ∥2F )f −s
                                            s                        n
                                       s=0
                                        f  
                                       X    f       (n − b + ps)!        n!        1
                          = mG(0) (T )        (−1)s                                   (∥T ∥2F )f −s
                                            s          (n − b)! (n − b + ps)! nb−ps
                                       s=0
                              b            f  
                            n            X    f
                          = b mG(0) (T )        (−np )s (∥T ∥2F )f −s
                            n                 s
                                                s=0
                           nb
                          = b mG(0) (T )(∥T ∥2F − np )f
                           n
by the binomial theorem, completing the proof.

Proof of Theorem 6.1. We first express the expectations of the centered cumulants of P in terms
of those of Gin(n, 1/n) · µ, and evaluate the latter using Corollary 6.5:
                                                r
                                                            !
                c                        c  1 X
             E κG (T ) =       E        κG √       Z i · Ai
           T ∼P          Zi ∼Gin(n,1/n)      r
                                                       i=1
                              Ai ∼µ
                                                                 r
                                       nb
                                                                                         
                               X                                Y
                                                                    c   1          1
                     =                                 E           κG √ Zi · Ai ; − 1Frob
                       G ⊔···⊔G =G
                                   nb1 · · · nbr Zi ∼Gin(n,1/n) i=1 i    r         r
                          1        r
                                                              Ai ∼µ
                                                                  r
                                        X              nb       Y
                     = r−d/2                  b1         br         E        κGi (Z · A)    c

                                G ⊔···⊔G =G
                                            n    · · · n    i=1
                                                                Z∼Gin(n,1/n)
                                  1         r
                                                                           A∼µ
                                                       r
                         nb                X           Y
                     =        r−d/2                          E mG(0) (A)(∥A∥F − n )
                                                                                      2         p |Frob(Gi )|
                                                                                                                .
                         nb                                A∼µ        i
                                       G1 ⊔···⊔Gr =G i=1

We make a few observations.


                                                            50
                                                        (0)
   First, if G contains any self-loops, then some Gi contains a self-loop in every term of the sum.
For this i, by our assumption that A is zero on entries with repeated indices, we have mG(0) (A) = 0
                                                                                                                    i
almost surely. Thus the entire sum is zero, so ET ∼P κcG (T ) = 0 whenever G has self-loops.
    Second, and similarly, if G contains any Frobenii, then some exponent of ∥A∥2F − np is positive
in each term in the sum. By our assumption we have ∥A∥2F − np = 0 almost surely when A ∼ µ, so
ET ∼P κcG (T ) = 0 whenever G has any Frobenii as well.
    Lastly, let us consider the case where G has neither self-loops nor Frobenii. We may bound
the ordinary graph moments naively by using our assumption that the entries of A ∼ µ are almost
surely uniformly bounded by a constant C > 0. This implies

                                      |mG (A)| ≤ C |V (G)| n|E(G)| ,                                                    (104)

since mG (A) is a sum of n|E(G)| terms, each of which is a product of |V (G)| factors of size at most
C. Using this, we find
                                                             X
                              | E κcG (T )| ≤ C d nb r−d/2          1
                               T ∼P
                                                              G1 ⊔···⊔Gr =G
                                                  d b −d/2+|conn(G)|
                                             ≤C n r

where we have used that the number of partitions G1 ⊔· · ·⊔Gr = G is just the number of assignments
of each connected component of G to one of r bins, or r|conn(G)| .
    Since G has no self-loops or Frobenii, it has no connected components on two vertices. Note
that, depending on the parity of p, the smallest possible size of a connected component in G will
differ: when p is even then it is 3, but when p is odd then it is 4. This will ultimately lead to the
different thresholds depending on the parity of p in our result. Let us give this number a name:
                                                                
                                                3 if p is even,
                                  ξ = ξ(p) :=                      .                            (105)
                                                4 if p is odd

   Substituting the above bound into Corollary 4.24, we find
                            D
                            X                                  X
           Adv≤D (Wig, P) ≲   (C 2 r−1 np/2 )d                                          r2|conn(G)|
                              d=0                           G∈Gd,p
                                                  |V (K)|≥ξ for all K∈conn(G)
                              D              d/ξ                               ℓ
                              X              X                X                Y
                                  2 −1 p/2 d                              2ℓ
                            ≤   (C r n )                              r              |Gai ,p |
                              d=0                 ℓ=1 ξ≤a1 ≤···≤aℓ             i=1
                                                      a1 +···+aℓ =d


and using Proposition 5.9, we have

                              D                       d/ξ                                         ℓ      p−2
                              X
                                  2 p+1 −p/2 −1 p/2 d
                                                      X                    X
                                                                                             2ℓ
                                                                                                  Y            ai
                            ≤   (C e p      r n )                                        r              ai 2
                              d=0                              ℓ=1 ξ≤a1 ≤···≤aℓ                   i=1
                                                                   a1 +···+aℓ =d




                                                   51
and a convexity argument shows that the inner product over ai is maximized when a1 = · · · =
aℓ−1 = ξ and aℓ = d − (ℓ − 1)ξ. We may therefore continue bounding

                                D                                 d/ξ
                                X                  p−2            X                     X
                            ≤     (C 2 ep+1 p−p/2 ξ 2 r−1 np/2 )d                                  r2ℓ dd−(ℓ−1)ξ
                                d=0                                            ℓ=1 ξ≤a1 ≤···≤aℓ
                                                                                   a1 +···+aℓ =d


Now, since d ≤ D ≤ n1/2 by assumption, while r ≥ n3 (provided we choose ap,C ≥ 1), we have
r2 ≥ n6 while dξ ≤ d4 ≤ n2 , so r2 ≥ dξ and the largest term of the remaining sum is the one where
ℓ = d/ξ. Using Proposition D.3 to bound the number of terms in the sum, we find

                                D                                             √
                                X                      p−2
                            ≤         (C 2 ep+1 p−p/2 ξ 2 r−1 np/2 )d · exp(O( d))r2d/ξ dξ
                                d=0
                                ∞                                   √        −(1− 2ξ ) p/2 d
                                X                       p−2
                                                                                          
                            ≤         dξ C 2 ep+1 p−p/2 ξ 2 exp(O(1/ d)) · r          n      .
                                d=0

                                                  p       ξ
                                                      ·
    Thus we find that, provided that r ≥ ap n 2 ξ−2 , the base of the exponent in the above series will
be strictly smaller than 1, so the sum will converge and and the proof will be complete. When p is
even, then ξ = 3 and the exponent of n in the condition above is 3p/2, while when p is odd, then
ξ = 4 and the exponent is p, so this gives precisely the stated result in both cases.
    Finally, for the upper bound, note that for this choice of deterministic A we have mG (A) ≍
n|E(G)| for each G, since each term in the sum in mG (A) is equal and close to 1. We thus have for
any G on d vertices that
                                       c          pd/2 −d/2+|conn(G)|
                                    E κG (T ) ≍ n      r                                         (106)
                                  T ∼P

by the same calculations as above. Let us take d = ξ ∈ {3, 4} and G any connected p-regular graph
on ξ vertices (say, a triangle with every edge repeated p/2 times when p is even, or a complete
graph on 4 vertices with each edge of one perfect matching repeated p − 2 times and the other edges
occurring once when p is odd). We have |conn(G)| = 1. By Corollary 4.24, we may lower bound
the advantage by the contribution of just the term corresponding to this graph G, which, since it
is of constant size, has |eAut(G)| = O(1), so
                                                                   2
                                                  −pξ/2       c
                              Adv≤D (Wig, P) ≳ n          E κG (T )
                                                                        T ∼P
                                                              −pξ/2
                                                  ≳n                  (npξ/2 )2 r−ξ+2

and using Proposition D.1 on the falling factorials gives

                                                  ≳ r−ξ+2 npξ/2 ,

which diverges by our assumption both when p is even and when p is odd.

Remark 6.6. It appears difficult to substantially relax the assumption that ∥A∥2F = np exactly.
Indeed, considering terms corresponding to G consisting only of Frobenii, if we had a bound |∥A∥2F −
np | ≤ K (or, speaking more roughly, if the typical scale of this difference is K) then we see that

                                                          52
our bounds would yield |EκcG (T )| ≤ C d npd/2 K d/2 , and this would be the best bound we can achieve
regardless of the value of r. Thus even if K is a constant this would not give an O(1) bound on the
advantage. It would be more natural to assume that ∥A∥2F − np is centered and O(np )-subgaussian,
say, in our result, but (at least with a naive bounding strategy as we have taken) such an assumption
would therefore not suffice to control the above terms when D = ω(1). The same issue arises with
relaxing the assumption that the diagonal entries of A ∼ µ are exactly zero.


Acknowledgments
Some of this work was carried out at the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing and the
Banff International Research Station for Mathematical Innovation and Discovery. We are grateful
to Denis Bernard, Guy Bresler, Josh Grochow, Sam Hopkins, Nick Read, Tselil Schramm, Guilhem
Semerjian, Piotr Śniady, and Dan Spielman for helpful discussions. C.M. is especially grateful to
Alex Russell for his hospitality during a sabbatical long ago when they learned about free probability
and explored diagrammatic methods.


References
[ABAČ13]      Antonio Auffinger, Gérard Ben Arous, and Jiřı́ Černỳ. Random matrices and
               complexity of spin glasses. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics,
               66(2):165–201, 2013.

[ABP73]        M. Atiyah, R. Bott, and V.K. Patodi. On the heat equation and the index theorem.
               Inventiones Math., 19:279–330, 1973.

[ADGM17]       Anima Anandkumar, Yuan Deng, Rong Ge, and Hossein Mobahi. Homotopy analysis
               for tensor PCA. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 79–104. PMLR, 2017.

[AGVP23]       Octavio Arizmendi, Jorge Garza-Vargas, and Daniel Perales. Finite free cumulants:
               multiplicative convolutions, genus expansion and infinitesimal distributions. Trans-
               actions of the American Mathematical Society, 376(06):4383–4420, 2023.

[AHH12]        Andris Ambainis, Aram W Harrow, and Matthew B Hastings. Random tensor
               theory: extending random matrix theory to mixtures of random product states.
               Communications in Mathematical Physics, 310(1):25–74, 2012.

[AMP16]        Kwangjun Ahn, Dhruv Medarametla, and Aaron Potechin. Graph matrices: norm
               bounds and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03423, 2016.

[AP18]         Octavio Arizmendi and Daniel Perales. Cumulants for finite free convolution. Jour-
               nal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 155:244–266, 2018.

[Ban10]        Teodor Banica. The orthogonal Weingarten formula in compact form. Letters in
               Mathematical Physics, 91(2):105–118, 2010.

[BB20]         Matthew Brennan and Guy Bresler. Reducibility and statistical-computational gaps
               from secret leakage. In 33rd Annual Conference on Learning Theory (COLT 2020),
               pages 648–847. PMLR, 2020.

                                                 53
[BB24]       Kiril Bangachev and Guy Bresler. On the Fourier coefficients of high-dimensional
             random geometric graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12589, 2024.

[BBH21]      Matthew Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Brice Huang. De Finetti-style results for
             Wishart matrices: Combinatorial structure and phase transitions. arXiv preprint
             arXiv:2103.14011, 2021.

[BBN20]      Matthew Brennan, Guy Bresler, and Dheeraj Nagaraj. Phase transitions for de-
             tecting latent geometry in random graphs. Probability Theory and Related Fields,
             178(3):1215–1289, 2020.

[BCRT20]     Giulio Biroli, Chiara Cammarota, and Federico Ricci-Tersenghi. How to iron out
             rough landscapes and get optimal performances: averaged gradient descent and its
             application to tensor PCA. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical,
             53(17):174003, 2020.

[BDER16]     Sébastien Bubeck, Jian Ding, Ronen Eldan, and Miklós Z Rácz. Testing for
             high-dimensional geometry in random graphs. Random Structures & Algorithms,
             49(3):503–532, 2016.

[BEAH+ 22]   Afonso S Bandeira, Ahmed El Alaoui, Samuel Hopkins, Tselil Schramm, Alexander S
             Wein, and Ilias Zadik. The Franz-Parisi criterion and computational trade-offs in
             high dimensional statistics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
             35:33831–33844, 2022.

[BGG+ 16]    Vijay V. S. P. Bhattiprolu, Mrinalkanti Ghosh, Venkatesan Guruswami, Euiwoong
             Lee, and Madhur Tulsiani. Multiplicative approximations for polynomial optimiza-
             tion over the unit sphere. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., TR16-185, 2016.

[BGL17]      Vijay Bhattiprolu, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Euiwoong Lee. Sum-of-squares
             certificates for maxima of random tensors on the sphere. In Approximation,
             Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, AP-
             PROX/RANDOM 2017, volume 81 of LIPIcs, pages 31:1–31:20. Schloss Dagstuhl -
             Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017.

[BGS13]      Valentin Bonzom, Razvan Gurau, and Matteo Smerlak. Universality in p-spin glasses
             with correlated disorder. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
             2013(02):L02003, 2013.

[BHK+ 19]    Boaz Barak, Samuel Hopkins, Jonathan Kelner, Pravesh K Kothari, Ankur Moitra,
             and Aaron Potechin. A nearly tight sum-of-squares lower bound for the planted
             clique problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 48(2):687–735, 2019.

[BM18]       Nicolas Bousquet and Arnaud Mary. Reconfiguration of graphs with connectivity
             constraints. In International Workshop on Approximation and Online Algorithms,
             pages 295–309. Springer, 2018.

[Bol82]      Béla Bollobás. The asymptotic number of unlabelled regular graphs. Journal of the
             London Mathematical Society, 2(2):201–206, 1982.


                                             54
[Bon24]       Remi Bonnin. Universality of the Wigner-Gurau limit for random tensors. arXiv
              preprint arxiv:2404.14144, 2024.

[Bra37]       Richard Brauer. On algebras which are connected with the semisimple continuous
              groups. Annals of Mathematics, 38(4):857–872, 1937.

[CDN14]       Chun-Feng Cui, Yu-Hong Dai, and Jiawang Nie. All real eigenvalues of symmetric
              tensors. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications, 35(4):1582–1601, 2014.

[CGL23a]      Benoı̂t Collins, Razvan Gurau, and Luca Lionni. The tensor Harish-Chandra–
              Itzykson–Zuber integral II: Detecting entanglement in large quantum systems. Com-
              munications in Mathematical Physics, pages 1–48, 2023.

[CGL23b]      Benoı̂t Collins, Razvan G Gurau, and Luca Lionni. The tensor Harish-Chandra–
              Itzykson–Zuber integral I: Weingarten calculus and a generalization of monotone
              Hurwitz numbers. Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 2023.

[CMSS06]      Benoit Collins, James A. Mingo, Piotr Sniady, and Roland Speicher. Second order
              freeness and fluctuations of random matrices, III. Higher order freeness and free
              cumulants. Documenta Mathematica, 12, 07 2006.

[COGHK+ 22] Amin Coja-Oghlan, Oliver Gebhard, Max Hahn-Klimroth, Alexander S Wein, and
            Ilias Zadik. Statistical and computational phase transitions in group testing. In
            Conference on Learning Theory, pages 4764–4781. PMLR, 2022.

[Col03]       Benoı̂t Collins. Moments and cumulants of polynomial random variables on unitary
              groups, the Itzykson-Zuber integral, and free probability. International Mathematics
              Research Notices, 2003(17):953–982, 2003.

[CŚ06]       Benoı̂t Collins and Piotr Śniady. Integration with respect to the haar measure
              on unitary, orthogonal and symplectic group. Communications in Mathematical
              Physics, 264(3):773–795, 2006.

[DdL+ 22]     Jingqiu Ding, Tommaso d’Orsi, Chih-Hung Liu, Stefan Tiegel, and David Steurer.
              Fast algorithm for overcomplete order-3 tensor decomposition. arXiv preprint
              arXiv:2202.06442, 2022.

[DDL23]       Jian Ding, Hang Du, and Zhangsong Li. Low-degree hardness of detection for cor-
              related Erdős-Rényi graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15931, 2023.

[DHS20]       Jingqiu Ding, Samuel B Hopkins, and David Steurer. Estimating rank-one spikes
              from heavy-tailed noise via self-avoiding walks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.13735,
              2020.

[DMW23]       Abhishek Dhawan, Cheng Mao, and Alexander S Wein. Detection of dense subhy-
              pergraphs by low-degree polynomials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08135, 2023.

[Evn21]       Oleg Evnin. Melonic dominance and the largest eigenvalue of a large random tensor.
              Letters in Mathematical Physics, 111(3):66, 2021.



                                               55
[Ger31]     S. Geršgorin. Über die abgrenzung der eigenwerte einer matrix. Bulletin de
            l’Académie des Sciences de l’URSS. Classe des sciences mathématiques et na, pages
            749–754, 1931.

[GJJ+ 20]   Mrinalkanti Ghosh, Fernando Granha Jeronimo, Chris Jones, Aaron Potechin, and
            Goutham Rajendran. Sum-of-squares lower bounds for Sherrington-Kirkpatrick via
            planted affine planes. In 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
            ence (FOCS 2020), pages 954–965. IEEE, 2020.

[GJW24]     David Gamarnik, Aukosh Jagannath, and Alexander S Wein. Hardness of random
            optimization problems for Boolean circuits, low-degree polynomials, and Langevin
            dynamics. SIAM Journal on Computing, 53(1):1–46, 2024.

[Gur14]     Razvan Gurau. Universality for random tensors. In Annales de l’IHP Probabilités
            et statistiques, volume 50, pages 1474–1525, 2014.

[Gur17]     Răzvan Gheorghe Gurău. Random tensors. Oxford University Press, 2017.

[Gur20]     Razvan Gurau. On the generalization of the Wigner semicircle law to real symmetric
            tensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02660, 2020.

[GW98]      Roe Goodman and Nolan R. Wallach. Representations and Invariants of the Clas-
            sical Groups. Cambridge University Press, 1998.

[Hak63]     Seifollah Louis Hakimi. On realizability of a set of integers as degrees of the vertices
            of a linear graph II. Uniqueness. Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied
            Mathematics, 11(1):135–147, 1963.

[Has20]     Matthew B Hastings. Classical and quantum algorithms for tensor principal com-
            ponent analysis. Quantum, 4:237, 2020.

[HKP+ 17]   Samuel B Hopkins, Pravesh K Kothari, Aaron Potechin, Prasad Raghavendra, Tselil
            Schramm, and David Steurer. The power of sum-of-squares for detecting hid-
            den structures. In 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
            (FOCS), pages 720–731. IEEE, 2017.

[Hop18]     Samuel Hopkins. Statistical inference and the sum of squares method. PhD thesis,
            Cornell University, 2018.

[HR18]      Godfrey H Hardy and Srinivasa Ramanujan. Asymptotic formulaæ in combinatory
            analysis. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 2(1):75–115, 1918.

[HS17]      Samuel B Hopkins and David Steurer. Efficient Bayesian estimation from few sam-
            ples: community detection and related problems. In 58th Annual Symposium on
            Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 379–390. IEEE, 2017.

[HSS15]     Samuel B. Hopkins, Jonathan Shi, and David Steurer. Tensor principal component
            analysis via sum-of-square proofs. In Peter Grünwald, Elad Hazan, and Satyen
            Kale, editors, Proc. 28th Conference on Learning Theory, volume 40 of Proceedings
            of Machine Learning Research, pages 956–1006, 2015.

                                              56
[HSSS16]    Samuel B. Hopkins, Tselil Schramm, Jonathan Shi, and David Steurer. Fast spectral
            algorithms from sum-of-squares proofs: tensor decomposition and planted sparse
            vectors. In Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
            Computing, pages 178––191, 2016.

[Iss18]     L. Isserlis. On a formula for the product-moment coefficient of any order of a normal
            frequency distribution in any number of variables. Biometrika, 12:134–139, 1918.

[JLM20]     Aukosh Jagannath, Patrick Lopatto, and Leo Miolane. Statistical thresholds for
            tensor PCA. Annals of Applied Probability, 30(4):1910–1933, 2020.

[JP21]      Chris Jones and Aaron Potechin. Almost-orthogonal bases for inner product poly-
            nomials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00216, 2021.

[JPRX23]    Chris Jones, Aaron Potechin, Goutham Rajendran, and Jeff Xu. Sum-of-squares
            lower bounds for densest k-subgraph. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Sym-
            posium on Theory of Computing, pages 84–95, 2023.

[KVWX23]    Pravesh Kothari, Santosh S Vempala, Alexander S Wein, and Jeff Xu. Is planted
            coloring easier than planted clique? In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on
            Learning Theory, pages 5343–5372. PMLR, 2023.

[KWB22]     Dmitriy Kunisky, Alexander S Wein, and Afonso S Bandeira. Notes on computa-
            tional hardness of hypothesis testing: Predictions using the low-degree likelihood
            ratio. In Paula Cerejeiras and Michael Reissig, editors, Mathematical Analysis,
            its Applications and Computation, pages 1–50, Cham, 2022. Springer International
            Publishing.

[LMSY22]    Siqi Liu, Sidhanth Mohanty, Tselil Schramm, and Elizabeth Yang. Testing thresh-
            olds for high-dimensional sparse random geometric graphs. In Proceedings of the
            54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 672–677,
            2022.

[Mas14]     Laurent Massoulié. Community detection thresholds and the weak ramanujan prop-
            erty. In Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of com-
            puting, pages 694–703, 2014.

[MFC+ 19]   Antoine Maillard, Laura Foini, Alejandro Lage Castellanos, Florent Krzakala,
            Marc Mézard, and Lenka Zdeborová. High-temperature expansions and message
            passing algorithms. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,
            2019(11):113301, 2019.

[Mik20]     Dan Mikulincer. A CLT in Stein’s distance for generalized Wishart matrices and
            higher order tensors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10846, 2020.

[MR95]      Michael Molloy and Bruce Reed. A critical point for random graphs with a given
            degree sequence. Random Structures & Algorithms, 6(2-3):161–180, 1995.

[MR11]      Cristopher Moore and Alexander Russell. A graph integral formulation of the circuit
            partition polynomial. Combinatorics, Probability & Computing, 20(6):911, 2011.

                                             57
[MR14]     Andrea Montanari and Emile Richard. A statistical model for tensor PCA. In
           Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
           Systems - Volume 2, NIPS’14, page 2897–2905. MIT Press, 2014.

[MS17]     James A. Mingo and Roland Speicher. Free Probability and Random Matrices, vol-
           ume 35 of Fields Institute Monographs. Springer, 2017.

[MW19]     Ankur Moitra and Alexander S Wein. Spectral methods from tensor networks. In
           51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2019),
           pages 926–937, 2019.

[NS06]     Alexandru Nica and Roland Speicher. Lectures on the combinatorics of free proba-
           bility, volume 13. Cambridge University Press, 2006.

[NŚ11]    Jonathan Novak and Piotr Śniady. What is. . . a free cumulant?    Notices of the
           American Mathematical Society, 58:300–301, 2011.

[OR20]     Mohamed Ouerfelli and Vincent Rivasseau. A new framework for tensor PCA based
           on trace invariants. 2020.

[OTR22]    Mohamed Ouerfelli, Mohamed Tamaazousti, and Vincent Rivasseau. Random tensor
           theory for tensor decomposition. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
           Intelligence, 36(7):7913–7921, 2022.

[Oue22]    Mohamed Ouerfelli. New perspectives and tools for Tensor Principal Component
           Analysis and beyond. PhD thesis, Université Paris-Saclay, 2022.

[PR22]     Aaron Potechin and Goutham Rajendran. Sub-exponential time sum-of-squares
           lower bounds for principal components analysis. Advances in Neural Information
           Processing Systems, 35:35724–35740, 2022.

[Pro76]    Claudio Procesi. The invariant theory of n × n matrices. Advances in mathematics,
           19(3):306–381, 1976.

[QCC18]    Liqun Qi, Haibin Chen, and Yannan Chen. Tensor eigenvalues and their applica-
           tions, volume 39. Springer, 2018.

[Qi05]     Liqun Qi. Eigenvalues of a real supersymmetric tensor. Journal of Symbolic Com-
           putation, 40(6):1302–1324, 2005.

[Qi07]     Liqun Qi. Eigenvalues and invariants of tensors. Journal of Mathematical Analysis
           and Applications, 325(2):1363–1377, 2007.

[RRS17a]   Prasad Raghavendra, Satish Rao, and Tselil Schramm. Strongly refuting random
           CSPs below the spectral threshold. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 121–131, 2017.

[RRS17b]   Prasad Raghavendra, Satish Rao, and Tselil Schramm. Strongly refuting random
           CSPs below the spectral threshold. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT
           Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2017, page 121–131, 2017.


                                           58
[RSWY23]   Cynthia Rush, Fiona Skerman, Alexander S Wein, and Dana Yang. Is it easier to
           count communities than find them? In 14th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
           Science Conference (ITCS 2023). Schloss-Dagstuhl-Leibniz Zentrum für Informatik,
           2023.

[Sem24]    Guilhem Semerjian. Matrix denoising: Bayes-optimal estimators via low-degree
           polynomials. arXiv preprint arxiv:2402.16719, 2024.

[Sub17]    Eliran Subag. The complexity of spherical p-spin models — a second moment ap-
           proach. The Annals of Probability, 45(5):3385–3450, 2017.

[SW22]     Tselil Schramm and Alexander S Wein. Computational barriers to estimation from
           low-degree polynomials. The Annals of Statistics, 50(3):1833–1858, 2022.

[WAM19]    Alexander S. Wein, Ahmed El Alaoui, and Cristopher Moore. The Kikuchi hierarchy
           and tensor PCA. In 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
           Science, FOCS 2019, pages 1446–1468. IEEE Computer Society, 2019.

[Wei23]    Alexander S Wein. Average-case complexity of tensor decomposition for low-degree
           polynomials. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
           Computing (STOC 2023), pages 1685–1698, 2023.

[Wen88]    Hans Wenzl. On the structure of Brauer’s centralizer algebras. Annals of Mathe-
           matics, 128(1):173–193, 1988.

[Wey46]    Hermann Weyl. The Classical Groups: Their Invariants and Representations. 1946.

[Wic50]    G. C. Wick. The evaluation of the collision matrix. Physical Review, 80:268–272,
           1950.

[Wil99]    Todd G Will. Switching distance between graphs with the same degrees. SIAM
           Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 12(3):298–306, 1999.

[WZ24]     Yuchen Wu and Kangjie Zhou. Sharp analysis of power iteration for tensor PCA.
           arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01047, 2024.

[ZJ09]     Paul Zinn-Justin. Jucys-Murphy elements and Weingarten matrices. arXiv preprint
           arXiv:0907.2719, 2009.




                                           59
A       Characterizations of Invariants
Our goal in this Appendix is to give diagrammatic proofs of Theorems 3.2, 3.6, and 3.15. We
first discuss the first two Theorems on invariant polynomials. Recall that we say that a function
f : Symp (Rn ) → R is invariant if, for all T ∈ Symp (Rn ) and all Q ∈ O(n), f (Q · T ) = f (T ).
Similarly, a function f : Symp1 (Rn ) × Symp2 (Rn ) × . . . × Sympm (Rn ) → R is invariant if, for any
symmetric tensors T1 , . . . , Tm of arity p1 , . . . , pm respectively, f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) = f (Q · T1 , . . . , Q · Tm )
for all Q ∈ O(n).
     A priori, restricting T to Symp (Rn ) could weaken the definition of invariance. There are indeed
polynomials that are invariant on symmetric tensors but not on general tensors: for instance, for
2 × 2 matrices, the function m211 + 2m212 + m222 is the Frobenius norm ∥M ∥2F and hence invariant,
but only if M is symmetric. However, the following proposition shows that we can always replace
such a polynomial with one that is invariant on general tensors by symmetrizing over O(n). In
what follows we will identify invariant polynomials with this symmetrized version.
Proposition A.1. Suppose f is an invariant polynomial. Then there is a polynomial g of the same
degree which coincides with f on Symp (Rn ) and which is invariant on all tensors, i.e., g(Q · T ) =
g(T ) for all T ∈ (Rn )⊗p .
Proof. Let g(T ) = EQ f (Q · T ), where the expectation is over the Haar measure on O(n).

    Next, we show Theorem 3.2, which says that any invariant polynomial is a linear combination of
graph moments. This generalizes a similar fact for matrices: the invariant polynomials of a matrix
are precisely the symmetric polynomials of its eigenvalues. These in turn can be written in terms
of spectral moments, or equivalently traces of T ’s matrix powers.
Theorem A.2. Let R be the ring of polynomials f : Sym2 (Rn ) → R in the entries of a matrix
so that, for any orthogonal matrix Q, f (T ) = f (Q⊤ T Q). Then R is generated by the polynomials
mℓ (T ) = tr(T ℓ ) for ℓ ≥ 0. In particular, any
                                             P invariant homogeneous polynomial f (T ) of degree d
is a linear combination of graph moments i αi mGi (T ) where each Gi is a disjoint union of cycles
with a total of d vertices.
Example A.3. For instance, f (T ) = (tr T )2 tr(T 2 ) tr(T 3 ), which is a polynomial of degree 7, is
mG (T ) where G is the 2-regular multigraph          .

Proof of Theorem 3.2. We illustrate the proof in Figure 10. First note that any polynomial f of
degree d in a p-ary tensor T can be written as an inner product between T ⊗d and a vector of
coefficients C, which we can also view as a dp-ary tensor.
   Now, if f is invariant, it remains the same if we place a copy of any orthogonal matrix Q⊤ on
each of the dp edges of T ⊗d . But this is equivalent to applying Q⊗dp to C: that is,

            f (Q⊤ · T ) = ⟨Q⊤ · T ⊗d , C⟩ = ⟨T ⊗d , Q · C⟩ = ⟨T ⊗d , Q⊗dp C⟩ = ⟨T ⊗d , C⟩ = f (T ) .

Since f (T ) = ⟨T ⊗d , Q⊗dp C⟩ for any Q ∈ O(n), we can symmetrize C by taking the expectation
over the Haar measure, obtaining
                                        f (T ) = ⟨T ⊗d , Πdp C⟩ ,                        (107)
where
                                                  Πℓ =       E     Q⊗ℓ ,                                             (108)
                                                          Q∈O(n)


                                                            60
                                           T                     T
         T                   T                                                      T               T
                                 =    Q    Q       Q       Q     Q       Q =
                 C                                                                          Q⨂dpC
                                                       C



                                 = 𝛼𝜇                                      + 𝛼𝜇´
         T                   T                 T                     T                  T               T

              𝔼Q
=                                                                                                           +…
                   ⨂dp
                         C


Figure 10: The proof of Theorem 3.2. Any homogeneous polynomial of degree d can be written
as the inner product of T ⊗d with a dp-ary tensor of coefficients C. By hypothesis the function is
unchanged if we symmetrize these coefficients by conjugating them with a Haar-random orthogonal
matrix Q. But their image under the projection operator E Q⊗dp is a linear combination of matching
vectors, each of which induces a multigraph connecting the copies of T .


the projection operator that we discussed in Section 3.3. Specifically, Πℓ projects onto the trivial
subspace under the action of O(n), i.e., the set of vectors w ∈ (Rn )⊗ℓ such that Q⊤ · w = Q⊗ℓ w = w
for all Q ∈ O(n).
               P     As we present there, it follows from representation theory that Πℓ may be
written Πℓ = µ,ν Wgµ,ν w(µ) ⊗ w(ν) for some Wgµ,ν ∈ R, µ, ν perfect matchings of [ℓ], and w(µ)
the indicator vector of pairs of indices being equal under the matching µ.
                    of Πℓ is spanned by the w(µ), the symmetrized coefficients Πdp C in (107) are a
    Since the image P
linear combination µ αµ w(µ). But for each µ, ⟨T ⊗d , w(µ)⟩ is exactly a graph moment mG(µ) (T ),
where G(µ) is the multigraph G(µ) formed by matching the dp half-edges of its vertices according
to µ. (The reader may be familiar with the configuration model of random graphs [MR95] where
µ is uniformly random.) Thus                    X
                                       f (T ) =    αµ mG(µ) (T ) .
                                                   µ

as illustrated in Figure 10. This completes the proof for invariant polynomials f (T ) of a single
p-ary tensor.

Proof of Theorem 3.6. For invariant polynomials of multiple tensors f (T1 , . . . , Tm ), if p is homoge-
neous of degree di in each Ti and each Ti has arity ki , we can write it as an inner product
                                                        * m         +
                                                         O ⊗d
                                 f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) =     Ti i , C ,
                                                               i=1
                                                                 P
where the tensor of coefficients C has total arity ℓ =               i di ki . The argument then goes through as
before; see Figure 11 for an example.

Again by similar arguments, we may also prove Theorem 3.15 on equivariant polynomials and open
graph moments.




                                                       61
                                        U       V      V        W




Figure 11: Generalizing the argument of Theorem 3.2 to mixed moments. The inner product of
U ⊗ V ⊗ V ⊗ W with the matching vector shown gives the multigraph on the right in Figure 3 and
the mixed moment (14).


Proof of Theorem 3.15. Let W be an ℓ-ary tensor of indeterminates. Then if f (T ) is ℓ-ary and
equivariant, the inner product P = ⟨f (T ), W ⟩ is an invariant function of T and W . Simi-
larly, if f (T1 , . . . , Tm ) is equivariant, then F = ⟨f (T1 , . . . , Tm ), W ⟩ is an invariant function of
{T1 , . . . , Tm , W }.
    If f (T ) is a homogeneous polynomial, then F (T, W ) is a homogeneous polynomial of degree 1
in W , i.e., which is multilinear in W ’s entries. By Theorem 3.2, F is a linear combination of mixed
moments mG (T, W ) where W corresponds to a single vertex w of degree ℓ and G’s other vertices
have degree p. Then each entry of f (T ) is a partial derivative of F (T, W ) by the corresponding
entry of W ,
                                                             ∂F (T, W )
                                             f (T )i(E ′ ) =            .
                                                              ∂Wi(E ′ )
Taking this partial derivative removes W ’s vertex from G, leaving a p-regular open multigraph
G \ {w} with |F | = ℓ open edges. This completes the proof for f (T ), and mutatis mutandis for
f (T1 , . . . , Tm ).


B     Properties of Wigner Tensors
B.1    Basic Properties
We give some further properties of T ∼ Wig(p, n, σ 2 ). As a result of symmetrizing over all permu-
tations π, the entries of T have different variances depending on the pattern of repetitions in their
indices. Specifically, their variance is equal to the size of their stabilizer subgroup, i.e., the number
of permutations in Sk which leave them unchanged.
Proposition B.1. Let T ∼ Wig(p, n, σ 2 ). For a given sequence of indices i = (i1 , . . . , ip ) ∈ [n]p
and j ∈ [n], let cj (i) be the number of times j appears in i. Then
                                                              
                                                     Yn
                                      Ti ∼ N 0, σ 2    cj (i)! .
                                                          j=1

Proof. Write m = nj=1 cj (i)!. Then m is the number of permutations π such that π(i) = i, and
                    Q
the number of distinct π(i) contributing to Ti in (5) is p!/m. For each of these the same Gπ(i)
appears m times in (5), multiplying its variance by m2 . Since the Gπ(i) are independent, we then
have Var Ti = (σ 2 /p!) × (p!/m) × m2 = σ 2 m.

   This ensemble is orthogonally invariant, and for p = 2 we recover the Gaussian orthogonal
ensemble of random matrix theory.

                                                     62
Proposition B.2. For T ∼ Wig(p, n, σ 2 ), for any Q ∈ O(n), Q · T has the same law as T . In
particular, T ∼ Wig(2, n, 1) has the law of the standard n × n Gaussian orthogonal ensemble, with
Tij = Tji ∼ N (0, 1 + δij ).

B.2    Hardness of Computing Moments
In this section, we give the proof of Theorem 5.3 on the hardness of computing the expected graph
moments of a Wigner tensor. In the course of developing the tools for the proof, we will find various
useful reinterpretations of the quantities involved in the moments.
Definition B.3. Let V be a finite set, p : V → N a degree sequence, and G(V, p) the set of graphs
(with loops and parallel edges allowed) on V such that each v ∈ V has degree p(v). G, H ∈ G(V, p)
are related by a switching if there is a pair of distinct edges {v, w}, {v ′ , w′ } ∈ E(G) such that H is
formed by replacing both of these edges with the edges {v, v ′ }, {w, w′ }. We view G(V, p) as a graph,
where G ∼ H if G and H are related by a switching.
    The switching distance between G and H, denoted dswitch (G, H), is the distance between G and
H in G(V, p), or equivalently the minimum number of switchings required to reach H from G.
We note that the degree sequence is preserved by the switching operation, so we must restrict our
attention to a fixed degree sequence for the switching distance to be defined. Even so, it is not
obvious that the switching distance is finite, but this is indeed the case. Also, we emphasize that,
unlike with the sets Gd,p in the main text, we are working with labelled graphs here.
Proposition B.4 (Lemma 1 of [Hak63]). Whenever G(V, p) is non-empty, then it is connected.
Thus, dswitch (G, H) < ∞ for any G, H ∈ G(V, p).
Remark B.5 (Loops and parallel edges). We will rely on the results of the works [Hak63, Wil99,
BM18], which variously work with not G(V, p) but the induced subgraph on the vertex set consisting
either of simple graphs or loopless multigraphs (with parallel edges allowed). However, implicit in
their results are the following facts:
  1. The induced subgraphs of G(V, p) on both simple graphs and on loopless multigraphs are con-
     nected.
  2. There is a path between simple graphs (respectively, loopless multigraphs) G, H ∈ G(V, p) of
     minimum length passing through only simple graphs (respectively, loopless multigraphs); that
     is, the distance between G and H in the induced subgraph on simple graphs (respectively,
     loopless multigraphs) equals the distance in G(V, p).
Thus we will rephrase their results over G(V, p) without further comment.
    Moreover, we may always reduce switching distance computations from a sequence of possibly
large degrees to the case p ≡ 1, which corresponds to sets of perfect matchings.
Definition B.6. For G ∈ G(V, p), let V ′ be a set of size v∈V p(v), which we view as consisting
                                                                  P
    ′
of va,b for a ∈ V and b ∈ [p(a)]. We say that a perfect matching µ ∈ G(V ′ , 1) realizes G if G is
                            ′ , . . . , v′
obtained from identifying va,1           a,p(a) into a single vertex for each a.

In other words, µ realizes G if G would be obtained from µ under the configuration model; this is
in somewhat different language the same definition used in the main text in constructing the graph
Weingarten function.

                                                   63
Proposition B.7. dswitch (G, H) = min{dswitch (µG , µH ) : µG realizes G, µH realizes H}.
Definition B.8. For G and H defined on the same vertex set, we write G△H for the graph
containing the symmetric difference of the edge sets G and H, where if G has a edges between i
and j and H has b edges between i and j, then G△H has |a − b| edges between i and j. We view
this graph as being colored, where, in the above setting, if a > b then the edges between i and j are
blue, and otherwise they are red.
    A symmetric circuit in such a colored graph is a closed walk of even length alternating between
red and blue edges. A symmetric circuit partition is a partition of the edges into symmetric circuits.
We denote the number of circuits in the largest symmetric circuit partition by circ(G, H).
    The following useful fact shows that the (minimum) switching distance is essentially equivalent
to the maximum circuit partition.
Proposition B.9 (Theorem 2.5 of [Wil99], Theorem 22 of [BM18]). dswitch (G, H) = 12 |E(G△H)|−
circ(G, H).
The proofs cited above treat simple and loopless graphs, respectively, but the same argument
extends straightforwardly to graphs with loops as well. One way to see this is to use Proposition B.7
to rephrase the computation of dswitch (G, H) as a similar computation of matchings realizing G and
H, which are simple graphs and to which the results of [Wil99] apply.
Corollary B.10. dswitch (G, H) ≤ |E(G)| = |E(H)|.
Proof. The result follows since |E(G△H)| = 2|E(G − H)| ≤ 2|E(G)|.

  We now move towards relating the switching distance to the quantities involved in the Wigner
moments; in particular, we will relate it to the exponent cmax (G), which we recall satisfied:

                                          E     mG (W ) ∼ ncmax (G) .                                 (109)
                                       W ∼Wig

Definition B.11. For p a constant and |V | even, denote by F = F(V, p) ⊂ G(V, p) the subset of
multigraphs that consist of a disjoint union of Frobenii of degree p.
   Our first main result is that the exponent cmax (G) may be computed through the minimum
switching distance to a set of Frobenii.
Lemma B.12. For any p-regular G, cmax (G) = |E(G)| − dswitch (G, F).
We note that, while F and G refer to sets of labelled graphs, the quantities being computed here
do not depend on the labelling, since F is invariant under permutations of the vertex labels.

Proof. Let v = |V (G)|, identify V (G) with [v], and let µ be a perfect matching realizing G. View
the vertex set of µ as [v] × [p], so that (v, 1), . . . , (v, p) are the “expanded” vertex set corresponding
to v ∈ V . To any even edge coloring of G we may associate a perfect matching κ of [v] and perfect
matchings η{i,j} of [p] for each {i, j} ∈ κ, so that vertices matched in κ have the same edge colors
in their neighborhoods, and η{i,j} isFa matching between half-edges of the same color incident with
i and with j. We may view µ′ := {i,j}∈κ η{i,j} as a matching on the same vertex set as µ. The
number of colors in the given edge coloring of G is at most the number of cycles into which µ ⊔ µ′
decomposes; conversely, there is an even edge coloring of G with precisely this number of edge

                                                     64
colors, formed by assigning a different color to the edges of G corresponding to the edges of µ lying
in each cycle.
    But, the possible µ′ described above are precisely the matchings that realize a graph of (p-
regular) Frobenii on [v]. Thus cmax (G) is equivalently the maximum number of cycles into which
µ ⊔ µ′ decomposes for any µ′ realizing a graph of Frobenii on [v]; moreover, the same holds for any
µ realizing G. Let us write cyc(µ ⊔ µ′ ) for this quantity. We have shown so far that

                cmax (G) = max{cyc(µ ⊔ µ′ ) : µ realizes G, µ′ realizes some F ∈ F}.                (110)

   Now, separating the 2-cycles in µ ⊔ µ′ , which correspond to edges shared between µ and µ′ ,
from longer cycles and using Proposition B.9, we have

                        cyc(µ ⊔ µ′ ) = cyc(µ△µ′ ) + |µ ∩ µ′ |
                                                                              
                                                 ′                1          ′
                                     = circ(M, M ) + |E(µ)| − |E(µ△µ )|
                                                                  2
                                                                             
                                                   1
                                     = |E(G)| −      |E(µ△µ′ )| − circ(µ, µ′ )
                                                   2
                                     = |E(G)| − dswitch (µ, µ′ ).

Finally, substituting, we find

           cmax (G) = |E(G)| − min{dswitch (µ, µ′ ) : µ realizes G, µ′ realizes some F ∈ F}
                    = |E(G)| − dswitch (G, F),

completing the proof.

   We also learn some interesting structural facts about maximum even edge colorings from this
proof, using the interpretation of cmax (G) in (110).

Proposition B.13. In any maximum even edge coloring, for any vertex, all edges adjacent to that
vertex have distinct colors.

Proof. Suppose otherwise. By (110), we then have a matching µ of [d] × [p] realizing G and another
matching µ′ realizing a disjoint union of Frobenii. Suppose without loss of generality that there are
two edges incident with vertex 1 and having the same color, i.e., two edges in µ, touching vertices
among (1, 1), . . . , (1, p), and belonging to the same cycle in µ ⊔ µ′ . Suppose again without loss of
generality that these latter vertices are (1, 1) and (1, 2). Under µ′ , all vertices with first coordinate
1 are matched to vertices with some other first coordinate i. So, suppose (1, 1) is matched with
(i, j) and (1, 2) with (i, k). Define µ′′ by instead matching (1, 1) with (i, k) and (1, 2) with (i, j).
Then, the cycle containing these edges in µ ⊔ µ′ is broken into two cycles, while all other cycles are
unchanged. Thus, the original coloring must not have had the maximum number of colors, and we
reach a contradiction.

Proposition B.14. In any maximum even edge coloring, every colored neighborhood occurs exactly
twice.




                                                   65
Proof. A similar argument applies in this case as well. In the matching interpretation, if there is
a colored neighborhood occurring four (or more) times in a coloring, then the same collection of p
cycles in µ ⊔ µ′ must pass through the vertices (ia , 1), . . . , (ia , p) for a = 1, 2, 3, 4 and some choice
of i1 , i2 , i3 , i4 ∈ [d]. Suppose without loss of generality that the (i1 , j) are matched to the (i2 , j)
and the (i3 , j) to the (i4 , j) in µ′ (if the cycles only pass through four of the same collections of
vertices such a pairing must occur; if there are more such collections then one may find such pairs
by following the matching of µ′ . Then, it is possible to instead match either the (i1 , j) to the (i3 , j)
or the (i4 , j) such that one of the p cycles is broken into two (by matching its endpoints differently),
and no two of the other cycles are merged (by matching their endpoints to one another arbitrarily
without joining two distinct cycles). Again, the total number of cycles must increase by at least 1,
contradicting the maximality of the original choice of µ′ .

    As a corollary of this result we learn that wmax (G), the sum of the “weights” of even edge
colorings with cmax (G) colors as defined in the main text, is actually just a counting problem of the
number of non-isomorphic even edge colorings with this number of colors; the weights necessarily
always equal 1.
    Finally, to prove Theorem 5.3, we will use the connection between cmax and the switching
distance that we have developed as well as the following result.

Theorem B.15 (Theorem 3.2 of [Wil99]). It is NP-hard to decide whether dswitch (G, H) ≥ d given
d ≥ 0 and simple graphs G, H on the same vertex set and having the same degree sequence.

Remark B.16. It may be tempting to try to use the cumulants we have defined to compute mH and
its Wigner expectation, and thereby to compute or estimate cmax and so a switching distance. The
issue with such a strategy appears to be that computing with the relationship between the cumulants
and the graph moments requires forming the graph Weingarten function WgG,H , which involves a
summation over the matchings realizing G and H. There are exponentially many of these matchings,
and indeed enumerating them would allow one to compute the switching distance by brute force.

Proof of Theorem 5.3. We will show that if it is possible to compute cmax (G), then it is also possible
to compute switching distances between simple graphs. Namely, let G, H be simple graphs on a
shared vertex set V and with a shared degree sequence p : V → N. We will show that computing
dswitch (G, H) may be encoded in the computation of cmax (J) for a certain graph J = J(G, H). By
Proposition B.12,    this is equivalent to computing dswitch (J, F). Let v = |V |, identify V with [v],
              1P
and set e = 2 v∈V p(v) = |E(G)| = |E(H)|.
    We form J on the vertex set {1, . . . , v, 1′ , . . . , v ′ }. For i, j ∈ {1, . . . , v}, we draw one edge
between i and j in J if i ∼ j in G. Likewise, for i′ , j ′ ∈ {1′ , . . . , v ′ }, we draw one edge between
i′ and j ′ in J if i ∼ j in H. Finally, for each i ∈ [v], we draw 3e − p(i) edges between i and i′
in J. Thus, J is a disjoint union of one copy of G and one copy of H, along with a “very heavy
matching” with many repeated edges between corresponding vertices in G and H under their joint
labelling. Note also that J is 3e-regular. The basic idea is that this heavy matching will force the
nearest disjoint union of Frobenii to correspond to the matching of vertices with the same labels in
G and H.
    More formally, let F0 be the graph of Frobenii on the heavy matching in J. We claim that
dswitch (J, F) = dswitch (J, F0 ); that is, that F0 is a minimizer of the switching distance of J to any
disjoint union of Frobenii. Indeed, we have dswitch (J, F0 ) ≤ dswitch (G, H) + e ≤ 2e, because to reach
F0 we may first transform G into (a copy of) H by switchings, and then align pairs of corresponding

                                                     66
edges in the two copies of H with F0 one at a time. (We also use the inequality dswitch (G, H) ≤ e
from Corollary B.10.) On the other hand, for any F ∈ F \ {F0 }, to reach F from J we must change
at least the 3e − p(i) edges between i and i′ for some i ∈ v. Since 3e − p(i) ≥ 3e − e ≥ 2e, we have
dswitch (J, F ) ≥ 2e, proving the claim.
    Finally, we claim that the inequality mentioned above is tight, that is, that

                           dswitch (J, F) = dswitch (J, F0 ) = dswitch (G, H) + e.                     (111)

After showing this the proof will be complete.
    By Proposition B.9, we have dswitch (J, F0 ) = 21 |E(J△F0 )| − circ(J, F0 ). Let us view the edges in
J△F0 coming from J as “red” and those coming from F0 as “blue.” Then, by our construction of
J, we have that J△F0 consists of two disjoint red copies of G and H, together with blue matchings
between corresponding vertices in G and H,P           where the edge between i and i′ is repeated p(i) times.
In particular, we have |E(J△F0 )| = 2e + vi=1 p(i) = 4e, so dswitch (J, F0 ) = 2e − circ(J, F0 ) =
e + (e − circ(J, F0 )). Thus it suffices to show that dswitch (G, H) = e − circ(J, F0 ). Further, since
dswitch (G, H) = |E(G − H)| − circ(G, H) = e − |E(G ∩ H)| − circ(G, H), it also suffices to show
circ(J, F0 ) = |E(G ∩ H)| + circ(G, H).
    Given a symmetric circuit partition of G△H, we may produce one of J△F0 by traversing
one blue edge (between G and H) between every edge of the given partition, and also adding
circuits of length 4 including each pair of edges shared between G and H. This shows circ(J, F0 ) ≥
|E(G ∩ H)| + circ(G, H).
    Conversely, we claim that, given a symmetric circuit partition of J△F0 , there is another parti-
tion of at least the same size that contains circuits of length 4 including each pair of edges shared
between G and H. Suppose {i, j} is such an edge. Then, edges {i, j} and {i′ , j ′ } must belong
to different circuits C, C ′ of the partition of J△F0 . In C, {i, j} must be surrounded by two blue
edges m1 , m2 of the heavy matching, and likewise in C ′ , {i′ , j ′ } must be surrounded by two blue
edges m′1 , m′2 . Then, we may form another symmetric circuit partition by replacing C, C ′ with
{{i, j}, m1 , {i′ , j ′ }m2 }, (C \ {{i, j}, m1 }) ⊔ (C ′ \ {{i′ , j ′ }, m′1 }) which is of the same size.
    So, there is a maximum symmetric circuit partition of J△F0 that contains all circuits of length
4 including pairs of edges shared between G and H. The remaining circuits in such a parti-
tion correspond to a symmetric circuit partition of G△H. Thus we have the opposite inequality
circ(J, F0 ) ≤ |E(G ∩ H)| + circ(G, H) as well, and the proof is complete.

   Despite this hardness result, it is still possible to give some tractable and general bounds on
the exponent cmax (G).

Proposition B.17. For any simple p-regular G on d vertices,

                                                          (p + 1)d
                                           cmax (G) ≤              .                                   (112)
                                                              4
Equality holds if and only if G has a transitive perfect matching µ: a matching such that, whenever
{v, v ′ }, {w, w′ } ∈ µ and v ∼ w, then v ′ ∼ w′ as well.

It is an interesting simplification of the problem of computing cmax (G) to check whether the con-
dition for this bound being saturated holds or not. When p = 3, one may check that a transitive
perfect matching exists if and only if each connected component of G is isomorphic to one of two
graphs built from a union of two cycles: if we imagine forming a cubical complex from this graph

                                                     67
by adding a 2-cell between the “lateral” edges connecting edges of the transitive perfect matching,
then the resulting surface must either be a cylinder without its top and bottom or the same with
a “twist,” i.e., a Möbius band. Once p ≥ 4, such a simple classification seems elusive, and it is
unclear whether to expect the problem to be easy or hard.


C     Conditioning of Weingarten Matrices
We have discussed in Section 3.3 the structure of the projection operator Π = Πℓ = EQ Q⊗ℓ . As
stated there, Πℓ projects onto the space spanned by the matching vectors w(µ) defined in (16)
where µ is a perfect matching of [ℓ]. Thus the projection may be written
                                        X
                                Πµ,ν =     (M −1 )µ,ν w(µ) ⊗ w(ν),                      (113)
                                           µ,ν

where M −1 is the inverse of the Gram matrix

                                         Mµ,ν = ⟨w(µ), w(ν)⟩ ,

or the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse if the w(µ) are overcomplete and M is not of full rank. For
matching vectors, the Gram matrix is given by

                         Mµ,ν = ⟨wµ , wν ⟩ = n# of cycles in µ ⊔ ν = nℓ/2−∆(µ,ν) .                (114)

Here by µ ⊔ ν we mean the 2-regular multigraph with ℓ vertices whose edges are the pairs in µ and
ν, and each of these cycles gives a factor of n. We define ∆(µ, ν) as the minimum number of swaps
it takes to transform µ to ν, where a swap changes two pairs in a matching from {(a, b), (c, d)} to
{(a, c), (b, d)} or {(a, d), (b, c)}. The relation

                                 # of cycles in µ ⊔ ν = ℓ/2 − ∆(µ, ν)

follows because µ ⊔ ν has ℓ/2 cycles if and only if µ = ν, and each swap on a shortest path from µ
to ν merges two cycles into one. See Figure 12 for an example.
    The inverse of M is called the Weingarten function and is denoted Wg. Thus
                                         X
                                   Π=       Wgµ,ν w(µ) ⊗ w(ν) ,
                                           µ,ν

where the sum is over all perfect matchings µ, ν of [ℓ]. By permutation symmetry, Wgµ,ν =
(M −1 )µ,ν is a function only of the cycle structure of µ ⊔ ν, i.e., the number of cycles of each length
that this graph has. For this reason Wg is often called a function, but for our purposes we will
view it as a matrix and seek to understand its spectrum, or equivalently the spectrum of M .
    For sufficiently large n, M is dominated by its diagonal, and a representation-theoretic argu-
ment [Bra37, Wen88] shows that M has full rank whenever n ≥ ℓ/2. However, we need the stronger
property that its smallest eigenvalue is bounded above zero. Using a simple counting argument we
will show that this holds, and moreover that the matrix is well-conditioned, whenever n > (1 + ϵ)ℓ2 .

Proposition C.1. Suppose that n > ℓ2 . Then the Gram matrix M defined in (114) has full rank,
and all of its eigenvalues lie in the interval [nℓ/2 (1 − ℓ2 /n), nℓ/2 (1 + ℓ2 /n)].

                                                    68
Figure 12: The inner product of two matching vectors w(µ), w(ν) as defined in (16) is n raised to
the number of cycles in their disjoint union µ ⊔ ν. In this example, ℓ = 8 and there are two cycles
in µ ⊔ ν, one of length 2 and one of length 6. Thus ⟨w(µ), w(ν)⟩ = n2 and µ and ν are ∆(µ, ν) = 2
swaps apart.

                                                                                                ℓ t
Proof. Since there are only 2ℓ possible swaps, for any matching µ there are at most                   2   t
                                                                                                
                                                                                                2 ≤ (ℓ /2)
matchings ν such that ∆(µ, ν) = t. Therefore, if we write
                                                        (
                             ℓ/2                          0         µ=ν
                      M = n (1 + H) where Hµν =
                                                          n−∆(µ,ν) µ ̸= ν ,

then if n > ℓ2 the sum of any row Hµ of H gives a bound on the operator norm of H,
                                               ∞  2 t
                                     X        X     ℓ
                               |H| ≤    Hµν ≤            ≤ ℓ2 /n .
                                                    2n
                                            ν̸=µ           t=1

The Geršgorin circle theorem [Ger31] then implies that M has full rank whenever n > ℓ2 and that
its eigenvalues lie in the stated interval.

    Since the eigenvalues of Wg are the reciprocals of those of M , Proposition C.1 implies that Wg
is well-conditioned.
Corollary C.2. Suppose that n ≥ 2ℓ2 . Then, all of the eigenvalues of (Wgµ,ν ) lie in the interval
[ 12 n−ℓ/2 , 2n−ℓ/2 ].
Remark C.3. Proposition C.1 and Corollary C.2 are essentially tight, since when n = o(ℓ2 ) then
                                                2
the largest eigenvalue of Wg is roughly n−ℓ/2 eℓ /2n . We outline the argument, which we learned of
from a personal communication with Piotr Śniady. Per Proposition 5 of [ZJ09] (originally due to
[Col03]), the distinct eigenvalues of Wg correspond to Young diagrams λ of ℓ boxes with an even
number of boxes in each row.8 We write λ/2 for the same diagram where the number of boxes
in each row is halved. We view these diagrams as sets of (i, j), the “coordinates” of the boxes of
the diagram, with i, j ≥ 0 so that the box in the top left corner has coordinates (0, 0), the one
below coordinates (1, 0), the one
                              Q to the right coordinates (0, 1), and so forth. Then, the eigenvalue
of Wg associated to λ is 1/( (i,j)∈λ/2 (n + j − i)). The largest eigenvalue of Wg is then the one
corresponding to λ two columns of ℓ/2 boxes each, which gives
                                                        ℓ/2−1                   2
                                 1               −ℓ/2
                                                        Y    1                  ℓ
                         Qℓ/2−1             =n                 i
                                                                 ≈ n−ℓ/2 exp        ,                    (115)
                                  (n − i)                   1− n                2n
                           i=0                          i=0
  8
   Actually, this correspondence could give another more explicit treatment of the conditioning results derived
above, but we prefer to give a self-contained treatment using the simpler Geršgorin circle theorem.


                                                           69
as claimed.

   In the main text we mostly encounter not this Weingarten function over matchings, but the
“graph Weingarten function” that we define indexed by Gd,p (Definition 4.16). This has entries
                                                           X
                                         WgG,H =                    Wgµ,ν                   (116)
                                                     µ realizes G
                                                     ν realizes H

for G, H ∈ Gd,p . We also recall from Proposition 4.17 that the number of summands over each axis
is
                                                          p!d d!
                                    #{µ realizes G} =            .                          (117)
                                                       |eAut(G)|
Using this, we state a corollary on the spectrum of this compressed version of Wg in the form that
will be useful in the main text.
                                        p
Corollary C.4. Suppose that pd ≤ n/2 is even. Then the symmetric matrix indexed by G, H ∈
Gd,p with entries                       p
                                 pd/2    |eAut(G)| · |eAut(H)|
                               n      ·                        · WgG,H                       (118)
                                               p!d d!
has all its eigenvalues lying in the interval [ 12 , 2].

Proof. Write ℓ := pd. Define a matrix Je indexed by G ∈ Gd,p and µ perfect matchings of [pd] with
                    s
                      |eAut(G)|                            1
           JeG,µ :=        d
                                1{µ realizes G} = p                  1{µ realizes G}.       (119)
                         p! d!                       #{µ realizes G}

By construction, we have Je Je⊤ = 1. On the other hand, calling X the matrix in the claim, we have
                                                 e ℓ/2 Wg)Je⊤ .
                                             X = J(n                                        (120)

By Corollary C.2, we then have
                                              X ⪯ 2JeJe⊤ = 21,                              (121)
and the lower bound follows similarly.

   By an identical proof and using Proposition 4.29, we also have the following variation for the
Weingarten matrix appearing for open multigraphs.
                                          p
Corollary C.5. Suppose that pd − 1 ≤ n/2 is even. Then the symmetric matrix indexed by
G, H ∈ Gd,p→ with entries
                            p
                 (pd−1)/2    |eAut(chop(G))| · |eAut(chop(H))|
               n          ·                                    · Wgchop(G),chop(H)          (122)
                                  p!d−1 (p − 1)!(d − 1)!

has all its eigenvalues lying in the interval [ 12 , 2].




                                                       70
   As an aside, let us mention that computing Wg explicitly is a notoriously difficult problem. We
can get a sense of how its entries scale by writing it as a geometric series,
                                                                             ∞
                                                                             X
                                 −1        −ℓ/2             −1        −ℓ/2
                       Wg = M         =n          (1 + H)        =n            (−1)t H t ,     (123)
                                                                             t=0

and expand this into a sum over paths through the space of perfect matchings. For a given pair of
matchings µ, ν, let {µ ∼ ν} denote the set of paths σ where µ = σ0 ̸= σ1 ̸= · · · =
                                                                                  ̸ σt = ν for some
t ≥ 0, and write |σ| = t. Define ∆(σ) as σ’s total length in swap distance,
                                                   t
                                                   X
                                       ∆(σ) =             ∆(σi , σi−1 ) ,
                                                    i=1

and define g(σ) as σ’s geodesic defect, i.e., the difference between its length and the shortest-path
distance between its endpoints,

                                      g(σ) = ∆(σ) − ∆(µ, ν) ≥ 0 .

Then (following [CŚ06, Ban10]) we have
                                                  X
                            Wgµν = n−ℓ/2                  (−1)|σ| n−∆(σ)                       (124)
                                             σ∈{µ∼ν}
                                                            X
                                  = n−ℓ/2−∆(µ,ν)                   (−1)|σ| n−g(σ) .            (125)
                                                          σ∈{µ∼ν}


Thus for graphs of constant size we have Wgµν = O(n−ℓ/2−∆(µ,ν) ). The prefactor for a given Wgµν ,
i.e., the sum of signed geodesics from µ to ν, might grow rapidly with ℓ.
     For instance, for D = 4 where there are 3 perfect matchings, the rows of M and Wg where
µ = {(1, 2), (3, 4)} are

                        ν      {(1, 2), (3, 4)} {(1, 3), (2, 4)} {(1, 4), (2, 3)}
                       Mµ,ν          n2                n                n
                                     n+1                  −1                      −1
                       Wgµ,ν     n(n−1)(n+2)          n(n−1)(n+2)             n(n−1)(n+2)


D     Combinatorial Bounds
We gather some auxiliary combinatorial results that are used in the main text.

Proposition D.1. Suppose k ≤ n/2. Then, nk exp(−k 2 /n) ≤ nk ≤ nk .

Proof. The upper bound is immediate. For the lower bound, we have:
                                                          
                             k     k           1        k−1
                            n =n ·1· 1−            · 1−
                                               n          n
                                          k−1          !
                                          X           i
                               = nk exp       log 1 −
                                                      n
                                                   i=0


                                                      71
and here, noting that log(1 − x) ≥ −2x for all 0 ≤ x ≤ 12 , we have

                                                k−1
                                                     !
                                              2 X
                                    ≥ nk exp        i
                                              n
                                                i=0
                                              2
                                       k        k
                                    ≥ n exp −        ,
                                                n

as claimed.

Proposition D.2. A chain of subsets of [n] is a sequence of strict inclusions ∅ ⊊ A1 ⊊ A2 ⊊ · · · ⊊
Ak ⊊ [n]. The number of chains of subsets of [n] is at most 3n n!.

Proof. Call C(n) the number of chains on [n]. The chains are in bijection with the ordered set
partitions of [n], where a chain as defined in the statement corresponds to the partition (A1 , A2 \
A1 , · · · , [n] \ Ak ). Every ordered set partition consists recursively of a choice of a non-empty set
and an ordered set partition on the remaining elements. Thus, C(0) = 1 and for n ≥ 1 we have
                             n                            n  
                             X  n                           X  n
                    C(n) =           C(n − i) = nC(n − 1) +      C(n − i).                        (126)
                                   i                           i
                             i=1                                       i=2

We proceed by strong induction. Clearly the claim holds for n = 0. Suppose that the claim holds
for all C(m) with 0 ≤ m ≤ n − 1. Then,
                                                     n  
                                        n−1
                                                     X  n
                             C(n) ≤ 3         n! +              3n−i (n − i)!3n−i
                                                            i
                                                     i=2
                                                        n
                                                         !
                                        n       1    3−i
                                                       X
                                   = 3 n!         +
                                                3     i!
                                                 i=2
                                                          
                                      n      1         1
                                   ≤ 3 n!      + exp       −1
                                             3         3
                                   < 3n n!,

completing the proof.

Proposition D.3 (Section 2 of [HR18]). An integer partition of d ≥ 1 is a sequence of 1 ≤ a1 ≤
· · · ≤ aℓ such that a1 + · · · + aℓ = d. There
                                            √ is an absolute constant C > 0 so that the number of
integer partitions of d is at most d1 exp(C d) for all d ≥ 1.




                                                      72
