                                           Uniformity, Universality, and Computability Theory
arXiv:1606.01976v2 [math.LO] 23 Mar 2017




                                                                           Andrew S. Marks∗

                                                                          September 1, 2018



                                                                                Abstract
                                                     We prove a number of results motivated by global questions of uni-
                                                 formity in computability theory, and universality of countable Borel
                                                 equivalence relations. Our main technical tool is a game for construct-
                                                 ing functions on free products of countable groups.
                                                     We begin by investigating the notion of uniform universality, first
                                                 proposed by Montalbán, Reimann and Slaman. This notion is a strength-
                                                 ened form of a countable Borel equivalence relation being universal,
                                                 which we conjecture is equivalent to the usual notion. With this addi-
                                                 tional uniformity hypothesis, we can answer many questions concerning
                                                 how countable groups, probability measures, the subset relation, and
                                                 increasing unions interact with universality. For many natural classes
                                                 of countable Borel equivalence relations, we can also classify exactly
                                                 which are uniformly universal.
                                                     We also show the existence of refinements of Martin’s ultrafilter on
                                                 Turing invariant Borel sets to the invariant Borel sets of equivalence
                                                 relations that are much finer than Turing equivalence. For example,
                                                 we construct such an ultrafilter for the orbit equivalence relation of the
                                                 shift action of the free group on countably many generators. These ul-
                                                 trafilters imply a number of structural properties for these equivalence
                                                 relations.

                                             ∗
                                               The author was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grants
                                           DMS-1204907 and DMS-1500974 and the Turing Centenary research project “Mind, Mech-
                                           anism and Mathematics”, funded by the John Templeton Foundation under Award No.
                                           15619.




                                                                                     1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                3
  1.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  1.2 Basic definitions, notation, and conventions . . . . . . . . . .       11
  1.3 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      13

2 Games and equivariant functions                                         14
  2.1 The main game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
  2.2 The free part of the shift action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
  2.3 Results in reverse mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

3 Uniform universality                                                     24
  3.1 Introduction to uniform universality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
  3.2 Basic results on uniform universality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  3.3 Limitations on controlling countable joins . . . . . . . . . . . 30
  3.4 Uniform universality and equivalence relations from computabil-
      ity theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
  3.5 Contrasting results in the measure context and on 3ω . . . . . 37

4 Ultrafilters on quotient spaces                                        45
  4.1 An introduction to ultrafilters on quotient spaces . . . . . . . 45
  4.2 A natural ultrafilter on the quotient of E(F∞ , 2ω ) . . . . . . . 48
  4.3 K-structurable equivalence relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
  4.4 Ultrafilters for K-structurable equivalence relations closed un-
      der independent joins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56




                                      2
1     Introduction
1.1   Introduction
In this paper, we investigate a number of problems concerning uniformity
and universality among countable Borel equivalence relations and in com-
putability theory.
    In a sense, this paper is a sequel to [28]. In that paper, we used Borel
determinacy to prove a Ramsey-like theorem ([28, Lemma 2.1]) for the shift
action of a free product of two groups. We then gave applications of this
result to several problems in Borel graph combinatorics. In this paper, we
generalize the games used in [28] to handle shift actions of free products of
countably many groups. The resulting theorems we prove above these shift
actions are the main technical tool of this paper. However, the applica-
tions we give in this paper are to problems in the study of countable Borel
equivalence relations and computability theory, rather than Borel graph
combinatorics.
    We briefly mention two of the results proved using these games. Recall
that if a group Γ acts on the spaces X and Y then a function f : X → Y is
said be Γ-equivariant if f commutes with the actions of Γ on X and Y , so
γ · f (x) = f (γ · x) for every x ∈ X and γ ∈ Γ. If Γ is a countable discrete
group and X is a Polish space, then Γ acts on the Polish space X Γ via the
left shift action where for all x ∈ X Γ and γ, δ ∈ Γ

                              γ · x(δ) = x(γ −1 δ).

One importance of the shift action is that it is universal in the sense that
every Borel action of Γ on a Polish space X admits a Borel embedding into
the shift action by sending x ∈ X to the function γ 7→ γ −1 · x. We will use
the notation ∗i Γi to denote the free product of the groups {Γi }i∈I .

Theorem 1.1. Suppose I ≤ ω and {Γi }i∈I is a set of countable discrete
groups. Let {Ai }i∈I be a Borel partition of (2ω )∗i Γi . Then there exists some
j ∈ I and an injective continuous function f : (2ω )Γj → (2ω )∗i Γi that is Γj -
equivariant with respect to the shift actions, and such that ran(f ) ⊆ Aj .
Furthermore, f can be chosen to be a Borel reduction between the orbit
equivalence relations induced by the shift actions of Γj on (2ω )Γj and ∗i Γi
on (2ω )∗i Γi .

   That is, if we partition the shift action of the group ∗i∈I Γi into I many
Borel sets {Ai }i∈I , not only does one of the sets Aj contain a copy of the


                                       3
shift action of Γj (as witnessed by a continuous equivariant injection), the
Borel cardinality of the shift action of Γj is also preserved.
    We also have a version of this theorem for the free part of the action.
Given a group Γ and a Polish space X, let

                    Free(X Γ ) = {x ∈ X Γ : Stab(x) = {1}}

be the free part of the left shift action: the largest set where every stabilizer
under this action is trivial. We have an analogous theorem for the free parts
of these actions:

Theorem 1.2. Suppose I ≤ ω and {Γi }i∈I is a set of countable discrete
groups. Let {Ai }i∈ω be a Borel partition of Free((2ω )∗i Γi ). Then there
exists some j ∈ I and an injective continuous function f : Free((2ω )Γj ) →
Free((2ω )∗i Γi ) that is Γj -equivariant with respect to the shift actions, and
such that ran(f ) ⊆ Aj . Furthermore, f can be chosen to be a Borel reduction
between the orbit equivalence relations induced by the shift actions of Γj on
Free((2ω )Γj ) and ∗i Γi on Free((2ω )∗i Γi )

    The use of Borel determinacy is necessary to prove Theorems 1.1 and
1.2 as well as the main lemmas from our earlier paper [28]. We show this
by proving the following reversal:

Theorem 1.3. Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 as well as Lemmas 2.1 and 3.12 from
[28] are equivalent to Borel determinacy over the base theory Z− + Σ1 −
replacement + DC.

    In fact, the reversal of all these theorems requires only one of their sim-
plest nontrivial cases: when there are two groups in the free product which
are both copies of Z. It remains an open question whether any of the conse-
quence of these theorems–both in the current paper and in [28]–require the
use of Borel determinacy in their proofs.1
    In Section 3, we turn to questions of uniformity in the study of universal
countable Borel equivalence relations. We work here in the setting where
a countable Borel equivalence relation E on a standard Borel space X is
given together with some fixed family of partial Borel functions {ϕi }i∈ω on
X that generate E, for which we use the notation E{ϕi } . In this context,
we say that a homomorphism f between E{ϕi } and E{θi } is uniform if a
witness that xE{ϕi } y (that is, a pair of indices (i, j) so that ϕi (x) = y and
   1
     Sherwood Hachtman has resolved these questions. See the footnote before Ques-
tion 2.17.


                                        4
ϕj (y) = x) can be transformed into a witness that f (x)E{θi } f (y) in a way
that is independent of x and y (see Section 3.1 for a precise definition). If
these equivalence relations E{ϕi } and E{θi } are generated by free actions of
countable groups, this is equivalent to the assertion that the cocycle (see
[16, Appendix B]) associated to f is group homomorphism.
    This sort of uniformity arises in the study of Martin’s conjecture, where
Slaman and Steel have shown that Martin’s conjecture for Borel functions
is equivalent to the statement that every homomorphism from Turing equiva-
lence to itself is equivalent to a uniform homomorphism on a Turing cone [38].
This idea also arises often in proving nonreducibility results between count-
able Borel equivalence relations; first we analyze the class of homomorphisms
which are uniform on some “large” (e.g. conull) set, and then prove that
this analysis is complete by showing every homomorphism is equivalent to a
uniform homomorphism on a large set. For instance, this is a typical proof
strategy in applications of cocycle superrigidity to the field of countable
Borel equivalence relations. See for example [1, 16, 39, 41, 46].
    One of the central concepts we study is the idea of uniform universality
for countable Borel equivalence relations, which was introduced in unpub-
lished work by Montalbán, Reimann and Slaman. Precisely, E{ϕi } is said
to be uniformly universal (with respect to {ϕi }i∈ω ) if there is a uniform re-
duction of every countable Borel equivalence relation, presented as E{θi } , to
E{ϕi } . Certainly, all known universal countable Borel equivalence relations
are uniformly universal with respect to the way they are usually generated,
so it is fair to say that the uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence
relations include all countable Borel equivalence relations that we can hope
to prove universal without dramatically new techniques. We make the fol-
lowing stronger conjecture (see Conjecture 3.3):

Conjecture 1.4. A countable Borel equivalence relation is universal if and
only if it is uniformly universal with respect to every way it can be generated.

    One attraction of the notion of uniform universality is that we are able
to settle many open questions about universality with this additional uni-
formity assumption, and we can also prove precise characterizations of what
equivalence relations are uniformly universal in many settings. The bulk of
Section 3 is devoted to theorems of these sorts, and we outline some of our
main results:

Theorem 1.5 (Properties of uniform universality).

  1. For every countable group Γ, there is a Borel action of Γ generating a


                                       5
     uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence relation if and only if
     Γ contains a copy of F2 , the free group on two generators.

  2. Given any uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence relation
     E{ϕi } on a standard probability space (X, µ), there is a µ-conull set
     A for which E{ϕi } ↾ A is not uniformly universal.

  3. Both the uniformly universal and non-uniformly universal countable
     Borel equivalence relations are cofinal under ⊆.

  4. An increasing union of non-uniformly universal countable Borel equiv-
     alence relations is not uniformly universal. An increasing union of
     uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence relations need not be
     uniformly universal.

Theorem 1.6 (Classifications).

  1. If Γ is a countable group, then the shift action of Γ on 2Γ generates a
     uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence relation if and only if
     Γ contains a subgroup isomorphic to F2 .

  2. If Γ is a countable group, then the conjugacy action of Γ on its sub-
     groups is uniformly universal if and only if Γ contains a subgroup iso-
     morphic to F2 .

  3. (Joint with Jay Williams) If G is a countable subgroup of S∞ and X is
     a standard Borel space of cardinality at least 3, then the permutation
     action of G on X ω is uniformly universal if and only if there exists
     some n ∈ ω and a subgroup H ≤ G isomorphic to F2 such that the
     map H → ω given by h 7→ h(n) is injective.

  4. For every additively indecomposable α < ω1 , define the equivalence
     relation ≡(<α) on 2ω by x ≡(<α) y if there exists β < α such that
     x(β) ≥T y and y (β) ≥T x. Then ≡(<α) is uniformly universal if and
     only if there is a β < α such that β · ω = α.

  5. If E{ϕi }i∈ω is a countable Borel equivalence relation on 2ω coarser than
     recursive isomorphism and closed under countable uniform joins, then
     E{ϕi }i∈ω is not uniformly universal. (This includes many-one equiva-
     lence, tt equivalence, wtt equivalence, Turing equivalence, enumeration
     equivalence, etc.). Further, this result is not true when 2ω is replaced
     by 3ω .


                                     6
    Note that several of these results settle open questions about universal
equivalence relations in our more restrictive uniform context. For exam-
ple, Hjorth [2, Question 1.4] [17, Question 6.5.(A)] has asked if E and F are
countable Borel equivalence relations, E is universal, and E ⊆ F , must F be
universal? This is addressed by part (3) of Theorem 1.5. Thomas [41, Ques-
tion 3.22] has asked whether every universal countable Borel equivalence
relation on a standard probability space is non-universal on a conull set.
This is addressed by part (2) of Theorem 1.5. Finally, Thomas has con-
jectured [42, Conjecture 1.5] that free Burnside groups of sufficiently high
rank admit Borel actions generating universal countable Borel equivalence
relations. This contradicts part (1) of Theorem 1.5, when combined with
Conjecture 1.4.
    Many of these abstract properties of uniformly universal equivalence re-
lations hinge upon an analysis of equivalence relations from computability
theory (some of which are mentioned in the second theorem we have stated
above). Of course, the investigation of the universality of equivalence rela-
tions from computability theory is interesting in its own right. For exam-
ple, whether Turing equivalence is a universal countable Borel equivalence
relation is a long open question of Kechris [21], and is closely connected
with Martin’s conjecture on Turing invariant functions, as discussed in [30]
and [6].
    Another important example of a computability-theoretic equivalence re-
lation is that of recursive isomorphism. Suppose Z is a countable set and
G is a group of permutations of Z. Then the permutation action of G
on Y Z is defined by (g · y)(z) = y(g−1 (z)) for g ∈ G, y ∈ Y Z , and z ∈ Z.
Now the equivalence relation of recursive isomorphism on Y ω is defined
to be the orbit equivalence relation of the permutation action of the group
of computable bijections of ω on Y ω . The universality of recursive isomor-
phism on 2ω is a long open question. However, several partial results are
known: Dougherty and Kechris have shown that recursive isomorphism on
ω ω is universal [5, 6], which was later improved to 5ω by Andretta, Camerlo,
and Hjorth [2]. We further improve this result to 3ω :

Theorem 1.7. Recursive isomorphism on 3ω is a universal countable Borel
equivalence relation.

   This argument hinges on reducing the problem of universality to a com-
binatorial problem involving Borel colorings of a family of 2-regular Borel
graphs. The problem can be solved if we are working on 3ω , however
on 2ω , the problem can not be solved, as we demonstrate using our new


                                     7
game-theoretic tools (see Theorem 3.10). Indeed, the games of this pa-
per and of [28] were originally developed specifically to solve this problem.
We also restate this combinatorial problem in computability-theoretic lan-
guage, showing that it is equivalent to an inability to control the computa-
tional power of countable uniform joins in a seemingly simple context (see
Lemma 3.9). These results are the basis of many of our results mentioned
above giving families of equivalence relations which are not uniformly uni-
versal.
    Now while this combinatorial problem related to the universality of re-
cursive isomorphism on 2ω can not be solved in general, it turns out that it
can be solved modulo a nullset with respect to any Borel probability mea-
sure. This leads to the following theorem, and part (2) of Theorem 1.5.
Recall that a countable Borel equivalence relation E is said to be measure
universal if given any Borel equivalence relation F on a standard probability
space (X, µ), there is a Borel µ-conull set A such that F ↾ A can be Borel
reduced to E.

Theorem 1.8. Recursive isomorphism on 2ω is a measure universal count-
able Borel equivalence relation.

    Hence, measure-theoretic tools can not be used to show that recursive
isomorphism on 2ω is not universal.
    Though it remains open whether recursive isomorphism is uniformly uni-
versal, we can rule out a large class of uniform proofs based on the close
connection between recursive isomorphism and many-one equivalence. Thus,
we conjecture the following:

Conjecture 1.9. Recursive isomorphism on 2ω is not a universal countable
Borel equivalence relation.

    If this conjecture is true, it implies the existence of a pair of Borel equiv-
alence relations of different Borel cardinalities (E∞ and recursive isomor-
phism), for which we can not prove this fact using measure-theoretic tools.
Conjecture 1.9 also implies that Turing equivalence is not universal, since it
is Borel reducible to recursive isomorphism via the Turing jump.
    One of the motivations of this paper is the search for new tools with
which to study countable Borel equivalence relations. Currently, measure
theoretic methods are the only known way of proving nonreducibility among
countable Borel equivalence relations of complexity greater than E0 (see
Question 4.2). However, many important open problems in the subject are
known to be resistant to measure-theoretic arguments. For example, it is


                                        8
open whether an increasing union of hyperfinite Borel equivalence relations
is hyperfinite [4], and whether recursive isomorphism on 2ω is a universal
countable Borel equivalence relation [6]. However, an increasing union of
hyperfinite Borel equivalence relations is hyperfinite modulo a nullset with
respect to any Borel probability measure by a theorem of Dye and Kreiger [7,
8, 25], and every countable Borel equivalence relation can be embedded into
recursive isomorphism on 2ω modulo a nullset by Theorem 3.23 of this paper.
    One promising candidate for such a new, non-measure-theoretic tool is
Martin’s ultrafilter on the Turing-invariant sets. Martin’s ultrafilter is some-
times called Martin measure. However, because we will discuss Borel proba-
bility measures often in this paper, we will use the terminology of ultrafilters
to keep this distinction clear. Martin has conjectured a complete classifica-
tion of the homomorphisms from Turing equivalence to itself with respect to
this ultrafilter which would have many consequences for the study of count-
able Borel equivalence relations. See [30] for a survey of connections between
Martin’s conjecture and countable Borel equivalence relations. Many of the
results discussed there are due to Simon Thomas, who first recognized the
tremendous variety of consequences of Martin’s conjecture for the field of
countable Borel equivalence relations, beyond just the non-universality of
Turing equivalence.
    In Section 4, we prove several structure theorems for certain countable
Borel equivalence relations using ultrafilters related to Martin’s ultrafilter,
but which are defined on the quotient of equivalence relations finer than
Turing equivalence. To begin, we generalize results from [30], where we
showed that E∞ is not a smooth disjoint union of Borel equivalence rela-
tions of smaller Borel cardinality and that E∞ achieves its universality on
a nullset with respect to any Borel probability measure (which answered
questions of Thomas [41, Question 3.20] and Jackson, Kechris, and Lou-
veau [17, Question 6.5.(C)]). We show that these results are all true with
E∞ replaced with a larger class of universal structurable Borel equivalence
relations which also includes, for example, the universal treeable countable
Borel equivalence relation, and the equivalence relation of isomorphism of
contractible simplicial complexes.
    Our proof of these results uses our games to define a σ-complete ultrafil-
ter U on the σ-algebra of Borel E-invariant sets for each of these equivalence
relations E. These ultrafilters are very closely related to Martin’s ultrafilter;
the equivalence relations E we consider are all subsets of Turing equivalence,
and our new ultrafilters agree with Martin’s ultrafilter when restricted to
Turing invariant sets. Further, these ultrafilters have structure-preserving
properties reminiscent of Martin’s ultrafilter; if A ∈ U , then E ≤B E ↾ A

                                       9
(i.e. U preserves the Borel cardinality of E).
     We briefly describe the class of equivalence relations for which we obtain
these ultrafilters. Suppose K is a Borel class of countable structures closed
under isomorphism. Then a countable Borel equivalence relation E is said
to be K-structurable if there is a Borel way of assigning a structure from K
to every E-class whose universe is that E-class. This notion was defined by
Jackson, Kechris and Louveau in [17], and Ben Miller has pointed out that
their ideas can be used to show that for every such K, there is a universal K-
structurable countable Borel equivalence relation E∞K (see Theorem 4.13).
It is these equivalence relations for which we obtain our ultrafilters, un-
der the assumption of one more condition: that the class of K-structurable
equivalence relations is closed under independent joins (see Section 4.3 for a
definition). We now state our result precisely (see Theorems 4.14, 4.15, and
4.16).
Theorem 1.10. Suppose K is a Borel class of countable structures closed
under isomorphism, and let E∞K be the universal K-structurable equivalence
relation on the space Y∞K . Then
  1. If µ is a Borel probability measure on Y∞K , there is a µ-null Borel set
     A so that E∞K ⊑iB E∞K ↾ A.

  2. If the class of K-structurable countable Borel equivalence relations is
     closed under binary independent joins, then there is a Borel cardinality
     preserving ultrafilter on the quotient space of E∞K and hence E∞K is
     not a smooth disjoint union of equivalence relations of smaller Borel
     cardinality.

  3. If the class of K-structurable countable Borel equivalence relations is
     closed under countable independent joins, then if {Ai }i∈ω is a Borel
     partition of E∞K into countably many sets, then there exists some Ai
     such that E∞K ⊑B E∞K ↾ Ai . It follows that for all countable Borel
     equivalence relations F , E∞K ≤B F implies E∞K ⊑B F .
    In a future paper joint with Adam Day, we use the ultrafilter constructed
here for the universal treeable countable Borel equivalence relation to prove a
strengthening of Slaman and Steel’s result from [38] that Martin’s conjecture
for Borel functions is equivalent to every Turing invariant function being
uniform Turing invariant on a pointed perfect set.
    We hope that these ultrafilters will continue to be useful tools for study-
ing countable Borel equivalence relations in the future. Because they pre-
serve Borel cardinality, they have the potential for proving much sharper

                                      10
theorems than other tools which do not necessarily have this property, such
as Borel probability measures. Finally, we remark that equivalence rela-
tions of the form E∞K appear to be underappreciated as natural examples
of countable Borel equivalence relations, and many interesting open ques-
tions exist regarding how model-theoretic properties of structures in the
class K influence the complexity of the resulting E∞K 2 .

1.2    Basic definitions, notation, and conventions
Throughout we will use X, Y , and Z for standard Borel spaces, x, y, and z
for elements of these spaces, and A, B, and C for subsets of standard Borel
spaces (which will generally be Borel). We will use f , g, and h for functions
between standard Borel spaces. If A is a subset of a standard Borel space,
we will use Ac to denote its complement.
    A Borel equivalence relation on a standard Borel space X is an
equivalence relation on X that is Borel as a subset of X × X. We will
generally use E and F to denote Borel equivalence relations. If E and
F are Borel equivalence relations on the standard Borel spaces X and Y ,
then f : X → Y is said to be a homomorphism from E to F if for all
x, y ∈ X, we have xEy ⇒ f (x)F f (y). We say that E is Borel reducible
to F , noted E ≤B F , if there is a Borel function f : X → Y so that for
all x, y ∈ X, we have xEy ⇐⇒ f (x)F f (y). Such a function induces an
injection fˆ: X/E → Y /F . The class of Borel equivalence relations under
≤B has a rich structure that been a major topic of research in descriptive set
theory in the past few decades. The field has had remarkable success both
in calibrating the difficulty of classification problems of interest to working
mathematicians, and also in understanding the abstract structure of the
space of all classification problems.
    If E is a Borel equivalence relation on the standard Borel space X, then
A ⊆ X is said to be E-invariant if x ∈ A and xEy implies y ∈ A. If a
group Γ acts on a space X, then we say that A ⊆ X is Γ-invariant if it is
invariant under the orbit equivalence relation of the Γ action. If P is a Borel
property of elements of x, then we will often consider the largest E-invariant
subset of X possessing this property. Precisely, this is the set of x such that
for all y ∈ X where yEx, y has property P .
    If E and F are equivalence relations on standard Borel spaces X and
Y , then a Borel embedding of E into F is an injective Borel reduction
from E to F . If there is a Borel embedding from E to F we denote this
   2
    Since a first draft of this paper was circulated, these questions have been investigated
by Chen and Kechris [3]


                                            11
by E ⊑B F . An invariant Borel embedding is one whose range is F -
invariant. If there is an invariant Borel embedding from E to F we denote
this by E ⊑iB F .
     A Borel equivalence relation is said to be countable if all of its equiv-
alence classes are countable. A countable Borel equivalence relation E is
said to be universal if for all countable Borel equivalence relations F , we
have F ≤B E. Universal countable Borel equivalence relations arise natu-
rally in many areas of mathematics. For example, isomorphism of finitely
generated groups [43], conformal equivalence of Riemann surfaces [15], and
isomorphism of locally finite connected graphs [23] are all universal count-
able Borel equivalence relations.
     If E is a countable Borel equivalence relation on X, we will use φ, ψ, θ to
denote partial Borel functions X → X whose graphs are contained in E. By
a theorem of Feldman and Moore [9], for every countable Borel equivalence
relation E, there exists countably many Borel involutions {φi }i∈ω of X such
that xEy if and only if there exists an i such that φi (x) = y. Hence, every
countable Borel equivalence relation is generated by the Borel action of some
countable group.
     Throughout, we use Γ and ∆ to denote countable groups, which we al-
ways assume to be discrete, and we use the lowercase α, β, γ, δ for their
elements. If X is a standard Borel space, then so is the space X Γ of func-
tions from Γ to X whose standard Borel structure arises from the product
topology. We let E(Γ, X) denote the equivalence relation on X Γ of orbits of
the left shift action where xE(Γ, X)y if there is a γ ∈ Γ such that γ · x = y.
By [4], if Γ contains a subgroup isomorphic to the free group F2 on two gen-
erators, and X has cardinality ≥ 2, then E(Γ, X) is a universal countable
Borel equivalence relation.
     If a group Γ acts on a space X, then the free part of this action is the
set Y of x ∈ X such that for every nonidentity γ ∈ Γ, we have γ · x 6= x. We
use the notation Free(X Γ ) to denote the free part of the left shift action of
Γ on X Γ . We will also let F (Γ, X) denote the restriction of the equivalence
relation E(Γ, X) to this free part.
     A Borel graph on a standard Borel space X is a symmetric irreflexive
relation on X that is Borel as a subset of X × X. If Γ is a marked countable
group (i.e. a group equipped with a generating set) and X is a standard
Borel space, then we let G(Γ, X) note the graph on Free(X Γ ) where there is
an edge between x and y if there is a generator γ of Γ such that γ · x = y or
γ · y = x. Hence, the connected components of G(Γ, Y ) are the equivalence
classes of F (Γ, X).
     A Borel n-coloring of a Borel graph G is a function f from the vertices

                                      12
of G to n such that if x and y are adjacent vertices, then f (x) 6= f (y). A
fact we use several times is that G(Z, 2) has no Borel 2-coloring, equipping
the additive group Z with its usual set of {1} (see [20]). A graph is said to
be d-regular if every vertex of the graph has exactly d neighbors. We also
have from [20] that every Borel d-regular graph has a Borel (d + 1)-coloring.
    Give two reals x, y ∈ 2ω , the join of x and y, noted x ⊕ y is defined
by setting (x ⊕ y)(2n) = x(n) and (x ⊕ y)(2n + 1) = y(n) for all n. The
join of finitely many reals is defined analogously. If we fix some computable
bijection h·, ·i : ω 2 → ω, we define the uniform
                                                                    L
                                                L computable join i∈ω xi of
countably many reals x0 , x1 , . . . by setting   i∈ω xi (hn, mi) = xn (m). If
s∈2   <ω               ω         a
          and x ∈ 2 , we use s x to denote the concatenation of s followed
by x.
    We use x′ to denote the Turing jump of a real x. If α is a notation for
a computable ordinal, then we let x(α) denote the αth iterate of the Turing
jump relative to x.

1.3   Acknowledgments
Theorems 3.7 and 3.23 are from the author’s thesis [26]. The author would
like his thesis advisor, Ted Slaman, for many years of wise advice.
    The author would also like to thank Clinton Conley, Adam Day, Alekos
Kechris, Ben Miller, Jan Reimann, Richard Shore, John Steel, Simon Thomas,
Anush Tserunyan, Robin Tucker-Drob, Jay Williams, Hugh Woodin, and
Jindřich Zapletal for many helpful conversations.




                                     13
2     Games and equivariant functions
2.1    The main game
In this section we introduce the games which are the main technical tool
of this paper. They are the natural generalization of the games in [28] to
free products of countably many groups, and we use many of the same ideas
as that paper. Throughout this section, we fix I ≤ ω and some countable
collection {Γi }i∈I of disjoint countable groups. For each i ∈ I, we also fix
a listing γi,0 , γi,1 . . . of the nonidentity elements of Γi . We will often abbre-
viate our indexing for clarity. For example, we write ( i 2ω )∗i Γi instead of
                                                               Q
         ω ∗i∈I Γi .
 Q        
    i∈I 2
     Of course, a countable product of copies of 2ω is homeomorphic   Q ω to 2 .
                                                                                  ω

However, throughout this section we will work with the space i 2 instead
of 2ω to streamline the notation in some of our proofs. We also will not
use any particular properties of 2ω in     Q this  section, which Q
                                                                  could be replaced
      ω                                         ω
by ω or even the space 2 (that is, i 2 would become i 2). We use the
space 2ω since it will be convenient in Section 4.
     We begin with a definition we use throughout in order to partition ∗i Γi :

Definition 2.1. A group element α ∈ ∗i Γi is called a Γj -word if α is not
the identity and it begins with an element of Γj as a reduced word.

    Thus, the group ∗i Γi is the disjoint union of the set containing the
identity {1}, and the set of Γj -words for each j ∈ I.
      Q any j ∈ I. We will be considering games for building an element
    Fix
y ∈ ( i 2ω )∗i Γi where player I defines y on Γj -words, player II defines y on
all other nonidentity group elements, and both players contribute to defining
y on the identity. We begin by giving a definition that we use to organize
the turns on which the bits of y(α) are defined.

Definition 2.2. We define the turn function t : ∗i Γi → ω as follows. First
we set t(1) = 0. Then, for each nonidentity element α of the free product
∗i Γi , there is a unique sequence (i0 , k0 ), . . . , (in , kn ) such that im 6= im+1
for all m and α = γi0 ,k0 . . . γin ,kn . We define t(α) to be the least l such that
im + m < l and km + m < l for all m ≤ n.

    The key property of this definition is that if i, k ≤ l + 1 and α is not a
Γi -word, then t(γi,k α) ≤ l + 1 if and only if t(α) ≤ l. We also have that for
each l there are only finitely many α with t(α) = l.
    We will also define a partition {Wi }i∈I of the set ∗i Γi × I.


                                         14
Definition 2.3. For each j ∈ I, let Wj be the set of (α, i) ∈ ∗i Γi × I such
that α is a Γj -word, or α = 1 and i = j.
   We are now ready to define our main game:
Definition 2.4 (The main game). Fix a bijection h·, ·i : I × ω → ω. Given
any A ⊆ ( i 2ω )∗i Γi , and any j ∈ I, we define the following game GA
           Q
                                                                          j for
                 Q ω ∗i Γi
producing y ∈ ( i 2 )       . Player I goes first, and on each turn the players
alternate defining y(α)(i)(n) for finitely many triples (α, i, n). Player I will
determine y(α)(i)(n) if (α, i) ∈ Wj and Player II will determine y(α)(i)(n)
otherwise. Finally, the value y(α)(i)(n) will be defined on turn k of the
game by the appropriate player if t(α) + hi, ni = k. Player I wins the game
if and only if the y that is produced is not in A.
    Note that y(α)(i) is an element of 2ω and so y(α)(i)(n) is its nth bit.
Note also that t(α) is the first turn on which y(α)(i)(n) is defined for some
i and n, and on turn t(α) + l, we have that y(α)(i)(n) is defined for the lth
pair (i, n).
    Now we prove two key lemmas. The first concerns strategies for player
I:
Lemma 2.5. Suppose {Ai }i∈I is a partition of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi . Then player I
                                                  Q

can not have a winning strategy in GA  i for every i ∈ I.
                                        i



Proof. We proceed by contradiction. We claim that from such winning
strategies, we could produce a y that was simultaneously a winning out-
come of player I’s strategy in GA i for every i ∈ I, and hence y ∈
                                    i
                                                                    / Ai for all
i ∈ I, contradicting the fact that {Ai }i∈I is a partition.
     To see this, fix winning strategies for player I in each GA
                                                               i . Inductively,
                                                                 i

                                        Ai
assume all turns < k of the games Gi have been played and that we have
already defined y(α)(i)(n) for all (α, i, n) where t(α) + hi, ni < k. Now
on turn k of the game, the winning strategies for player I in the games
GAi
    i
      collectively define y(α)(i)(n) on all (α, i, n) where t(α) + hi, ni = k.
Since the sets Wj partition ∗i Γi × I, there is no inconsistency between any
of these moves in different games. This defines y(α)(i)(n) for all (α, i, n)
where t(α) + hi, ni < k + 1. We can now move for player II in each of the
games GA  i using this information, finishing the kth turn of all these games.
            i

This completes the induction.

    There is a different way of viewing Lemma 2.5 which the reader may find
helpful. One can regard the games GA    i in Definition 2.4 as constituting a
                                         i

single game with countably many players: one player for each i ∈ I. The role

                                      15
of player i in this multiplayer game corresponds to the role of player I in the
game GA   i
            . That is, in this multiplayer game we are still building an element
      Q i ω ∗i Γi
y ∈ ( i2 )        , but now player i defines y(α)(i) for all (α, i) ∈ Wi . The
proof of Lemma 2.4 is essentially checking that the games GA      i fit together
                                                                    i

in this way.
     Now in this multiplayer game, instead of declaring a winner, one of the
players is instead declared the loser once play is over. That is,Qthe payoff
set for the multiplayer game is a Borel partition {Ai }i∈I of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi ,
and player i loses if the y that is created during the game is in Ai . It is a
trivial consequence of Borel determinacy that in such a multiplayer game,
there must be some player i so that the remaining players have a strategy to
collaborate to make player i lose. (Otherwise, if every player has a strategy
to avoid losing, playing these strategies simultaneously yields an outcome of
the game not in any element of the partition).
    We will make use of following projections from ( i 2ω )∗i Γi to (2ω )Γi .
                                                        Q

Definition 2.6. For each i ∈ I, let πi : ( i 2ω )∗i Γi → (2ω )Γi be the function
                                            Q
πi (x)(γ) = x(γ)(i),
    Note that πi is Γi -equivariant.
    Our second key lemma is a way of combining strategies for player II in
the game Gi . In the alternate way of viewing things described above, since
there must be some player i so that the remaining players (which viewed
jointly are player II in the game Gi ) can collaborate to make player i lose,
we are now interested in what can be deduced from the existence of such a
strategy.
    Note that below we speak of a strategy in the game Gj instead of GA    j
(suppressing the superscript) to emphasize that this lemma does not consider
a particular payoff set. Eventually in Lemma 4.9 we will apply this lemma
when sγ depends on γ.
Lemma 2.7. Fix a j ∈ I, and suppose that to each element γ of Γj we
associate a strategy sγ for player II in the game Gj . Then there is a y ∈
( i 2ω )∗i Γi such that for all γ ∈ Γj , γ · y is an outcome of the game Gj
 Q
where player II uses the strategy sγ . Further, for every z ∈ (2ω )Γj , there is
a unique such y so that πj (y) = z.
Proof. Fix a z ∈ (2ω )Γj . For each γ ∈ Γj we will play an instance of the
game Gj whose outcome will be γ ·y, where the moves for player II are made
by the strategy sγ . We will specify how to move for player I in these games.
Indeed, at each turn, there will be a unique move for player I that will satisfy
our conditions above. We play these games for all γ ∈ Γj simultaneously.

                                      16
    If γ ∈ Γj and so γ · y is an outcome of a play of Gj where player II uses
the strategy sγ , then this strategy determines (γ · y)(α)(i) = y(γ −1 α)(i) for
       / Wj . So let Vγ = {(γ −1 α, i) : (α, i) ∈
(α, i) ∈                                         / Wj } so that Vγ is the set of
(β, i) such that player II determines y(β)(i) when they move in the game
associated to γ whose outcome is γ ·y. Note that the Vγ are pairwise disjoint.
This is because if α is not a Γj -word and γ ∈ Γj , then γ −1 α is a reduced
word, and so both γ −1 and α can be uniquely determined from γ −1 α. Hence
the strategies for player II in these different games do not interfere with each
other.
    Inducting on k, suppose (γ·y)(α)(i)(n) is defined for all γ ∈ Γj , α ∈ ∗i Γi ,
and i, n ∈ ω such that t(α) + hi, ni < k, and all moves on turns < k have
been played in the games. Suppose γ ∈ Γj . We will begin by making the
kth move for player I in the game defining γ · y. First, if k = hj, ni for some
n, we must define (γ · y)(1)(j)(n) = y(γ −1 )(j)(n) = z(γ −1 )(n) to ensure
that πj (y) = z. Next, suppose β is a Γj -word with t(β) ≤ k such that we
can write β = γj,l α for some l < k and α which is not a Γj -word such that
t(α) < t(β). Player I must define y(β)(i)(n) on turn k where hi, ni = k−t(β).
                                                                 −1
Now for all γ ∈ Γj , we have (γ · y)(γj,l α) = y(γ −1 γj,l α) = γj,l γ · y(α) where
            −1
of course γj,l γ ∈ Γj . Hence, since t(α) + hi, ni < t(β) + hi, ni = k, we have
that (γ ·y)(γj,l α)(i)(j) has already been defined by the induction hypothesis.
Thus, we must make the kth move for player I in the game associated to γ ·y
using this information. Now player II responds by making their kth move in
the games, and so we have played the first k turns of the games, and defined
y(α)(i)(n) for all α ∈ ∗i Γi , and i, n ∈ ω such that t(α) + hi, ni ≤ k.

   Now we combine the above two lemmas to give the following lemma,
which is part of Theorem 1.1.

Lemma 2.8. Suppose I ≤ ω and {Γi }i∈I are countable groups. Let {Ai }i∈I
be a Borel partition of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi . Then there exists some j ∈ I and an
                          Q

injective continuous function f : (2ω )Γj → ( i 2ω )∗i Γi that is Γj -equivariant
                                             Q
with respect to the shift actions and such that ran(f ) ⊆ Aj .

Proof. By Borel determinacy, either player I or player II has a winning
                           A                                            A
strategy in each game Gj j . By Lemma 2.5, player II must win Gj j for
some j. Fix this j, and a winning strategy in this game.
    We now define the equivariant continuous function f : 2ω → ( i 2ω )∗i Γi .
                                                                   Q
We do this using Lemma 2.7: let f (x) be the unique y such that for all
γ ∈ Γj , and all x ∈ 2ω , we have πj (y) = x, and that γ · y is an outcome of
                                                 A
the winning strategy for player II in the game Gj j . Now f is injective since


                                        17
πj (f (x)) = x. The equivariance of f follows from the uniqueness property
of Lemma 2.7 and the equivariance of πj , which implies that γ · f (x) and
f (γ · x) are equal. Finally, since f (x) is a winning outcome of player II’s
               A
strategy in Gj j , we have that f (x) ∈ Aj for all x. It is easy to check from
the proof of Lemma 2.7 that f is continuous. Roughly, the value of each bit
of f (x) depends only on finitely many moves in finitely many games which
depend on only finitely many bits of x.

Remark 2.9. The proof of Lemma 2.8 shows that f can be chosen such
that πj (f (x)) = x.

2.2    The free part of the shift action
Our next goal is to prove a version of Lemma 2.8 for the free part of the
shift action. To begin, we recall a lemma from [28]. Suppose that I ≤ ω and
{Ei }i∈I is a collection of at least two equivalence relations on X. Then the Ei
are said to be independent if there does not exist a sequence x0 , x1 , . . . , xn
of distinct elements of X, and i0 , i1 , . . . in ∈ ω with n ≥ 2 such that ij 6= ij+1
for j < n and x0 Ei0 x1 Ei1 x2 . . . xn Ein x0 . The join of the Ei , denoted
W
  i∈I Ei , is the
               W smallest equivalence relation containing all the Ei . Precisely,
x and y are i∈I Ei -related if there is a sequence x0 , x1 , . . . xn of elements in
X such that x = x0 , y = xn , and for all j < n, we have xj Ei xj+1 for some
i ∈ I. Finally,
            W     we say that the Ei are everywhere non-independent if
for every i∈I Ei equivalence class A ⊆ X, the restrictions of the Ei to A
are not independent.

Lemma 2.10 ([28, Lemma 2.3]). Suppose that I ≤ ω and {Ei }i∈I are
countable Borel equivalence relations on a standard Borel space X that are
everywhere non-independent. Then there exists a Borel partition {Bi }i∈I of
X such that for all i ∈ I, (Bi )c meets every Ei -class.

   We will combine this lemma with one other lemma that we will use to
deal with the non-free part of the action.

    Q 2.11. Suppose that for every i ∈ I, Xi is a Γi -invariant Borel subset
Lemma
of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi . Let Y be the largest invariant set of y such that y ∈ Xi for
all i ∈ I. Then there is a Borel partition {Ci }i∈I of the complement of Y
such that if A ⊆ Ci is Γi -invariant, then A ∩ Xi = ∅.

Proof. We will define Borel              i ∈ I and n ∈ ω which partition
                         S sets Ci,n for −1
 c
Y . We will then let Ci = n∈ω Ci,n . If δ · y ∈
                                              / Xi , say that the pair (δ, i)


                                         18
witnesses y ∈  / Y . Note that if (δ, i) witnesses y ∈     / Y , then (γ −1 δ, i) witnesses
γ ·y ∈/ Y.
     Let Ci,0 be the set of y ∈ Y c such that (1, i) witnesses y ∈         / Y and there is
no j < i such that (1, j) witnesses y ∈         / Y . Note that Ci,0 does not meet Xi .
For m > 0, let Ci,m be the set of y ∈ Y c so that m is the minimal length of
a δ so that some (δ, j) witnesses y ∈      / Y , and i is least such that such a δ may
be chosen to be a Γi -word. Note that by the length of a word δ ∈ ∗i Γi , we
mean that if δ = γi0 ,k0 . . . γin ,kn with im 6= im+1 for all m, then the length
of δ is n + 1.
     So suppose now that A ⊆ Ci is Γi -invariant, and for a contradiction
suppose that m was least such that (A ∩ Ci,m ) ∩ Xi is nonempty. Let y
be an element of this set and note that m > 0 since Ci,0 does not meet
Xi . Since m > 0, the associated witness that y ∈             / Y must be of the form
(δ, j), where δ = γi0 ,k0 . . . γin ,kn is a Γi -word in reduced form, so i0 = i. But
then (γi1 ,k1 . . . γin ,kn , j) witnesses γi−1
                                             0 ,k0
                                                      / Y , and γi−1
                                                   ·y ∈            0 ,k0
                                                                         · y ∈ A since A is
                                                −1
Γi -invariant. But this implies that γi0 ,k0 · y ∈ Ci,m′ for some m′ < m since
A ⊆ Ci , and γi1 ,k1 . . . γin ,kn has length strictly less than δ. This contradicts
the minimality of m.

    We can now prove a version of Lemma 2.8 for the free part of the action:
Lemma 2.12. Suppose I ≤ ωQand {Γi }i∈I are countable groups. Let {Ai }i∈I
be a Borel partition of Free(( i 2ω )∗i Γi ). Then there existsQsome j ∈ I and
an injective continuous function f : Free((2ω )Γj ) → Free(( i 2ω )∗i Γi ) that
is Γj -equivariant with respect to the shift actions and such that ran(f ) ⊆ Aj .
Proof.
 Q ω Our        idea is to extend our partition {Ai }i∈I to cover the whole space
( i2 )   ∗ i Γi  in such a way that when we apply Lemma 2.8 to this partition,
the resulting function f will have the property that ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) ⊆
Aj .
     Let Xi beQthe set of y ∈ ( i 2ω )∗i Γi on which Γi acts freely. That is,
                                    Q
Xi = {y ∈ ( i 2ω )∗i Γi : ∀1 6= γ ∈ Γi (γ · y 6= y)}. Let Y be the largest
invariant set of y such that y ∈ Xi for every i and let {Ci }i∈I be a Borel
partition of the complement       of Y as in Lemma 2.11.
     Note that Free(( i 2ω )∗i Γi ) is a subset of Y . Let Ei be the equivalence
                         Q
relation on Y where x Ei y if there exists a γ ∈ Γi such that γ · x = y. Note
                             Q ω ∗{EΓi } are everywhere non-independent on the
that the equivalence relations
complement Y \ Free(( i 2 Q       ) i i ). So by Lemma 2.10, let {Bi }i∈I be a
Borel partition of Y \ Free(( i 2ω )∗i Γi ) so that Bi c meets everyQEi -class.
     Let A′i = Ai ∪ Bi ∪ Ci , so that {A′i }i∈I is a Borel partition of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi ,
and apply Lemma 2.8 to obtain a continuous injective equivariant function

                                            19
f : (2ω )Γj → A′j .
     Now ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) is invariant under the Γj action since f
is Γj -equivariant. Thus, ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) does not meet Bj (whose
complement meets every Ej -class). Since f is injective we also have that
ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) ⊆ Xj and hence ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) does not meet
Cj by Lemma 2.11. Hence, ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γj )) ⊆ Aj .

    There is an interesting application of this lemma to a fact about complete
sections of F (Fω , 2ω ).

Theorem 2.13. Suppose that A is a Borel complete section of F (Fω , 2ω ).
Then there is an x ∈ Free(ω Fω ) and some subgroup Γ of Fω so that Γ is
isomorphic to Fω and γ · x ∈ A for every γ ∈ Γ.

Proof. Let γ0 , γ1 , . . . be an enumeration of all the elements of Fω , and define
{Ai }i∈ω inductively
                        by Ai = γi ·A\(∪j<i Aj ). Note that the {Ai }i∈ω partition
             F
Free (2ω ) ω . Now if we write Fω as Fω ∗ Fω ∗ . . ., and apply Lemma 2.12,
then there is some Ai and corresponding ith copy of Fω such that there is
an equivariant injection from Free(ω Fω ) into Free((2ω )F2 ∗F2 ∗... ) whose range
is contained in γi · A for some i. Let ∆ be this ith copy of Fω , and note
then that if y ∈ ran(f ) then since δ · y ∈ γi · A for all δ ∈ ∆, then letting
x = γi−1 ·y and Γ = γi−1 ∆γi , we are done. To verify, we check that γi−1 δγi ·x =
γi−1 δγi · (γi−1 · y) = γi−1 · (δ · y) ∈ A since δ · y ∈ γi · A.

Remark 2.14. Theorem 2.13 is true when we replace F (Fω , 2ω ) by F (F2 , 2ω ).
This is because there is a subgroup of F2 isomorphic to Fω for which we can
equivariantly embed F (Fω , 2ω ) into F (F2 , 2ω ) (see [4]). Having done this,
then given any Borel complete section A of F (F2 , 2ω ), in each equivalence
class of F (F2 , 2ω ) that meets the range of this embedding of F (Fω , 2ω ), we
can translate A by the least group element that makes A intersect the range
of this embedding to obtain A∗ . Now pull A∗ back under the embedding and
apply Theorem 2.13. Theorem 2.13 is also true when we replace F (Fω , 2ω )
with F (Fω , 2) by [36]. Finally, by results of Section 4, we can find a Γ such
that F (Fω , 2ω ) ↾ {x : ∀γ ∈ Γ(γ · x ∈ A)} has the same Borel cardinality as
F (Fω , 2ω ).

    There is a general theme here that a complete section of the shift action of
Γ on Free((2ω )Γ ) must have a significant amount of structure. Gao, Jackson,
Khrone, and Seward have some other results which fit into this theme, which
are currently in preparation. See also [27].



                                        20
2.3   Results in reverse mathematics
In this section, we show that the lemmas we have proved above giving con-
tinuous equivariant functions into Borel partitions of (2ω )∗i Γi truly require
the use of determinacy in their proofs, in the sense that these lemmas imply
Borel determinacy. We will also show that the main lemma from [28] implies
Borel determinacy. These reversals rely on the following observation:

Lemma 2.15. Suppose X, Y ∈ {2, 3, . . . , ω, 2ω }, let Γ = ∆ = Z, and sup-
pose f : Free(X Γ ) → Y Γ∗∆ is a continuous Γ-equivariant function whose
range is not a singleton. Then there is a continuous function g : 2ω →
Free(X Γ ) such that for all x ∈ 2ω , we have f (g(x)) ≥T x.

    We are restricting here to the spaces {2, 3 . . . , ω, 2ω } and the groups
Γ = ∆ = Z so that we can sensibly talk about computability in the space
Y Γ∗∆ . More generally, the same proof will work for any groups Γ and ∆
that contain Z as a subgroup, provided we choose an appropriate way of
identifying Γ ∗ ∆ with ω so that the cosets of Z are computable.

Proof. We will assume that X = Y = 2ω . The proof is similar in the other
cases. Note that since f is continuous and ran(f ) is not a singleton, we can
find basic clopen neighborhoods U0 , U1 of Free(X Γ ) so that f (U0 ) and f (U1 )
are disjoint. Furthermore, by refining the basic clopen sets U0 and U1 , we
may assume that this disjointness is witnessed in the following strong way:
there is a δ ∈ Γ ∗ ∆, i ∈ ω, and j0 6= j1 ∈ 2 so that for all x0 ∈ U0 and
x 1 ∈ U1 ,
                   f (x0 )(δ)(i) = j0 and f (x1 )(δ)(i) = j1 .
Since U0 and U1 are basic clopen neighborhoods in X Γ , there are finite sets
S0 , S1 ⊆ Z and si,n ∈ 2<ω for i ∈ {0, 1} and n ∈ Si so that Ui = {x ∈ X Z :
∀n ∈ Si : x(n) ⊇ si,n }. Choose k larger than twice the absolute value of any
element of S0 or S1 so that k′ · U0 and U1 are compatible for any k′ ∈ Z = Γ
with |k′ | ≥ k.
     Our idea is to code x ∈ 2ω into g(x) ∈ Free(X Γ ) by putting nk ·g(x) ∈ Ui
if and only if x(n) = i. Then from the value of (nk · f (g(x)))(δ)(i) (in
particular whether it is j0 or j1 ), we will be able to determine whether
nk · g(x) ∈ U0 or nk · g(x) ∈ U1 and hence the value of x(n). This coding
only constrains our choice of g(x)(m) for m ≥ −k. Hence, we can define
g(x)(m) for m < −k so that the sequence g(x)(m) for m < −k is not
periodic. This will ensure that g(x) ∈ Free(X Γ ). It is clear that we can find
a continuous map g : 2ω → Free(X Γ ) with this property.


                                       21
    Recall that Turing determinacy for a pointclass Λ is the statement
that every Turing invariant set A ∈ Λ either contains a Turing cone, or
its complement contains a Turing cone. Turing determinacy is closely con-
nected to determinacy in general. For example, Σ11 Turing determinacy
is equivalent to Σ11 determinacy by Martin [32] and Harrington [14], and
Woodin has shown that Turing determinacy is equivalent to AD in L(R).
For Borel sets, a close analysis of Friedman’s work in [10] shows that over
Z− + Σ1 − replacement + DC, Borel Turing determinacy implies Borel de-
terminacy (see [35], [33, Exercises 2.3.6-2.3.11], and [12]).
Theorem 2.16. The following theorems are each equivalent to Borel deter-
minacy over the base theory Z− + Σ1 − replacement + DC: Lemmas 2.8 and
2.12 and hence Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 from this paper, and Lemmas 2.1 and
3.12 from [28].
Proof. Let Γ = ∆ = Z and suppose X, Y ∈ {2, 3, . . . , ω, 2ω } is appropriate
for the theorem or lemma in question which we would like to reverse. In
the case of the Lemmas 2.8 and 2.12 in this paper, assume that I = 2, and
{Γi }i∈I = {Γ, ∆}.
    Suppose A ⊆ Y Γ∗∆ is Turing invariant. Since Borel Turing determinacy
implies Borel determinacy over Z− + Σ1 − replacement + DC, it will suffice
to prove that A either contains a Turing cone, or is disjoint from a Tur-
ing cone. By applying our theorem or lemma, we can find an equivariant
continuous map f whose range is contained in A or the complement of A.
The domain of f will at least include Free(X Γ ), and the codomain will be
Y Γ∗∆ for some X, Y ∈ {2, 3, . . . , ω, 2ω }. Hence by Lemma 2.15, we can find
a continuous function g : 2ω → Free(X Γ ) or g : 2ω → Free(X ∆ ) so that for
every x, f (g(x)) ≥T x. Now since f ◦ g is continuous, on the cone of x
above a code for f ◦ g, f (g(x)) ≡T x. Hence, the range of f ◦ g contains
representatives of a Turing cone. Hence either A or its complement contains
a cone.

    It is very natural to ask about the strength in reverse mathematics of
the main theorems in both this paper and [28], since they are proved using
these lemmas which reverse to Borel determinacy. These are all open prob-
lems.3 We draw attention to a pair of questions which we find particularly
interesting.
   3
     After a preprint of this paper was posted, Sherwood Hachtman resolved these prob-
lems. In particular, Questions 2.17 and 2.18 have negative answers. Hachtman’s proof
uses the fact that all these statements have the following syntactic form: for all Borel
functions f , there exists a real x such that R(x, f ) where R is a Borel condition. Thus,
for each f , each instance is Σ11 in a real code for f , and thus these statments are true in


                                             22
Question 2.17. Does Theorem 3.9 imply Borel determinacy over Z− +Σ1 −
replacement + DC?

    Theorem 3.9 stands out to us here because it resembles (at least in a
superficial way) Borel diagonalization theorems which are known to have
strength in reverse mathematics.

Question 2.18. Does [28, Theorem 3.7] imply Borel determinacy over Z− +
Σ1 − replacement + DC?

     Note that by the proof of Theorem 2.16 above, [28, Lemma 2.1] implies
Borel determinacy in the case when Γ and ∆ contain Z. However, in the
case when Γ and ∆ are finite, the strength of [28, Lemma 2.1] is open, and
it is in fact equivalent to [28, Theorem 3.7]. This is because the spaces
Free(NΓ ) and Free(N∆ ) are countable, so constructing equivariant functions
is trivial once we know A or its complement contain infinitely many Γ-orbits
or ∆-orbits. Note that we know there cannot be an easy measure theoretic
or Baire category proof of [28, Theorem 3.7] by [28, Theorem 4.5], except
in the trivial case Γ = ∆ = Z/2Z. So there is at least some evidence that
[28, Theorem 3.7] is hard to prove.
levels of L that are Σ11 correct. This includes levels of L that witness the failure of Borel
(or even Σ04 ) determinacy.




                                             23
3     Uniform universality
3.1   Introduction to uniform universality
In this section, we will investigate a strengthened form of universality for
countable Borel equivalence relations. The key idea will be to restrict the
class of Borel reductions we consider witnessing E ≤B F to only those
reductions f where there is a way of transforming a witness that x and
y are E-equivalent into a witness that f (x) and f (y) are F -equivalent in
a way that is independent of x and y. To this end, we will begin this
section with a discussion of how countable Borel equivalence relations may
be generated. Indeed, though the Feldman-Moore theorem [9] implies that
every countable Borel equivalence relation can be generated by the Borel
action of a countable group, we will prefer to work with a more general way
of generating equivalence relations since many equivalence relations from
computability theory are not naturally generated by group actions. Such
equivalence relations will play a key role in many of the theorems we will
prove.
     Let E be a countable Borel equivalence relation on a standard Borel space
X. Then by Lusin-Novikov uniformization [22, Theorem 18.10], there exists
a countable set {ϕi }i∈ω of partial Borel functions ϕi : X → X such that
x E y if and only if there is an i and j such that ϕi (x) = y and ϕj (y) = x.
Conversely, if X is a standard Borel space and {ϕi }i∈ω is a countable set of
partial Borel functions on X that is closed under composition and includes
the identity function, then we define E{ϕ X    to be the equivalence relation
                                            i}
generated by the functions {ϕi }i∈ω , where x E{ϕ  X     y if there exists an i
                                                      i}
and j such that ϕi (x) = y and ϕj (y) = x, in which case we say x E{ϕ     X    y
                                                                            i}
via (i, j). For example, the Turing reductions are a countable set of partial
Borel functions on 2ω which generate Turing equivalence.
     Our assumption here that the set {ϕi }i∈ω is closed under composition is
merely a convenience so that we do not have to discuss words in the functions
{ϕi }i∈ω . For this reason, we will assume throughout this section that there
is also a computable function u : ω 2 → ω such that ϕi ◦ ϕj = ϕu(i,j) for all
(i, j) ∈ ω 2 .
     We codify the above into the following convention:

Convention 3.1. Throughout this section, we will let {ϕi }i∈ω and {θi }i∈ω
denote countable sets of partial functions on some standard Borel space
that contain the identity function, and are closed under composition as
witnessed by some computable function on indices. We will often omit the


                                      24
                                                            X
indexing on {ϕi }i∈ω and {θi }i∈ω for clarity. We will let E{ϕ         Y
                                                                  and E{θ
                                                               i}         i}
denote equivalence relations on some standard Borel spaces X and Y that
are generated by {ϕi } and {θi } respectively.
    Given countable Borel equivalence relations E{ϕ    X     and E{θY    which are
                                                          i}          i}
generated by {ϕi } and {θi }, say that a homomorphism f : X → Y from
  X
E{ϕ    to E{θY    is uniform (with respect to {ϕi } and {θi }) if there exists
    i}         i}
a function u : ω 2 → ω 2 such that for all x, y ∈ X, if x E{ϕX
                                                               i}
                                                                  y via (i, j), then
        Y
f (x) E{θi } f (y) via u(i, j), independently of what x and y are.
    Now suppose Γ is a countable group equipped with a Borel action on
a standard Borel space X yielding the countable Borel equivalence relation
EΓX . In this case we can equivalently regard EΓX as being generated by the
functions x 7→ γ · x for each γ ∈ Γ, and so we can apply our definitions as
above in this setting. However, since all of these functions have inverses, the
definitions can be simplified a bit. For examples, if E∆     Y is generated by a

Borel action of the countable group ∆ on Y and f is a homomorphism from
EΓX to E∆  Y , then f is uniform if and only if there is a function u : Γ → ∆

such that u(γ) · f (x) = f (γ · x) for all γ ∈ Γ. Hence, in the setting where the
action of ∆ is free, a homomorphism is uniform if and only if the cocycle
associated to it has no dependence on the value of x ∈ X. This type of
cocycle superrigidity is well studied and has many applications in the field
of Borel equivalence relations, as mentioned in the introduction.
    We are ready to give one of the central definitions of this section:
Definition 3.2. A countable Borel equivalence relation E{ϕ     X    generated by
                                                                 i}
{ϕi }i∈ω is said to be uniformly universal (with respect to {ϕi }i∈ω ) if for
every countable Borel equivalence relation E{θ   Y , there is a Borel reduction
                                                  i}
f from E{θ Y    to E X    that is uniform with respect to {θi } and {ϕi }.
             i}     {ϕi }
    The idea of uniform universality was introduced by Montalbán, Reimann,
and Slaman (who restricted themselves to the case of equivalence relations
generated by Borel actions of countable groups). They showed in unpub-
lished work that Turing equivalence is not uniformly universal with respect
to some natural way of generating it by a group. That Turing equivalence
is not uniformly universal as it is usually generated with Turing reductions
is an easy consequence of Slaman and Steel’s work in [38].
    Note that when we discuss uniform universality, it is important for us
to specify the functions {ϕi }i∈ω that we use to generate the equivalence
           X . In particular, we will show that every universal countable
relation E{ϕ i}
Borel equivalence relation is uniformly universal with respect to some way
of generating it (see Proposition 3.7).

                                        25
    To date, every known universal countable Borel equivalence relation E
has been shown to be universal using a proof that is uniform in the sense of
Definition 3.2 (and with respect to some natural way of generating E). Thus,
we can regard the class of uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence
relations as those which we can hope to prove universal without dramatically
new techniques. Indeed, one could make the following ridiculously optimistic
conjecture:
Conjecture 3.3. If E is a universal countable Borel equivalence relation,
then E is uniformly universal with respect to every way of generating E.
    This conjecture is attractive since we understand uniformly universality
far better than mere universality; Theorems 1.5 and 1.6 from the intro-
duction would settle many open questions about universal countable Borel
equivalence relations if Conjecture 3.3 were true.
    The various parts of Theorems 1.5 and 1.6 will come from applying
some of the tools of Section 2 together with an analysis of some particular
examples of natural equivalence relations, many of them from computability
theory.
    We finish by mentioning that there is another view one could take here
which is more computability-theoretic. Instead of studying equivalence rela-
tions, we could instead study locally countable quasiorders (which are often
called reducibilities). See [44]. If X is a standard Borel space, and {ϕi }i∈ω
is a countable collection of partial functions on X that contains the identity
function and is closed under composition, then we let ≤{ϕi } be the associ-
ated quasiorder where x ≤{ϕi } y if there exists an i ∈ ω such that ϕi (y) = x.
In computability theory, there are several important examples of uniform
embeddings between natural quasiorders from computability theory. For
example, Turing reducibility ≤T embeds into many-one reducibility ≤m via
the map x 7→ x′ , and Turing reducibility also embeds into enumeration re-
ducibility via the map x 7→ x ⊕ x. These embeddings are uniform in the
sense that if x ≤T y via the ith Turing reduction ϕi (y) = x, then there
is some many-one reduction/enumeration reduction θu(i) depending only on
the index i so that the images of x and y are related by θu(i) . One might
want, then, to study the general question of how the usual reducibilities from
computability theory are related under uniform Borel embedding/reduction.
    All of our proofs in Section 3 work in this context of locally countable
quasiorders. So for example, many-one reducibility on 3ω is a uniformly
universal locally countable quasiorder (as are poly-time Turing reducibility
and arithmetic reducibility by the proofs of [29] and [30]). However, any
locally countable Borel quasiorder on 2ω coarser than one-one reducibility

                                      26
and closed under countable uniform joins is not a uniformly universal locally
countable quasiorder.

3.2   Basic results on uniform universality
We will begin by proving some basic facts about uniform universality. Since
the composition of two uniform homomorphisms is uniform, it is clear that
     X
if E{ϕ                                                                 X
           is uniformly universal and there is a uniform reduction of E{ϕ    to
        i}                                                                i}
   Y             Y
E{θi } , then E{θi } is also uniformly universal. Hence, to demonstrate that
some equivalence relation is uniformly universal, is enough to show that
we can uniformly reduce a single uniformly universal equivalence relation
to it. For this purpose, we explicitly show below that both E(Fω , 2ω ) and
E(F2 , 2ω ) are uniformly universal.

Proposition 3.4. E(Fω , 2ω ) and E(F2 , 2ω ) are both uniformly universal (as
generated by the left shift actions).

Proof. This proposition simply follows from the proofs of the universality of
these equivalence relations given in [4]. We will recapitulate this argument
to explicitly demonstrate how these constructions are uniform, and because
we will eventually require a careful analysis of its details.
    Fix some equivalence relation E{ϕ Y     generated by {ϕi }i∈ω which we wish
                                         i}
to uniformly reduce to E(Fω , 2 ). We may assume that Y ( 2ω is a strict
                                    ω

subset of 2ω , by exploiting the isomorphism theorem for standard Borel
spaces. Let p be some distinguished point in 2ω \ Y , and let Y ∗ = Y ∪ {p}.
    Let the countably many generators of the group Fω be {γi,j }(i,j)∈ω2 ,
exploiting some bijection between ω and ω 2 . For each (i, j) ∈ ω 2 define the
function θγi,j : Y ∗ → Y ∗ :
                              (
                               θi (y) if y ∈ Y and θj (θi (y)) = y
                θγ(i,j) (y) =
                               p      otherwise

Define θγ −1 to be θγ(j,i) . Finally, we can define θw for any reduced word
         (i,j)
w ∈ Fω2 by composing the θγ(i,j) and θγ −1 in the obvious way. Let θ1 be
                                           (i,j)
the identity function.
    We define our reduction f : Y → (2ω )Fω from E{θ     Y
                                                           i}
                                                               to E(Fω , 2ω ) by
f (y)(α) = θα (y). This is a uniform reduction; if xE{θ   Y y via (i, j), then
                                                            i}
f (x)E(Fω , 2ω )f (y) via the generator γ(i,j) .
    For the case of E(F2 , 2ω ), let p be a distinguished point in 2ω , and let
ρ : Fω → F2 be an embedding of the group Fω into F2 . Now we define our

                                      27
uniform Borel embedding g : (2ω )Fω → (2ω )F2 from E(Fω , 2ω ) to E(F2 , 2ω )
by:                        (
                             x(ρ−1 (α)) if α ∈ ran(ρ)
                 g(x)(α) =
                             p             otherwise
The uniformity of this reduction is witnessed by ρ.

    Note that since E(Fω , 2ω ) is generated by a group action, a count-
able Borel equivalence relation E{ϕ X    is uniformly universal if and only if
                                      i}
        ω                                X
E(Fω , 2 ) is uniformly reducible to E{ϕi } if and only if there is a uniform
reduction of every equivalence relation generated by a Borel action of a
countable group to E{ϕ X . Hence, our more general definition agrees with
                          i}
the original definition of Montalbán, Reimann, and Slaman if we restrict to
the special case of equivalence relations equipped with group actions gener-
ating them.
    Another useful consequence of Theorem 3.4 is the following, which says
that our uniform reductions can always be assumed to have their uniformity
witnessed by a computable function.
Lemma 3.5. If E{ϕ   X    is a uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence
                      i}
relation, then for every countable Borel equivalence relation E{θ Y , there is a
                                                                    i}
uniform reduction from E{θ   Y    to E X    with the additional property that its
                               i}     {ϕi }
                           2       2
uniformity function u : ω → ω is computable.
Proof. This follows by analyzing the proof of Proposition 3.4 above. First,
the reduction of E{θ  Y    to E(Fω , 2ω ) has a computable uniformity function.
                        i}
Second, there is a computable embedding of Fω into F2 (where the nth
generator of Fω is mapped to αn βα−n where α and β are the two generators
of F2 ). Hence, composing these two uniform reductions, we get one from
  Y
E{θ    to E(F2 , 2ω ) with a computable uniformity function.
    i}
    Finally, take a uniform reduction from E(F2 , 2ω ) to E{ϕ  X , since E X
                                                                 i}           {ϕi }
is assumed to be uniformly universal. This reduction can also be assumed
to have a computable uniformity function since it is enough just to know
how the uniformity of the two generators of F2 is witnessed (recall that
by Convention 3.1, we are assuming that composition of functions in {ϕi }
is witnessed by a computable function). Now we are done: compose the
reduction of E{θ Y    to E(F2 , 2ω ) with the reduction from E(F2 , 2ω ) to E{ϕ
                                                                             X .
                   i}                                                           i}




    The above lemma will be used in Theorem 3.13 as part of proving that
a large class of equivalence relations are not uniformly universal.

                                        28
   We note one final consequence of Proposition 3.4.
Proposition 3.6. If E{φ X             X
                                   ⊆ E{φ          . . . is an increasing sequence of
                          0,i }i∈ω       1,i }i∈ω
countable Borel equivalence relations that are not uniformly universal, then
              X
their union E{θ    is not uniformly universal, where {θi } is the generating
                i}
family obtained by closing the {φj,i } under composition.
Proof. Since E(F2 , 2ω ) is uniformly universal and F2 is finitely generated,
any uniform reduction from E(F2 , 2ω ) to E{θ  X
                                                 i}
                                                    must be contained inside
  X
E{φj,i }i∈ω for some j since the two generators of F2 correspond to two pairs
of functions that are from some {φi,j }i∈ω .

    Hence, uniformly universal equivalence relations are not “approximable
from below” by non-uniformly universal equivalence relations. See [40] and
[30] for some related results on strong ergodicity that show that under the
assumption of Martin’s conjecture, the (weakly) universal countable Borel
equivalence relations are “much larger” than the non (weakly) universal
ones.
    Next, we show that every universal countable Borel equivalence relation
is uniformly universal with respect to some way of generating it.
Proposition 3.7. If E is a universal countable Borel equivalence relation,
then there is some countably family of functions generating E for which it
is uniformly universal.
Proof. This is a trivial corollary of [30, Theorem 3.6], that if E is a universal
countable Borel equivalence relation, then F ⊑B E, for every countable
Borel equivalence relation F .
    To see this, let F = E(Fω , 2ω ) which is uniformly universal. Then we can
embed E(Fω , 2ω ) into E with an injective Borel function f . Now take the
partial functions generating the image of E(Fω , 2ω ) on ran(f ) and extend
these functions to a larger countable set that generates E. With respect to
this set of generators, E is uniformly universal.

   Indeed, by the same argument, there is some group action generating E
with respect to which it is uniformly universal.
   We will finish this section with a simple application of the results of
Section 2 to uniform universality. In particular, we will prove part (1) of
Theorem 1.5.
Theorem 3.8. Suppose Γ is a countable group. Then there exists a Borel
action of Γ on a standard Borel space X such that EΓX is uniformly universal
if and only if Γ contains F2 as a subgroup.

                                        29
Proof. We begin with the forward implication. Since EΓX is uniformly uni-
versal, there exists a uniform Borel reduction of F (F2 ∗ F2 ∗ . . . , 2ω ) to EΓX .
Now by Lusin-Novikov uniformization [22, Theorem 18.10], we can parti-
tion Free((2ω )F2 ∗F2 ∗... ) into countably many Borel sets {Ai }i∈ω such that f
is injective on each Ai . Now by Lemma 2.12, let g be an equivariant Borel
injection of F (F2 , 2ω ) into F (F2 ∗F2 ∗. . . , 2ω ) ↾ Aj for some j (i.e. equivariant
for the ith copy of F2 ). Then f ◦ g is a uniform injective Borel homomor-
phism from F (F2 , 2ω ) to EΓX . If u : F2 → Γ witnesses this uniformity, then
it is clear that the image of the two generators of F2 under u generates a
copy of F2 inside Γ, since f ◦ g is injective.
     The reverse implication follows from the fact that if Γ contains F2 as a
subgroup, then E(Γ, 2ω ) is uniformly universal by [4]. (Following essentially
the same argument as that in Proposition 3.4.)

    Thomas has previously considered the question of which countable groups
admit Borel actions that generate universal countable Borel equivalence re-
lations [42]. From our uniform perspective, Theorem 3.8 gives a complete
answer to this question. Note that the theorem above combined with Conjec-
ture 3.3 contradicts Thomas’ Conjecture [42, Conjecture 1.5] that Burnside
groups of sufficiently high exponent can generate universal countable Borel
equivalence relations.
    Another corollary of Theorem 3.8 is a classification of which countable
groups Γ generate uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence relations
with their shift actions on 2Γ and their conjugacy actions on their subgroups.
If F2 ≤ Γ, then both these actions are uniformly universal by [4] and [2].
Theorem 3.8 implies the converses of these two theorems are true. Hence,
we have parts (1) and (2) of Theorem 1.6.

3.3    Limitations on controlling countable joins
In this section we will show how results from Section 2 can be used to infer
a limitation on our ability to control the computational power of countable
uniform joins, which we will then use to prove that a number of equivalence
relations from computability theory are not uniformly universal.
    The general problem of controlling the computational power of finite and
countable joins is a frequent topic of investigation in computability theory.
To introduce our lemma let us first recall two contrasting pieces of folklore.
    First, suppose ≤P is a Borel quasiorder on 2ω with meager sections (e.g.
a quasiorder such that for every y, {x : x ≤P y} is countable). Then there
is a continuous injection f : 2ω → 2ω such for every x ∈ 2ω and every finite


                                          30
sequence of y0 , y1 , . . . yn ∈ X not containing x, we have
                         f (x) P f (y0 ) ⊕ . . . ⊕ f (yn )
This is easy to show using a simple Baire category argument (see for instance
the Kuratowski-Mycielski theorem [22, Theorem 19.1]). In computability
theory, ran(f ) is called an independent set for ≤P .
    Second, suppose we consider countable joins instead of finite joins. Then
the analogue of the above fact becomes false. Let us consider one-one-
reducibility here for concreteness, where x ≤1 y if there is a computable
injection ρ : ω → ω such that x(n) = y(ρ(n)). Now if f : 2ω → 2ω is any (not
necessarily Borel) function, then there must exist x ∈ 2ω and a countable
sequence y0 , y1 , . . . ∈ 2ω not containing x such that
                          f (x) ≤1 f (y0 ) ⊕ f (y1 ) ⊕ . . .
To see this, we may clearly assume f is injective (else the statement is
trivial). But then there must be an n such that there are infinitely many
y with f (y)(n) = 0 and infinitely many y such that f (y)(n) = 1. Thus, by
taking the union of two such countably infinite sets of y and permuting this
set, we can code any real into the sequence f (y0 )(n), f (y1 )(n), . . ..
    We now prove a substantial strengthening of this second fact of folklore
for Borel functions f . Suppose that instead of arbitrary countable joins,
we have the dramatically more modest goal of controlling for each x the
countable join of a single sequence of yi that depends in a Borel way on x.
It turns out that this too is impossible!
Theorem 3.9. Let Fω be the free group on the ω many generators γ0 , γ1 , . . .
and let X = Free((2ω )Fω ). To each x ∈ X we associate the single countable
sequence γ0 · x, γ1 · x, . . . which does not include x.
    Then for all Borel functions f : X → 2ω , there exists an x ∈ X such that
                      f (x) ≤1 f (γ0 · x) ⊕ f (γ1 · x) ⊕ . . .
Indeed, there is an x such that f (x)(i) = f (γi · x)(i) for all i ∈ ω.
Proof. Let f be any Borel function from X to 2ω , and let Ai be the set
of x ∈ X such that i is the least element of ω such that f (x)(i) 6= f (γi ·
x)(i). Assume for a contradiction that the sets Ai partition X. Then by
Lemma 2.12 there exists some i such that there is a hγi i-equivariant Borel
injection h from Free((2ω )hγi i ) to X such that ran(h) ⊆ Ai . Note then that
for all x, we have f (h(x))(i) 6= f (h(γi · x))(i). But x 7→ f (h(x))(i) would
then give a Borel 2-coloring of the graph G(Z, 2ω ). This is easily seen to be
impossible with an ergodicity argument. (See [20]).

                                         31
    Of course (2ω )Fω is homeomorphic to 2ω , and so we could regard X above
as a subset of 2ω .
    Now it turns out that controlling countable joins in the way shown to be
impossible by Theorem 3.9 shows up as a subproblem in many natural con-
structions aimed at showing certain equivalence relations from computability
theory are uniformly universal. Our next goal will be to pivot Theorem 3.9
and these failed constructions into a proof that many equivalence relations
from computability theory are not uniformly universal.
    Before we finish, we make one more remark: the lemma above can be
restated in graph-theoretic language:

Theorem 3.10. There is a standard Borel space X and countably many
2-regular Borel graphs {Gi }i∈ω on X such that for every Borel set {ci }i∈ω
where ci is a Borel 3-coloring of Gi , there is an x ∈ X such that ci (x) = cj (x)
for all i, j (i.e. x is {ci }-monochromatic).

Proof. Let X = Free((2ω )Fω ) and Gi be the graph generated by gi as in
Theorem 3.9. Then given countably many 3-colorings ci , let f : X → 2ω
be defined by f (x)(i) = ci (x) if ci (x) ∈ {0, 1} and f (x)(i) = ci (gi (x)) if
ci (x) ∈
       / {0, 1}. Now apply Theorem 3.9.

    We mention this restatement largely for a historical reason: in [26], we
showed that the above coloring problem was equivalent to the uniform uni-
versality of many-one equivalence. The proof of the forward direction of this
result is essentially contained in the proof of Theorem 3.23. The proof of
the converse of this theorem makes essential use of a notion of forcing due
to Conley and Miller. We refer the interested reader to [26, Section 5.2].
The equivalence of this coloring problem with the uniform universality of
many-one equivalence was the catalyst that led the games studied in this
paper and thus most of our results, as well as the results of [28].

3.4    Uniform universality and equivalence relations from com-
       putability theory
In this section, we will show that a large class of equivalence relations from
computability theory are not uniformly universal. Beyond the inherent in-
terest in classifying such equivalence relations our analysis will also be used
to prove the remaining parts of Theorem 1.5. We begin with a simple lemma.

Lemma 3.11. Suppose x, y0 , y1 , . . . ∈ 2ω are each of the form ⊕i∈ω z for
some z ∈ 2ω , and there is a computable function u : ω → ω such that x ≡1 yi


                                       32
via the program u(i) for all i ∈ ω. Then there exists a pair of computable
bijections r, s : ω → ω such that x(r(n)) = ys(n) (n) for all n.

Proof. The point of this lemma is that x looks like a “diagonal” of the join
of the yi after permuting x by r, and the yi by s.
     Our argument is a simple back and forth construction. At each stage of
the construction we will have defined r and s on the same finite domain.
     At even steps, we begin by picking the least n not in the domain of
r and s. Let m be the least number not in the range of s, and define
s(n) = m. Now since x ≡1 ym , we have that ym (n) = x(hi, ji) for some
hi, ji ∈ ω. It is possible that hi, ji is already in the range of r but we can
always find some hi∗ , ji not already in the range of r, and set r(n) = hi∗ , ji,
since ym (hi, ji) = ym (hi∗ , ji) since ym is of the form ⊕i∈ω z for some z ∈ 2ω .
     At odd steps, we pick the least k and m that are not in the range of r and
s respectively. Then since x is recursively isomorphic to ym , there is some
hi, ji such that x(k) = ym (hi, ji). Again, we can find some hi∗ , ji not already
in the domain of r and s and set r(hi∗ , ji) = k and s(hi∗ , ji) = m.

   It is a fundamental property of Turing reducibility that if we computably
specify countably many Turing reductions, then we can run them all simul-
taneously to produce the uniform join of their outputs. It is this idea which
we encapsulate into our next definition:
                                   2   ω
Definition 3.12. Suppose that E{ϕ      i}
                                           is a countable Borel equivalence rela-
         ω
tion on 2 generated by {ϕi }i∈ω . Say that E is closed under countable
                                       . . . ∈ 2ω , u : ω → ω 2 is computable, and
uniform joins if whenever x, y0 , y1 , L
xEyi via u(i) for all i ∈ ω, then xE i∈ω yi .

   For example, many-one equivalence, tt equivalence, Turing equivalence,
and enumeration equivalence all have this property, as generated by their
usual family of reductions.

Theorem 3.13. Suppose that E{ϕi } is a countable Borel equivalence rela-
tion on 2ω that is coarser than recursive isomorphism and is closed under
countable uniform joins. Then E{ϕi } is not uniformly universal.

Proof. Let Fω = hγi : i ≤ ωi be the free group on the generators γ0 , γ1 . . . , γω .
Let Γ be the subgroup hγi γω−1 : i < ωi, which is isomorphic to Fω . Note that
γω ∈/ Γ. Let X = Free((2ω )Fω ), and let FΓ ⊆ F (Fω , 2ω ) be the equivalence
relation on X where x FΓ y if α · x = y for some α ∈ Γ. It is interesting
to note that FΓ is Borel isomorphic to F (Fω , 2ω ) and is hence a universal
treeable countable Borel equivalence relation.

                                           33
    Now for a contradiction, let f be a uniform Borel reduction of FΓ to E{ϕi }
with a computable uniformity function by Lemma 3.5. So for all x ∈ X and
α ∈ FΓ we have that f (x)Ef (α · x) uniformly in α. Let α0 , α1 , . . . be a
computable listing of all the elementsL of Γ in which each element appears
infinitely many times. Let fˆ(x) = i∈ω f (αi · x). Then we have f (x)E fˆ(x)
since E is closed under countable uniform joins. It is clear that fˆ(γω · x)
and fˆ(γi · x) are recursively isomorphic for all i ∈ ω by permuting columns.
Further, since each group element appears infinitely often in our listing
{αi }i∈ω of Γ, we can apply Lemma 3.11 to obtain a pair of computable
bijections r, s : ω → ω such that fˆ(γω · x)(r(i)) = fˆ(γs(i) · x)(i) for all x ∈ X
and all i ∈ ω.
    Now for all x ∈ X, since γω ∈     / Γ, we have that x ✚     F✚
                                                                 Γ γω · x, and so
                                  ˆ
f (x) E f (γω ·x), which implies f (x) E f (γω ·x) and thus f (x) and fˆ(γω ·x) are
                                          ˆ                  ˆ
not recursively isomorphic. Hence, for each x ∈ X, we have that fˆ(x)(i) 6=
fˆ(γs(i) )(i) for some i ∈ ω, since otherwise fˆ(x) and fˆ(γω · x) would be
recursively isomorphic via r. We will apply the same idea as the proof of
Theorem 3.9 to obtain a contradiction.
    For each i ∈ ω, let As(i) be the set of x ∈ X such that i is the least
element of ω such that fˆ(x)(i) 6= fˆ(γs(i) · x)(i). By Lemma 2.12, there is
                                                                               
some i and a hγs(i) i-equivariant Borel function g from Free (2ω )hγs(i) i to
               
Free (2ω )Fω such that ran(g) ⊆ As(i) . Then x 7→ fˆ(g(x))(i) yields a Borel
2-coloring of G(Z, 2ω ), which is a contradiction.

    Later in this section, we will show that this theorem is specific to 2ω ; it
is not true when 2ω is changed to 3ω . In particular, we will show that the
equivalence relation of many-one equivalence on 3ω is a uniformly universal
countable Borel equivalence relation.
    We also remark that the statement of the theorem can be strengthened
slightly:
Remark 3.14. The proof of Theorem 3.13 yields a statement that is actu-
ally slightly stronger than what we have stated. Because there is a uniform
embedding of F (Fω , 2ω ) into F (F2 , 2ω ), the countable uniform joins that
were used in this proof are very simple: they are computable compositions
of two pairs of elements of {ϕi }. Hence Theorem 3.13 remains true when
we assume closure under this smaller class of countable uniform joins.
   It is interesting that our proof of Theorem 3.13 only uses that fact that
the universal treeable equivalence relation can not be uniformly reduced to
E{ϕi } . Very little is known about what countable Borel equivalence relations

                                        34
can be reduced to Turing equivalence, or any other such E{ϕi } satisfying the
hypothesis of Theorem 3.13. We make the following conjecture:

Conjecture 3.15. The universal treeable countable Borel equivalence rela-
tion is not Borel reducible to Turing equivalence.

    Next, we will turn specifically to the case of equivalence relations coarser
than Turing equivalence. We will begin by considering the following exam-
ples:

Definition 3.16. Let α be an ordinal less than ω1ck that is additively
indecomposable so that if β0 , β1 < α then β0 + β1 < α. Define (< α)-
reducibility, noted ≤(<α) , by x ≤(<α) y if and only if there exists a β < α
such that x ≤T y (β) where y (β) is the βth iterate of the Turing jump relative
to y. (Our assumption here that α is additively indecomposable is needed
so that ≤(<α) is transitive). The symmetrization of this reducibility is the
equivalence relation ≡(<α) .

    Hence, ≤(<1) is Turing reducibility, arithmetic reducibility is ≤(<ω) , and
so on. Now (< α)-reducibility is naturally generated by the functions ob-
tained by taking the Turing reductions and the functions x 7→ x(β) for all
β < α, and closing under composition. We assume henceforth that (< α)-
equivalence is generated by these canonical functions.
    Note that we can relativize this definition to any x ∈ 2ω , and every
additively indecomposable α < ω1x . Of course, different x yield different
equivalence relations, but any two such definitions of (< α)-equivalence
relations for the same ordinal α will agree on a Turing cone.
    There is a certain sense in which (< α)-reducibilities are the only “natu-
ral” computability-theoretic reducibilities coarser than ≤T . We may justify
this the following way. Suppose that ≤P is any countable Borel quasiorder
that is coarser than Turing equivalence and closed under finite computable
joins, i.e. if x ≥P y, z, then x ≥P y ⊕z. Then Slaman [37] has shown that on
a Turing cone, ≤P is (< α)-reducibility relative to x for some x and α < ω1x .
Thus, up to a Turing cone, these reducibilities are the only ones coarser than
Turing reducibility that are closed under finite computable joins.
    We give a complete description of which of these equivalence relations
are uniformly universal.

Theorem 3.17. Suppose α < ω1ck is additively indecomposable. Then (<
α)-equivalence is uniformly universal if and only if there is a β < α such
that α = β · ω.


                                      35
    We prove the non-uniform universality here by using Remark 3.14. In
the other case when α = β · ω for some β < α, the proof of universality is
an easy extension of Slaman and Steel’s proof that arithmetic equivalence
is universal. Recall from [30] that given x : ω → 2<ω and y ∈ 2ω , we define
J(x, y) ∈ 2ω to be the real whose nth column is
                               (
                         [n]     x(n)10000 . . . if y(n) = 0
                (J(x, y)) =
                                 x(n)01111 . . . if y(n) = 1

   We now give an extension of this definition that iterates this type of
jump coding through the transfinite.

Definition 3.18. Given x : ω → 2<ω and y ∈ 2ω , and a notation for α <
ω1ck , we define Jα (x, y) ∈ 2ω as follows. For α = 1, J1 (x, y) = J(x, y). For
α = β +1 for β > 0, we define Jα (x, y) = J(x0 , Jβ (x1 , y)), where x = x0 ⊕x1 .
Finally, suppose now that α is a limit ordinal and (λn )n<ω is an computable
sequence of computable ordinals whose limit is the computable ordinal α.
Then for n ∈ ω, define the functions fn (x, y, (λn )) by

                fn (x, y, (λn )) = Jλn (x[n] , y(n)a fn+1 (x, y, (λn )))

where x[n] is the nth column of x. Note that this definition is really an induc-
tive definition of the kth bit fn (x, y, (λn ))(k) simultaneously for all n; the
definition of fn (x, y, (λn ))(k) will only use the values of fn+1 (x, y, (λn ))(k′ )
for k′ < k. Finally, define Jα (x, y) = f0 (x, y, (λn )).

    Now we have the following:

Lemma 3.19. If x0 , . . . , xi , z0 , . . . , zj , and w are mutually ∆11 generic func-
tions from ω to 2<ω , then for all α, β, γ < ω1ck and y0 , . . . , yi ∈ 2ω
                                                                    (β)
   1. 0(α) ⊕ Jβ (x0 , y0 ) ⊕ . . . ⊕ Jβ (xi , yi ) ⊕ z0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ zj

                          ≡T 0(α+β) ⊕ x0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ xi ⊕ y0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ yi ⊕ z0 ⊕ . . . zj

   2. 0(α) ⊕ Jβ (x0 , y0 ) ⊕ . . . ⊕ Jβ (xi , yi ) ⊕ z0 ⊕ . . . ⊕ zj T w

Proof. This is an easy extension of the proof of [30, Lemma 2.4]. The
successor step is essentially identical, and at limits we use the fact that the
equivalences at each step are proved uniformly in β.



                                           36
Proof of Theorem 3.17. Suppose α < ω1ck is closed under addition and there
exists a β < α such that α = β · ω. We must show that ≡(<α) is a uni-
versal countable Borel equivalence relation. It is enough to show that if
F2 = ha, bi acts on a Polish space X, then the resulting equivalence relation
EFX2 ≤B ≡(<α) . Let g : X → (2<ω )ω be a Borel function such that for ev-
ery distinct x0 , . . . , xn ∈ X, we have that g(x0 ), . . . , g(xn ) are all mutually
∆11 generic functions from ω to 2<ω . The definition of the Borel reduction
witnessing EFX2 ≤B ≡α is:

         f (x) = Jβ (g(x), f (a · x) ⊕ f (a−1 · x) ⊕ f (b · x) ⊕ f (b−1 · x))

Like Definition 3.18, this is really an inductive definition of f (x)(k), which
depends on values of f (γ · x)(k′ ) for γ ∈ {a, a−1 , b, b−1 }, but only for k′ < k.
   By inductively applying Lemma 3.19, we see that

                                     M                            M
        f (β·n) (x) = 0(β·n) ⊕                   g(γ · x) ⊕                   f (γ · x)
                                 {γ∈F2 :|γ|<n}                {γ∈F2 :|γ|=n}

where |γ| is the length of γ as a word in F2 . Hence, by part 2 of Lemma 3.19,
we see that f (β·n) (x) can not compute g(y) for any y not in the same EFX2 -
class of x. Thus, f is an embedding, since therefore f (β·(n+1)) (x) can not
compute f (y) for all n and all y not in the same EFX2 -class as x.
    Now conversely, suppose that for every β < α, we have that β · ω < α.
Now if we have pair of (< α)-reductions, then they must both be (< β)-
reductions for some β < α. But then given any x, if we have a countable
uniform of reals obtained by computably composing these two reductions
applied to x, then it is still a (< α)-reduction since β · ω < α. Hence, by
Remark 3.14, (< α)-equivalence is not uniformly universal.

    This proves part (4) of Theorem 1.6. This also proves part (3) of The-
orem 1.5 since every countable Borel equivalence relation is contained in
(< α)-equivalence relative to some real. Note that the equivalence relations
≡(<ω) , ≡(<ω2 ) , ≡(<ω3 ) , . . . are each uniformly universal by Theorem 3.17, but
their union ≡(<ωω ) is not. This finishes the proof of part (4) of Theorem 1.5
together with Proposition 3.6.

3.5    Contrasting results in the measure context and on 3ω
In this section, we shall prove a number of contrasting results to those in the
previous section by showing that some of the equivalence relations considered


                                           37
there are universal if we change the space from 2ω to 3ω , or are willing
to discard nullsets. We will begin with some combinatorial results in the
measure context which we will use in one of our constructions.

Lemma 3.20. Suppose E and F are countable Borel equivalence relations
on a standard probability space (X, µ). Then there is a Borel set A ⊆ X
that meets µ-a.e. E-class of cardinality ≥ 3, and whose complement meets
µ-a.e. F -class of cardinality ≥ 3.

Proof. We may find some standard Borel space Y ⊇ X and equivalence
relations E ∗ and F ∗ extending E and F such that all the E ∗ -classes and F ∗ -
classes have cardinality ≥ 3 and for all x ∈ X whenever [x]E has cardinality
≥ 3, then [x]E = [x]E ∗ and when [x]F has cardinality ≥ 3, then [x]F = [x]F ∗ .
Now by [28, Theorem 1.7] there is a Borel set A ⊆ Y such that A meets
µ-a.e. E ∗ -class and the complement of A meets µ-a.e. F ∗ -class.

   From this, we can conclude the following, which shows that Theorem 3.9
does not hold after discarding a nullset.

Lemma 3.21. Suppose that X is a standard Borel space, {gi }i∈ω is a count-
able collection of partial Borel injections X → X, and µ is a Borel probability
measure on X. Then there is a Borel set A of full measure and countably
many Borel functions ci : A → 2ω such that for all x ∈ 2ω , if gi (x) is defined
and not equal to x for all i, then there exists an i such that ci (x) 6= ci (gi (x)).

Proof. We may assume all the gi are total Borel automorphisms of X. This
is because we may extend the gi to total Borel automorphisms on some
larger standard Borel space Y ⊇ X.
    For each i ∈ ω, let Ei be the equivalence relation generated by gi and
let Gi be the graph generated by gi .
    We may prove this fact with merely two functions c0 and c1 . By Lemma
3.20, there is a Borel set B that meets µ-a.e. E0 class of cardinality ≥ 3
and whose complement meets µ-a.e. E1 class of cardinality ≥ 3. Let G∗0 be
the graph where we remove the edge between x and g0 (x) for every x ∈ B,
and let G∗1 be the graph where we remove the edge between x and g1 (x) for
every x ∈ B c . Now there is a Borel set A of full measure such that every
connected component of G∗0 ↾ A and G∗1 ↾ A are finite. Finish by letting c0
be a Borel 2-coloring of G∗0 ↾ A and c1 be a Borel 2-coloring of G∗1 ↾ A.

    We are now ready to prove the following theorem:




                                         38
Theorem 3.22. Suppose Z is some countable set (which is possibly empty)
and G is a countable group of permutations of the set F2 × ω ⊔ Z so that for
every δ ∈ F2 , there exists some ρδ ∈ G so that ρδ ((γ, n)) = (δγ, n) for every
(γ, n) ∈ F2 × ω. Then
  1. The permutation action of G on 2F2 ×ω generates a measure universal
     countable Borel equivalence relation.

  2. The permutation action of G on 3F2 ×ω generates a universal countable
     Borel equivalence relation.
   Suppose briefly that Z is empty and we identify 2F2 ×ω with (2ω )F2 . Then
note that the permutations (γ, n) 7→ (δγ, n) which are required to be in the
group G generate the shift action of F2 on (Y ω )F2 ; this is their significance.

Proof. Throughout we will let Y ∈ {2, 3}. Let E∞ be a universal countable
Borel equivalence relation generated by an action of F2 on a standard Borel
space X. If f : X → Y ω is a function, then define the function fˆ: X →
Y F2 ×ω⊔Z by
                         fˆ(x)((γ, n)) = f (γ −1 · x)(n)
for (γ, n) ∈ F2 × ω, and fˆ(x)(z) = 0 for all z ∈ Z.
    Note that if x, y ∈ X and δ · x = y, then ρδ · fˆ(x) = fˆ(y), since

  ρδ · fˆ(x)((γ, n)) = fˆ(x)(ρ−1               ˆ       −1
                               δ ((γ, n))) = f (x)((δ γ, n))
                          = f (γ −1 · δ · x)(n) = fˆ(δ · x)((γ, n)) = fˆ(y)((γ, n))

So given any Borel f , the associated fˆ is a Borel homomorphism from E∞
to the orbit equivalence relation of the permutation action of G on Y F2 ×ω⊔Z .
We will define a Borel function f so that the corresponding fˆ becomes our
desired Borel reduction.
    Say a permutation ρ ∈ G uses {n, m} for n 6= m ∈ ω if there exist group
elements δ, γ ∈ F2 such that ρ((γ, n)) = (δ, m). Let G′ be the set of ρ ∈ G′
so ρ does not use infinitely many pairs {n, m}, and there are only finitely
many n such that ρ(Z) ∪ ρ−1 (Z) meets F2 × {n}. Note that G′ is a subgroup
of G.
    Let S0 , S1 ⊆ ω be disjoint sets so that S0 ∪ S1 is coinfinite, and
   1. For every ρ ∈ G that uses infinitely many pairs {n, m}, there is some
      pair {n, m} used by ρ so that n ∈ S0 and m ∈ S1 .

   2. For every ρ ∈ G such that there are infinitely many n such that ρ(Z) ∪
      ρ−1 (Z) meets F2 × {n}, ρ(Z) ∪ ρ−1 (Z) meets F2 × S1 .

                                         39
   Our first constraint on the function f will be that for every x ∈ X,

         f (x)(n) = 0 ∧ f (x)(m) = 1 for every n ∈ S0 and m ∈ S1 .

    We claim now that if ρ ∈ G, but ρ ∈   / G′ , then y ∈ ran(fˆ) will imply that
ρ·y ∈ / ran(fˆ). This is because if ρ((γ, m)) = (δ, n) and n ∈ S0 and m ∈ S1 ,
then for all y ∈ ran(fˆ), we have y((γ, m)) = 1 and y((δ, n)) = 0. However,
(ρ · y)((δ, n)) = y((γ, m)) = 1, and so (ρ · y) ∈  / ran(fˆ). We argue similarly
for ρ such that ρ(Z) ∪ ρ(Z −1 ) meets F2 × S1 .
    Let S2 ⊆ ω be an infinite set disjoint from S0 ∪S1 and so that S0 ∪S1 ∪S2
is coinfinite. Let h : X → 2S2 be a Borel reduction from the equality relation
on X to the relation of equality mod finite on 2S2 . (For example, we may
assume X = 2ω , let π : S2 → ω be an infinite-to-one surjection, and let
h(x)(n) = x(π(n)).) Now define

                     f (x)(n) = h(x)(n) for every n ∈ S2                     (*)

    Suppose ρ ∈ G′ . Then for sufficiently large n ∈ S2 , we must have
that for every x ∈ X, (ρ · fˆ)(x)(n) has been defined by (*). Because we
can recover y ∈ X if we know all but finitely many bits of h(y), there
can be at most one y such that for all sufficiently large n ∈ S2 , we have
(ρ · fˆ)(x)(γ, n) = fˆ(y)(γ, n) for all γ ∈ F2 . Let gρ : X → X be the partial
Borel function mapping each x ∈ X to this unique y ∈ X if it exists. Note
that if gρ (x) = y then gρ−1 (y) = x, so gρ is a partial injection. For each ρ,
also define nρ to be least such that for every n ≥ nρ and γ ∈ F2 there is a
δ ∈ F2 such that ρ((γ, n)) = (δ, n).
    For each n ≥ nρ , let gρ,n : X → X be the partial Borel function so
gρ,n (y) = γ · gρ−1 (y) where γ ∈ F2 is such that ρ−1 ((1, n)) = (γ, n). Hence,
if gρ (x) = y, and x ✟   E✟               ˆ       ˆ
                          ∞ y then ρ · f (x) = f (y) would imply f (y)(n) =
fˆ(y)((1, n)) = (ρ · fˆ(x))((1, n)) = fˆ(x)(ρ (1, n)) = fˆ(x)((γ, n)) = f (γ −1 ·
                                             −1

x)(n) = f (gρ,n (y))(n) for every n ≥ nρ .
    Hence, to make fˆ a Borel reduction, it suffices to ensure that for every
y ∈ X and every ρ ∈ G′ if gρ−1 (y) is defined, then either g−1 (y) E∞ y, or
else there is an n ≥ nρ such that f (y)(n) 6= f (gρ,n (y)).
    For each ρ ∈ G′ let S3,ρ be an infinite set disjoint from S0 ∪ S1 ∪ S2 with
min(S3,ρ ) ≥ nρ , and so that the sets {S3,ρ }ρ∈G′ S   are all pairwise disjoint.
Define f (x)(n) arbitrarily for n ∈ / S0 ∪ S1 ∪ S2 ∪ ( {S3,ρ }ρ∈G′ ).
    We will now indicate how to finish the construction to show both parts
(1) and (2).
    To prove (1), suppose µ is a Borel probability measure on X. By
Lemma 3.21, for each ρ ∈ G′ and n ∈ S3,ρ , let Aρ be a µ-conull Borel set

                                       40
and let cρ,n : Aρ → 2 be a function so that for every y ∈ Aρ , there is some
n ∈ S3,ρ so that gρ,n (y) = y, gρ,n (y) is undefined, or cρ,n (y) 6= cρ,n (gρ,n (y)).
We finish our definition of f by letting

                 f (y)(n) = cρ,n (y) for all ρ ∈ G′ and n ∈ S3,ρ

We claim that fˆ ↾ ρ∈G′ Aρ a reduction. Above, we have already shown
                         T

that if ρ ∈ / G′ , then ρ · fˆ(y) is not in the range of fˆ for all y ∈ X. So
suppose ρ ∈ G′ and y ∈ Aρ . Then if gρ−1 (y) is defined and gρ−1 (y) ✟    E✟
                                                                           ∞ y, this
implies that gρ,n (y) 6= y for all n, hence there is some n ∈ S3,ρ such that
cρ,n (y) 6= cρ,n (gρ,n (y)). Hence, ρ−1 · fˆ(y) is not in the range of fˆ.
     To prove (2), each injective partial function gρ,n generates a Borel graph
on X of degree at most 2. Let cρ,n : X → 3 be a Borel 3-coloring of this
graph by [20, Proposition 4.6], and define

                 f (y)(n) = cρ,n (y) for all ρ ∈ G′ and n ∈ S3,ρ .



    Recall that given x, y ∈ 2ω , we say that x is many-one reducible to
y, noted x ≤m y, if there is a computable function r : ω → ω such that
x = r −1 (y). The associated symmetrization of this reducibility is many-one
equivalence, and is noted ≡m . Many-one equivalence is Borel reducible to
recursive isomorphism via the function x 7→ ⊕i∈ω x; the function mapping x
to the computable join of ω many copies of x. Indeed, for all reals x and y,
we have that ⊕i∈ω x and ⊕i∈ω y are recursively isomorphic if and only if they
are many-one equivalent. Note that many-one equivalence is closed under
countable uniform joins.
Corollary 3.23.
   1. The equivalence relation of recursive isomorphism on 2ω is measure
      universal.

   2. The equivalence relation of recursive isomorphism on 3ω is universal.
Further, the same two facts are true for many-one equivalence in place of
recursive isomorphism.
Proof. Take a computable bijection between F2 × ω with ω so we can iden-
tify 2ω with 2F2 ×ω , and similarly for the base space 3. Then the group of
computable permutations of ω includes the permutations required in the
assumptions of Theorem 3.22.

                                         41
    The fact that these facts are also true for many-one equivalence follows
from the above observation that we may change the group F2 in the proof
of Theorem 3.22 into the group F3 , and the proof will work unchanged to
construct a Borel reduction from the equivalence relation generated by any
Borel action of F3 on X. Now take an action of F3 = ha, b, ci where the first
two generators a, b generate a universal countable Borel equivalence relation,
and the last generator c acts trivially so that c·x = x for every x ∈ X. Then
the range of the resulting fˆ will have fˆ(x)((ck δ, n)) for every k ∈ Z. Thus,
every bit in fˆ(x) is duplicated infinitely many times, and so fˆ(x) and fˆ(y)
are many-one equivalent iff they are recursively isomorphic.

    Now recursive isomorphism on 2ω is not closed under countable uniform
joins, and hence Theorem 3.13 does not apply to it. However, because of the
close connection between recursive isomorphism and many-one equivalence,
and the fact that all known approaches to the universality of recursive iso-
morphism also give the universality of many-one equivalence, we make the
following conjecture:
Conjecture 3.24. Recursive isomorphism on 2ω is not a universal count-
able Borel equivalence relation.
   We can now prove part (2) of Theorem 1.5.
Theorem 3.25. Given any uniformly universal countable Borel equivalence
          X
relation E{ϕ    on a standard probability space (X, µ), there is an invariant
             i}
Borel set A of full measure such that E{ϕX    ↾ A is not uniformly universal.
                                           i}

                                         X
Proof. There is a uniform embedding of E{ϕ    ↾ A into many-one equivalence
                                           i}
for some µ-conull Borel set A by Corollary 3.23. However, since many-one
equivalence is not uniformly universal by Theorem 3.13, E{ϕX    ↾ A can not
                                                             i}
be uniformly universal.

   Our proofs above give the following interesting consequence about tree-
able equivalence relations.
Theorem 3.26. Let E∞T = F (F2 , 2) be the universal treeable countable
Borel equivalence relation, and let µ be a Borel probability measure on the
free part of 2F2 . Then there exists a µ-conull Borel set A such that E∞T
does not uniformly reduce to E∞T ↾ A.
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 3.13, we see that E∞T does not uniformly
reduce to many-one equivalence on 2ω . However, we have shown that many-
one equivalence is measure universal, and hence E∞T ↾ A does uniformly

                                      42
reduce to recursive isomorphism on 2ω for some conull set A with respect to
every Borel probability measure. Hence, we see that E∞T cannot uniformly
reduce to E∞T ↾ A.

    Hence, it seems reasonable to expect that the Borel cardinality of E∞T
decreases after we discard a sufficiently complicated nullset, with respect to
any Borel probability measure. At the very least, any proof that this is not
the case must use a complicated nonuniform construction.
    In more recent work joint with Jay Williams, we have generalized part
(2) of Theorem 3.23 as follows.

Theorem 3.27 (joint with Jay Williams). Suppose X is a Polish space
with |X| ≥ 3, and G is any countable subgroup of S∞ . Then the permu-
tation action of G on X ω generates a uniformly universal countable Borel
equivalence relation if and only if there exists some k ∈ ω and a subgroup
H ≤ G isomorphic to F2 such that the map H → ω given by ρ 7→ ρ(k) is
injective.

   Essentially, not only must Γ contain a copy of F2 , as given in (1) of
Theorem 1.5, this must be witnessed in a single orbit.

Proof. For the forward direction, assume that for all n ∈ ω and g0 , g1 ∈ G,
that there exists some nontrivial reduced word h in g0 and g1 such that
h(n) = n. Now let f be a uniform Borel homomorphism from E(F2 , 2ω )
to EGX ω with uniformity function u : F → G. Since F is a free group, we
                                        2               2
may assume that u is a group homomorphism. We claim that f is constant
on a set of Lebesgue measure 1. It is enough to show that for each n ∈ ω,
f (x)(n) is constant on a set of Lebesgue measure 1.
    Let k ∈ ω be given. Let F2 = hα, βi and consider words in u(α) and
u(β). By assumption, there must be some nonidentity γ ∈ F2 such that
u(γ)(k) = k. We see that f (γ · x)(k) = u(γ) · f (x)(k) = f (x)(u(γ)−1 (k)) =
f (x)(k). Hence, the value assigned to x by x 7→ f (x)(k) is invariant under
the map x 7→ γ · x. However, since x 7→ γ · x is an ergodic transformation,
the map x 7→ f (x)(n) must therefore be constant a.e. (Note that here we
have not used the fact that the cardinality of X is ≥ 3.)
    The reverse direction follows from Lemma 3.22. By assumption there
is a subgroup H ≤ G isomorphic to F2 and a k ∈ ω so that the map
H 7→ ω defined by h 7→ h(k) is injective. Let H ′ ≤ H be a subgroup
isomorphic to F3 , and let α, β, ξ ∈ H ′ be generators of this subgroup. Let
φ : F2 → H ′ be an isomorphism sending the two generators of F2 to α and
β, and let π : F2 × ω → ω be the injection π(γ, i) = φ(γ) ◦ ξ i (k), so we can


                                     43
view ω as ran(π) ⊔ (ω \ ran(π)), and canonically identify it with F2 × ω ⊔ Z
for Z = ω \ ran(π). Viewed this, way G therefore contains the required
permutations in order to apply Lemma 3.22 to show that the permutation
action of G on 3ω is universal.

    Note that one implication of this theorem is that if G ≤ H ≤ S∞ are
countable and the permutation action of G on X ω generates a uniformly
universal countable Borel equivalence relation, then so does the permutation
action of H.
    With this theorem, we have finished proving all the abstract properties
and classifications of uniform universality that we have discussed in the
introduction.




                                    44
4     Ultrafilters on quotient spaces
4.1   An introduction to ultrafilters on quotient spaces
Largeness notions for the subsets of a standard Borel space play a central role
in descriptive set theory. They are an indispensable tool whenever we want
to prove an impossibility result such as E B F for some Borel equivalence
relations E and F . In such situations, we must analyze all possible Borel
functions that could be counterexamples to these statements. While we
have no hope of understanding the behavior of arbitrary Borel functions
everywhere, if we are willing to discard some “small” part of the domain of
the function, we may gain a much clearer understanding of its behavior on
the remaining “large” complement.
    Formally, a notion of largeness is often taken to mean a σ-complete filter,
whose corresponding notion of smallness is its dual σ-ideal. For example,
Baire category and Borel probability measures yield such notions of large-
ness: the comeager sets and conull sets. Our main goal in this section will
be to define largeness notions that are particularly well suited for studying
Borel equivalence relations (though one could equally well study other types
of Borel objects, such as Borel graphs, or Borel quasiorders). They will have
much stronger properties than merely being σ-complete filters.
    As a motivating example, consider E0 : the equivalence relation of equal-
ity mod finite on infinite binary sequences in 2ω . Both Lebesgue measure
and Baire category have two properties that are particularly helpful when
they are used to analyze homomorphisms from E0 to other Borel equiv-
alence relations. First, every E0 -invariant Borel set A ⊆ 2ω has either
Lebesgue measure 0 or 1, and likewise is either meager or comeager. Hence,
with respect to either of these two notions, every E0 -invariant set is either
large or small. Phrased another way, these largeness notions are ultrafilters
when restricted to E0 -invariant sets. Second, since the restriction of E0 to
a comeager or conull set cannot be smooth by standard ergodicity argu-
ments, it must therefore be Borel bireducible with E0 by the Glimm-Effros
dichotomy [13].
    We isolate these two phenomena into the following definitions. Recall
that given any σ-algebra Σ, an ultrafilter on Σ is a maximal filter of Σ. An
ultrafilter U is said to be σ-complete if the intersection of countably many
elements of U is in U .

Definition 4.1. Suppose E is a countable Borel equivalence relation on a
standard Borel space X with the associated σ-algebra Σ of E-invariant Borel
sets. A σ-complete ultrafilter on the Borel subsets of X/E is a σ-

                                      45
complete ultrafilter U on Σ. U is said to preserve the Borel cardinality
of E if for all A ∈ U , we have E ∼B E ↾ A.

    Let us expand our horizons briefly and discuss this situation under the
axiom of determinacy. Under AD, every ultrafilter must be σ-complete (see
for instance [18, Proposition 28.1]) and so there can not be any nonprin-
cipal ultrafilter on any Polish space. Nevertheless, many ultrafilters exist
on quotients of Polish spaces by equivalence relations. For example, the
two examples of ultrafilters we have given above as well as all the examples
we will give below will easily extend to define ultrafilters on all subsets of
the quotient X/E under AD. Hence, the reader may assume we are work-
ing in this context if they prefer, and work with genuine ultrafilters for the
σ-algebra of all subsets of X/E, instead of just the Borel ones.
    We mention here that there are several open questions concerning the
structure of the ultrafilters on the quotient space of a Borel equivalence
relation E. Abstractly, we would like to know if there is a way of classifying
such ultrafilters and hence understanding exactly what types of tools exist
with which we can analyze E using ergodicity arguments. The most natural
way of organizing these ultrafilters is by Rudin-Keisler reducibility. Several
important open questions can be rephrased in this framework. For example,
the question of whether Martin’s ultrafilter is E0 -ergodic [40] is equivalent
to asking whether there is a nonprincipal ultrafilter on the quotient of E0
that is Rudin-Keisler reducible to Martin’s ultrafilter on the Turing degrees.
Along these lines, Zapletal has also asked whether the ultrafilters arising
from measure and category are a basis for all the ultrafilters on the quotient
of E0 .
    As described in the introduction, our main goal in this section is the
construction of new ultrafilters on the quotient space of countable Borel
equivalence relations that do not arise from measure or category. We are
motivated to construct ultrafilters in particular because of the central role
that ergodicity plays in the subject, and because of connections with Mar-
tin’s ultrafilter on the Turing degrees. Further, our desire for ultrafilters
which preserve Borel cardinality comes from our ultimate goal of proving
sharper theorems than those which are currently possible using category
(which suffers from generic hyperfiniteness [24, Theorem 12.1]), and measure
(which we conjecture does not preserve Borel cardinality in many natural
cases such as for E∞T and E∞ : see Theorems 3.25 and 3.26).
    The search for tools beyond measure theory to use in the study of count-
able Borel equivalence relations has long been a central question of the
subject. Indeed, up to the present, in every case where we can prove that


                                     46
there is no definable reduction from E to F for countable Borel equivalence
relations E and F , we have been able to give a measure-theoretic proof of
this fact. We may make this question precise under the axiom AD+ , a slight
technical strengthening of AD due to Woodin which implies uniformization
for subsets of R2 with countable sections [45] 4 . Assume AD+ , and suppose
E and F are countable equivalence relations on the standard Borel space X
and Y . Then say E is reducible to F if there is a function f : X → Y such
that xEy ⇐⇒ f (x)F f (y). Say that E is measure reducible to F if for every
probability measure µ on X, there exists a µ-conull set A such that E ↾ A
is reducible to F . It is open whether these two notions are distinct. That
is, whether every instance of nonreducibility arises for measure-theoretic
reasons.

Question 4.2 (AD+ ). If E and F are countable equivalence relations on
standard Borel spaces and E is measure reducible to F , then must E be
reducible to F ?

    An affirmative answer to Question 4.2 seems unlikely. For example, we
have shown above that E∞ is measure reducible to the equivalence relation
of recursive isomorphism on 2ω and also conjectured that recursive isomor-
phism on 2ω is not universal (see Theorem 3.23 and Conjecture 3.24).
    We return now to the realm of Borel sets. The existence of a σ-complete
ultrafilter on the Borel subsets of X/E already yields some interesting in-
formation about E, related to its indivisibility, which we proceed to define:

Definition 4.3. Suppose that E and F are Borel equivalence relations.
Say that E is F -indivisible if for every Borel homomorphism f from E
to F , there exists an F equivalence class C such that E ↾ f −1 (C) is Borel
bireducible with E. In the case where F is the relation of equality on a
standard Borel space of cardinality κ, then we say that E is κ-indivisible.

    Given Borel equivalence relations E and F , E being F -indivisible is
perhaps the antithesis of having E Borel reducible to F . Not only is E B F ,
but any homomorphism f from E to F makes no progress whatsoever in
completely classifying E, since there is a single F -class whose preimage under
f has the same Borel cardinality as E.
    We know many examples of interesting pairs of uncountable Borel equiv-
alence relations E and F for which E is F -indivisible (see for example
    4
      The Borel version of Question 4.2 is false because of the known difference between σ-
Σ11 reducibility and Borel reducibility for countable Borel equivalence relations [1, Theorem
5.5]


                                             47
the book of Kanovei, Sabok, and Zapletal [19]). However, no countable
Borel equivalence relations beyond E0 were known even to be indivisible
into two pieces until we showed this for E∞ in [30]. In contrast, we note
that Thomas [39] has shown the existence of a countable Borel equivalence
relation E on an uncountable standard Borel space that is not 2-indivisible.
Indeed, there is a countable Borel equivalence relation E where E <B E ⊕E,
where E ⊕ E is the direct sum of two disjoint copies of E.
    Our study of ultrafilters is connected to indivisibility in the following
way:
Proposition 4.4. Suppose there exists a σ-complete Borel cardinality pre-
serving ultrafilter U on the Borel E-invariant sets. Then E is 2ℵ0 -indivisible.
Proof. This is a standard ergodicity argument. Let f be a Borel homomor-
phism from E to ∆(2ω ). For each n ∈ ω, let An,0 = {x : f (x)(n) = 0}
and An,1 = {x : f (x)(n) = 1}. Then for each n, either An,0 ∈ U or
An,1 ∈ U . Hence, there is an x ∈ 2ω such that An,x(n) ∈ U for all n and so
A = f −1 (x) = ∩n An,x(n) has A ∈ U , so E ↾ A ∼B E.

    In [30] we pointed out that for arithmetic equivalence, the invariant
sets containing an arithmetic cone are a σ-complete ultrafilter on the ≡A -
invariant sets. Since Slaman and Steel have shown that arithmetic equiv-
alence is a universal countable Borel equivalence relation, and their proof
relativizes, we noted that this implies that this ultrafilter preserves Borel
cardinality and hence that E∞ is 2ℵ0 -indivisible. This answered questions
of Jackson, Kechris and Louveau, [17] and Thomas [41, question 3.20], who
had asked whether E∞ is 2-indivisible and 2ℵ0 -indivisible respectively. In
this section, we will give a new proof of this result by constructing a large
family of cardinality preserving ultrafilters on the quotient of countable Borel
equivalence relations of which E∞ is merely one example.
    It remains an open question to classify exactly which countable Borel
equivalence relation E are such that E∞ is E-indivisible. However, Martin’s
conjecture provides an answer to this question, as discussed in [30].

4.2   A natural ultrafilter on the quotient of E(F∞ , 2ω )
As in Section 2, throughout this section we will have I ≤ ω and {Γi }i∈I a
collection of disjoint countable groups. For each i ∈ I, we also fix a listing
γi,0 , γi,1 . . . of the nonidentity elements of Γi .
     We will begin by proving a strengthening of Lemma 2.8 to show that f
may be chosen to be a Borel reduction. This will require us to generalize
slightly the main game from Section 2.

                                      48
Definition 4.5 (The general game). Fix a strictly increasing sequence of
natural numbers (nk )k∈ω . We define the general game GA i ((nk )) for produc-
         Q ω ∗i Γi                              A
ing y ∈ ( i 2 )     identically to the game Gi , except with the following
modification: the appropriate player will define y(α)(i)(n) on turn k of the
game if t(α) ≥ k, and n(k−t(α)) ≤ hi, ni < n(k+1−t(α)) .

   Hence, the main game GA  i from Definition 2.4 corresponds to the general
        A
game Gi ((nk )) for the sequence nk = k. It is easy to check that for all the
lemmas in Sections 2.1 and 2.2 that use game GA    i , we can use the more
                 A
general game Gi ((nk )) instead. In all the relevant inductions where we
assume the turns < k have been played, one simply replaces the assumption
that y(α)(i)(n) has been defined for t(α) + hi, ni < k with the assumption
that y(α)(i)(n) has been defined where t(α) < k and hi, ni < nk−t(α) .
   We have one more technical definition giving a growth criterion for se-
quences (nk )k∈ω .

Definition 4.6. Let Sk = {β ∈ Γj : t(β) ≤ k}. Let Nα,i,k = {n ∈
ω : nk−t(α−1 ) ≤ hi, ni ≤ nk+1−t(α−1 ) }, so that the nth bit of (α · y)(1)(i)
(which is equal to the nth bit of y(α−1 )(i)) is determined on turn k if and
only if n ∈ Nα,i,k . Say that a sequence (nk )k∈ω is good if for every i ∈ I,
d ∈ ω, and α ∈ ∗i Γi , there are infinitely many k such that d|Sk | < 2|Na,i,k | .

Lemma 4.7. Assume that {Ai }i∈I is a Borel partition of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi and
                                                              Q
                                                         A
that player II has a winning strategy in the game Gj j ((nk )) for a good
sequence (nk )k∈ω . Then there exists some j ∈ I and an injective continuous
Γj -equivariant function f : (2ω )Γj → Aj , but withQ the additional property
that f is an embedding of E(Γj , 2ω ) into E(∗i Γi , i 2ω ).

Proof. Fix such a winning strategy. The f we produce will be a slight
variation on the one produced in Lemma 2.8. Given any g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω ,
let fg be the unique equivariant Borel function such that for all x ∈ 2ω we
have fg (x)(γ)(j) = g(γ −1 · x), and such that fg (x) is a winning outcome of
                                             A
player II’s winning strategy in the game Gj j ((nk )k∈ω ). This fg exists by an
analogous argument to that in the proof of Lemma 2.8. In this notation, the
f produced in the proof of Lemma 2.8 is the function fg where g(x) = x(1).
We claim that if g is a sufficiently generic continuous function, then fg will
be as desired.
    To simplify notation, identify (2ω )Γj with 2Γj ×ω . Fix some enumeration
of Γj × ω, and let 2<Γj ×ω be the set of all functions from some finite initial
segment of Γj × ω to 2. Hence, if s, t ∈ 2<Γj ×ω are compatible, then s ⊆ t
or t ⊆ s. In general, if s, t ∈ 2Γj ×ω and β ∈ Γj , we will say that β · s is

                                       49
compatible with t if for all (γ, n) ∈ Γj × ω so that both s((β −1 γ, n)) and
t((γ, n)) are defined, we have s((β −1 γ, n)) = t((γ, n)). Otherwise, we will
say that β · r is incompatible with s.
    The sense of genericity that we mean for continuous functions from
(2ω )Γj → 2ω will be the usual one. Our set P of conditions will be the set of
all finite partial functions p from 2<Γj ×ω → 2<ω such that if s, t ∈ dom(p)
and s ⊆ t, then p(s) ⊆ p(t). It is clear that a generic filter for this poset will
yield a unique continuous function g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω in the usual way.
    Note that a sufficiently generic function g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω will have the
property that there exists a function ρj : ω → ω such that for all x ∈ (2ω )Γj ,
γ ∈ Γj and n ∈ ω, we have x(1)(n) = g(x)(ρj (n)). Hence, g will be injective,
and thus so will fg .
    We must show that whenever x, y ∈ (2ω )Γj are not E(Γj , 2ω )-related,
and α ∈ ∗i Γi is not an element of Γj , then α · fg (x) 6= fg (y). Of course, if
α ∈ Γj , then α · fg (x) = fg (α · x), since fg is Γj -equivariant.
    Fix α ∈ ∗i Γi . It suffices to prove the following. Suppose r, s ∈ 2<Γj ×ω
are such that β · r is incompatible with s for all β ∈ St(α) . Then given any
condition p ∈ P , it is dense to extend p to a condition p∗ such that for all
continuous functions g extending p∗ , we have that α · fg (x) 6= fg (y) for all
x ∈ (2ω )Γj extending r and y ∈ (2ω )Γj extending s.
    We can find such a p∗ in the following way. Let σ be a finite initial
segment of Γj × ω (according to our fixed enumeration) that contains          the
three sets {(β −1 γ, n) : (γ, n) ∈ dom(r) ∧ β ∈ St(α) }, dom(s), and {dom(t) :
                                                                      S
t ∈ dom(p)}. Let k be sufficiently large so that

     min(Nα,j,k ) > sup({|p(t)| : t ∈ dom(t)}) and | dom(p)|Sk < 2|Nα,j,k |

Let l = max(N1,j,k ). Let q be an extension of p such that

                     dom(q) = {t ∈ 2<Γj ×ω : dom(t) ⊆ σ}

and for every t ∈ dom(q) with dom(t) = σ, q(t) has length l, and consists of a
string in ran(p) followed by finitely many zeroes. Note that if g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω
is a continuous function extending q, then for every x ∈ (2ω )Γj , we have that
g(x) ↾ l must be an element of ran(p) followed by finitely many zeroes. Our
desired p∗ will be equal to some q except on extensions of s.
    Now if n ∈ Nt(α−1 ),j,k , then the nth bit of (α · fg (x))(1)(j) will have been
                       A
defined in the game Gj j ((nk )) by player II on turn k, and hence will depend
only on the values of g(β · x)(n′ ) for β ∈ Γj with t(β) ≤ k, and n′ such that

   1. hj, n′ i < nk+1 if t(β) ≤ t(α).

                                        50
   2. hj, n′ i < nk−t(α−1 ) if t(β) > t(α).

   Suppose g is a generic continuous function extending q, and x extends
r. Then for any β ∈ Γj ,

   1. if t(β) ≤ t(α), then since β · x is incompatible with x, g(x) ↾ {n′ :
      hj, n′ i < nk+1 } must be an element of dom(p) followed by finitely
      many 0s.

   2. if t(β) > t(α), then g(x) ↾ {n′ : hj, n′ i < nk−t(α−1 ) } must also be an
      element of dom(p) followed by finitely many 0s.

Hence, there are at most w = | ran(p)||Sk | ways to associate an element
in ran(p) to each β ∈ Sk , and so at most | ran(p)||Sk | possible values that
α · fg (x)(i)(j) ↾ Nα,j,k could take. Let v0 , . . . , vw−1 : Nα,j,k → 2 enumerate
these possibilities. Let p∗ ⊆ p be a condition with dom(p∗ ) = dom(q) and
such that for every t with dom(t) = σ, if t is incompatible with s, then
p∗ (t) = q(t). Otherwise, if t extends s, then p∗ (t) is incompatible with
v0 , . . . , vw−1 .

    Theorems 1.1 and 1.2 from the introduction are now easy corollaries of
Lemma
Q ω 4.7. ωNote that as we discussed at the beginning of the introduction,
                                                              Q ω ∗i Γi
  i 2 and 2 are homeomorphic, so it is fine to use the space ( i 2 )
instead of (2ω )∗i Γi .

Proof of Theorem 1.1.
                    Q Let   (nk )k∈ω be a good sequence, and {Ai }i∈I be a
                        ω ∗
Borel partition of ( i 2 ) Γi . By Lemma 2.5 but for the game Gi ((nk )),
                            i

                                                            A
there must be some j ∈ I so that player II wins the game Gj j ((nk )). Now
apply Lemma 4.7.

   The proof of Theorem 1.2 simply adds the ideas from the proof of
Lemma 2.12.

Proof of Theorem 1.2. Let Q (nk )k∈ω be a good sequence, and {Ai }i∈I be a
Borel partition of Free(( i 2ω )∗i Γi ). Now define the partitions {Bi }i∈I and
{Ci }i∈I identically as in Lemma 2.12, and let A′i = Ai ∪ Bi ∪ Ci so that
                                                                   A′
{A′i }i∈I is a Borel partition of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi . Player II wins Gj j ((nk )) for
                                   Q
some j ∈ I, so we can apply Lemma  Q 4.7    to obtain a continuous equivariant
                         ω   i           ω ∗
injective function f : (2 ) → ( i 2 ) i Γi . But then arguing identically
                            Γ

as in the proof of Lemma 4.7, ran(f ↾ Free((2ω )Γi )) must be contained in
Aj .



                                         51
    We will make a remark here on the extent to which the function g in
the proof of Lemma 4.7 depends on the winning strategy for player II in the
game Gj .

Remark 4.8. We have remarked in the proof of Lemma 4.7 above that
a sufficiently generic function g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω will have the property that
there exists a function ρj : ω → ω such that for all x ∈ (2ω )Γj and n ∈ ω,
x(1)(n) = g(x)(ρj (n)). We remark here these functions ρj can be chosen so
that they will work regardless of what the winning strategy for player II is
                A
in the game Gj j ((nk )).
    Precisely, we mean that if we fix a good sequence (nk )k∈ω , then there
exists a choice of function ρi : ω → ω for each i ∈ I such that if player II
                  A
wins the game Gj j ((nk )), then there is a continuous function g : (2ω )Γj → 2ω
such that x(1)(n) = g(x)(ρj (n)) for all x and n, and an injective continuous
Γj -equivariant
              Qfunction   f : (2ω )Γj → Aj that is an embedding of E(Γj , 2ω )
into E(∗i Γi , i 2 ) and such that fg (x)(1)(j) = g(x) for every x ∈ (2ω )Γj .
                   ω

    The reason this is true is that when we extend the condition p to p∗
in the proof of Lemma 4.7, the condition p∗ will depend on the winning
strategy for player II in the game Gj (since p∗ must diagonalize against
how the strategy works), however the length of elements in the range of
p∗ will always be l independent of what the winning strategy is. Hence, if
we choose ρj in advance to be sufficiently fast growing, we will be able to
alternate meeting the dense sets defined in the proof of Lemma 4.7 (where
we extend p to p∗ ) with dense sets ensuring that x(1)(n) = g(x)(ρj (n)).

   Next, we will show how we can combine Lemma 4.7 and Lemma 2.7 to
construct a Borel cardinality preserving ultrafilter for E∞ , which will give a
new way of proving many of the theorems from Section 3 of [30].

Lemma 4.9. Suppose I = 2 and Γ0 and Γ1 are countably infinite Q         groups,
and (nk )k∈ω is strictly increasing. Let S be the σ-algebra of E(∗i Γi , i 2ω )-
invariant Borel sets. Define U ⊆ S to be the set of A ∈ S such that player
II has a winning strategy in GA  0 ((nk )). Then U is a σ-complete ultrafilter.

Proof. First, it is clear that if A ∈ U and B ⊇ A, then B ∈ U . Now if
B1 , B2 , . . . ∈ U then we claim (∩m≥1 Bm )c ∈
                                              / U . This is by contradiction, if
(∩m≥1 Bm ) ∈ U , then by Lemma 2.7, we could obtain a y that is an outcome
                                            (∩   Bm )
of a winning strategy for player II in G0 m≥1      ((nk )) and so that γ0,i · y is
an outcome of a winning strategy for player II in GB 0 ((nk )), for each m ≥ 1.
                                                      m

Hence, y ∈ ∩k≥1 Bk , but γ0,k · y ∈ Bk for all k ≥ 1, which is a contradiction,
since the Bk are invariant.

                                       52
                                                         / U then, (∩m≥1 Bm )c ∈
     An analogous argument shows that if B1 , B2 , . . . ∈
U ; if player II does not have a winning strategy in GA   0 ((nk )), then player II
                                c
has a winning strategy in GA  1   ((n k )) by Lemma 2.5.   Note that here we are
using the fact observed above that both Lemmas 2.5 and 2.7 adapt to the
general game Gi ((nk )).

    Now if Γ0 = Γ1 = Fω , then Theorem 4.7 implies that the ultrafilter from
Lemma 4.9 preserves Borel cardinality. Hence, we have a new proof of the
following theorem, by applying Proposition 4.4.

Theorem 4.10 ([30]). E∞ is 2ℵ0 -indivisible.

   In addition, Lemma 4.7 gives us a new way of proving a couple of the
other theorems from Section 3 of [30]. For example, we have the following:

Theorem 4.11 ([30, Corollary 3.1]). If E is a universal countable Borel
equivalence relation on a standard Borel space X, and {Bi }i∈ω is a Borel
partition of X, then there must exist a Bi such that E(Fω , 2ω ) ⊑B E ↾ Bi .

Proof. Let g be a Borel reduction from E(∗i<ω Fω , i<ω 2ω ) to E. By
                                                        Q
Lusin-Novikov uniformization [22, Theorem 18.10] we can partition each
g−1 (Bi ) into countably many Borel sets on which g is injective. Let {Aj }j∈ω
be the union of these countably many sets over every i ∈ ω. Now by
Lemma 4.7,Qfind a j ∈ ω and a Borel embedding f of E(Fω , 2ω ) into
E(∗i<ω Fω , i<ω 2ω ) ↾ Aj . Then g ◦ f is an injective reduction of E(Fω , 2ω )
to E ↾ Bi for some i.

    This theorem was used in [30] to also obtain the corollary that if E is
a universal (under ≤B ) countable Borel equivalence relation, then F ⊑B E
for every countable Borel equivalence relation F .
    Of course, our proofs above are not so far from those of [30]. In partic-
ular, every ultrafilter given by Lemma 4.9 refines Martin’s ultrafilter on the
Turing degrees in the following way.

Proposition 4.12. Let Γ0 , Γ1 be countably infinite computable
                                                           Q groups, and
(nk )k∈ω be a computable good sequence. It is clear that ( i 2ω )∗i Γi is ef-
fectively homeomorphic         ω
                  Q ω to 2 , and viewed this way, the shift equivalence
relation E(∗i Γi , i 2 ) is a subequivalence relation of Turing equivalence.
Now suppose that A is aQBorel subset of ( i 2ω )∗i Γi that is Turing invari-
                                             Q
ant, and hence E(∗i Γi , i 2ω )-invariant. Then A is in Martin’s ultrafilter
if and only if A is in the ultrafilter U given by Lemma 4.9.



                                        53
Proof. Suppose s is a winning strategy for player II in the game GA       j . By
Lemma 2.7, for every z ∈ 2ω there exists a y that is an outcome of the
strategy s such that y(1)(j) = z. Hence A must contain reals of arbitrarily
large Turing degree and hence must be in Martin’s ultrafilter. Conversely,
if A is in Martin’s ultrafilter, then it must also be in the ultrafilter U from
Lemma 2.7, as Ac ∈ U would imply Ac is in Martin’s ultrafilter.

    Indeed, our game in Definition 2.4 is actually Martin’s game from [31]
if A is Turing invariant. The bits of y are partitioned into two computable
sets: one set that player I determines, and one set that player II determines,
and then player II wins if and only if y is in A.

4.3   K-structurable equivalence relations
In this section we use the terminology and notation of [17, Section 2.5].
Suppose L = {Ri : i ∈ I} is a countable relational language and XL is the
associate space of L-structures whose universe is some set I ≤ ω. Let K ⊆
XL be a Borel class of L-structures closed under isomorphism. By a theorem
of Lopez-Escobar, such K are exactly those classes of structures defined by
some Lω1 ,ω sentence [22, Theorem 16.8]. A countable Borel equivalence
relation E on a standard Borel space X is said to be Borel K-structurable
if there is a Borel assignment of a K-structure to each E-class whose universe
is that class. Precisely, we mean that there are Borel relations {Qi : i ∈ I}
on X where Qi and Ri have the same arity for all i ∈ I, and so that for each
E-class C, the structure whose universe is C and whose relations are Qi ↾ C
is isomorphic to some structure in K.
     Recall that if E and F are Borel equivalence relations on the standard
Borel spaces X and Y , then a Borel homomorphism f : X → Y from E to
F is said to be class bijective if for every E-class C, f ↾ C is a bijection
between C and some F -class. It is easy to see that if there is a class bi-
jective homomorphism Borel homomorphism from E to F , and F is Borel
K-structurable, then E is also Borel K-structurable.
     Many natural classes of countable Borel equivalence relations are exactly
the K-structurable equivalence relations for some such class of structures K.
For example, the class K of trees yields the class of treeable equivalence rela-
tions. Similarly, the class of hyperfinite equivalence relations corresponds to
the class of structures that are increasing sequences of finite equivalence re-
lations whose union is the universe of the structure. Further, given a class C
of K-structurable equivalence relations for some K, the class of equivalence
relations that are finite index over elements of C, and the class of equiv-


                                      54
alence relations that are increasing unions of elements of C are also both
structurability classes.
    Ben Miller has pointed out the following theorem, which generalizes
many ad-hoc universality proofs in the field of countable Borel equivalence
relations, such as [20, Proposition 7.1] for graphs. The proof we give is a
simplified version of our earlier argument suggested by Kechris. Recall that
the notation E ⊑iB F indicates that there is an injective Borel reduction
from E to F whose range is F -invariant.

Theorem 4.13 (Miller, after Jackson, Kechris, and Louveau [17] and Kechris,
Solecki, Todorcevic [20]). If K is a Borel class of countable relational struc-
tures closed under isomorphism, then there is a universal countable Borel
K-structurable equivalence relation, which we note E∞K . That is, given any
countable Borel K-structurable equivalence relation E, then E ⊑iB E∞K .

Proof. Let E∞ be an invariantly universal countable Borel equivalence re-
lation on the space Y∞ so that for all countable Borel equivalence relations
F , we have that F ⊑iB E∞ (see [4]). For example, let E∞ = E(Fω , 2ω ). Let
y 7→ fy be a Borel map from Y∞ → (Y∞ )≤ω associating to each y ∈ Y∞ a
bijection fy : I → Y∞ from some I ≤ ω to the equivalence class [y]∞ of y.
    Now let Y∞K be the set of (x, y) ∈ XL × Y∞ such that x ∈ K, and the
universe of x has the same cardinality as [y]E∞ . Now E∞K is defined to be
the equivalence relation on A where (x0 , y0 ) E∞K (x1 , y1 ) iff y0 E∞ y1 and
the structure on [y0 ]∞ induced by pushing forward x0 under fy0 is equal to
the structure on [y1 ]∞ obtained by pushing forward x1 under fy1 .
    Suppose F is a K-structurable countable Borel equivalence relation on
X and let Q0 , Q1 , . . . be Borel relations on X giving a K-structuring of
F . Let g : X → Y∞ witness that F ⊑iB E∞ . Then F ⊑iB E∞K via the
function x 7→ (h(x), g(x)) where h : X → XL is the function sending x to
the structure h(x) ∈ XL on the set dom(fg(x) ) where

                Ri (n0 , . . . , nk ) ⇐⇒ Qi (fg(x) (n0 ), . . . , fg(x) (nk ))

   It is also clear that E∞K is Borel K-structurable. Define the relations
Qi on A witnessing E∞K is Borel K-structurable by setting

   Qi ((x0 , y0 ), . . . (xn , yn )) ⇐⇒ x0 |= Ri (fy−1
                                                    0
                                                       (y0 ), fy−1
                                                                0
                                                                   (y1 ), . . . , fy−1
                                                                                    0
                                                                                       (yn ))



   We have the following trivial corollary of Sacks’s theorem that Turing
cones have measure zero, which generalizes [30, Theorem 3.10].

                                              55
Theorem 4.14. Suppose K is a Borel class of countable structures closed
under isomorphism, and let E∞K be the universal K-structurable equivalence
relation on the space Y∞K . Then if µ is a Borel probability measure on Y∞K ,
there is a µ-null Borel set A so that E∞K ⊑iB E∞K ↾ A.

Proof. Our definition of E∞K in Theorem 4.13 has Y∞ = (2ω )Fω which is
computably homeomorphic to 2ω , and XL also computably homeomorphic
to 2ω relative to the language L. Hence, it makes sense to discuss com-
putability of elements of the set Y∞K ⊆ XL × Y∞ on which E∞K is defined.
   By the relativized version of Sacks’s theorem [34], if x ∈ 2ω can compute
a representation of µ, and y >T x, then the cone {z ∈ 2ω : z ≥ y} has
µ-measure 0. Choose such a y, and note that since E∞K is induced by a
Borel action of Fω , there is an invariant Borel embedding E∞K into E∞ via
the function g(x)(γ) = y ⊕ γ −1 · x. Using g to define an invariant Borel
embedding of F = E∞K into E∞K as in the proof of Theorem 4.13, then the
range of the resulting function is contained in the cone {z : z ≥T y}, which
therefore has µ-measure 0.

   We mention here that there is a wealth of open problems related to how
model theoretic properties of K are related to the Borel cardinality of E∞K .
For example, suppose K is the isomorphism class of a single structure. Can
we characterize when E∞K is smooth? How about in the special case when
the structure is a Fraı̈ssé Limit?5

4.4      Ultrafilters for K-structurable equivalence relations closed
         under independent joins
Our next goal is to use arguments similar to those in Section 4.2 to obtain
ultrafilters for a class of universal K-structurable equivalence relations. The
key property K must have to allow our arguments to work is that the class
of K-structurable equivalence relations must be closed under independent
joins.
    Say that the collection of K-structurable countable Borel equivalence re-
lations is closed under binary independent joins if whenever E and
F are independent countable Borel K-structurable equivalence relations on
a standard Borel space X, then their join E ∨ F is also K-structurable
Borel equivalence relations. Say that the K-structurable countable Borel
equivalence relations are closed under countable independent joins if
  5
      These questions have been resolved by [3]




                                            56
whenever {Ei }i∈I are independent countable Borel K-structurable     W equiva-
lence relations on the same standard Borel space, then their join i∈I Ei is
also a K-structurable Borel equivalence relation.
    Trees, contractible simplicial complexes of dimension ≤ n, and the class
of all countable structures are all examples of classes of structures K so that
the K-structurable Borel equivalence relations are closed under countable
independent joins. So are increasing unions of these examples. Locally finite
trees and Cayley graphs of groups Γ for which Γ ∗ Γ ∼     = Γ are examples of
classes of structures K so that the K-structurable Borel equivalence relations
are closed under binary independent joins.
    For the specific case of contractible simplicial complexes of dimension
≤ n, we note that the universal structurable equivalence relation for this
class is Borel bireducible with the equivalence relation of isomorphism of
contractible simplicial complexes of dimension ≤ n by standard arguments.
Gaboriau has shown [11] that these equivalence relations form a proper
hierarchy under ≤B . See also [16].
Theorem 4.15. Suppose K is a Borel class of countable structures so that
the class of K-structurable Borel equivalence relations is closed under binary
independent joins. Then there is an ultrafilter on the invariant Borel sets of
E∞K that preserves Borel cardinality. Hence, E∞K is 2ℵ0 -indivisible.
Proof. The proof of this theorem uses ideas from the proofs of Lemma 2.12,
Remark 4.8, and Lemma 4.9.
    Let I = 2, and Γi = Fω for i ∈ I. Let X̂i ⊆ (2ω )Γi be the range of a
class bijective Borel embedding of E∞ K into E(Γi , 2ω ), so E(Γi , 2ω ) ↾ X̂i is
Borel isomorphic to E∞K for every i.
    Fix functions ρi : ω → ω as in Remark 4.8, and let πi′ : ( i 2ω )∗i Γi →
                                                               Q
(2ω )Γi be the function

                         πi′ (x)(γ)(n) = x(γ)(i)(ρi (n))

so that πi′ is Γi -equivariant. Note that πi′ is essentially just the function πi
from Definition 2.6 modified by ρi .
    In our proof we will be considering functions fg : (2ω )Γi → ( i 2ω )∗i Γi
                                                                      Q
as defined in the proof of Lemma 2.12 and Remark 4.8, and so together,
these functions will have the property that

                                 πi′ (fg (x)) = x.

Let Xi = {y ∈ ( i 2ω )∗i Γi : πi′ (y) ∈ X̂i ∧ ∀γ ∈ Γi (γ · y 6= y ⇒ γ · πi′ (y) 6=
                   Q
πi′ (y))} so Xi is Γi -invariant.

                                        57
    Let Y be the largest invariant set of y ∈ Y such that y ∈ Xi for every
i ∈ I, and let {Ci }i∈I be a Borel partition of the complement of Y as in
Lemma 2.11. Let Ei be the equivalence relation on Y where x Ei y if
∃γ ∈ Γi (γ · x = y). Let Ŷ be the largest ∗i Γi -invariant subset of Y on which
the Ei are independent. Hence the Ei are everywhere non-independent on
Y \ Ŷ , so let {Bi }i∈I be a Borel partition of Y \ Ŷ as in Lemma 2.10.
    Now for every i ∈ I, Ei ↾ Ŷ is K-structurable, since πi′ gives a class bijec-
tive homomorphism W from Ei ↾ Ŷ to E(Fω , Fω ) ↾ X which is K-structurable.
Hence the join i (Ei ↾ Ŷ ) on Ŷ is also K-structurable by assumption. Let
       W
E = i (Ei ↾ Ŷ ) be the equivalence relation on Ŷ generated by the shift
action of ∗i Γi .
    Given any Borel partition {Ai }i∈I of Ŷ , letQAi = Ai ∪ Bi ∪ Ci , so {A′i }i∈I
will be a Borel partition of the whole space ( i 2ω )∗i Γi .
    Let (nk )k∈ω be a good sequence. Suppose player II wins the game
  A′
Gj j ((nk )) and fg is the associated injective continuous Γj -equivariant func-
tion fg : (2ω )Γj → A′j constructed by Lemma 4.7 and Remark 4.8. Then since
πj′ (fg (x)) = x for all x, we see that ran(fg ↾ X̂j ) is contained in Xj , and so
ran(fg ↾ X̂j ) is contained in Ŷ , since it cannot meet Bj by Lemma 2.10 or
Cj by Lemma 2.11 (as in the proof of Lemma 2.12).
     Since E(Γi , 2ω ) ↾ X̂j is Borel isomorphic to E∞K , we have just shown
that E∞K ≤B E, and since E is itself K-structurable and so E ≤B E∞K , we
have that E∞K ∼B E.
     Now the collection of E-invariant Borel sets A such that player II wins
        0 ∪C0
GA∪B
   0          ((nk )) is an ultrafilter on the E-invariant Borel sets by an identical
proof to Lemma 4.9. Furthermore, if player II wins this game, then E∞K ≤B
E ↾ A by our argument above.

    This constitutes part (2) of Theorem 1.10 from the introduction. We
finish by proving part (3) of this theorem.

Theorem 4.16. Suppose K is a Borel class of countable structures closed
under isomorphism, so that the class of K-structurable countable Borel equiv-
alence relations is closed under countable independent joins. Let E∞K be the
universal K-structurable Borel equivalence relation on Y∞K . Then if {Ai }i∈ω
is a Borel partition of Y∞K into countably many Borel pieces, there is some
Ai such that E∞K ⊑B E∞K ↾ Ai . Hence, for all countable Borel equivalence
relations F , E∞K ≤B F implies E∞K ⊑B F .

Proof.
W      If we let I = ω, then the proof of Theorem 4.15 shows that E =
  (Ei ↾ Ŷ ) is K-structurable, and hence E ⊑B E∞K , and if {Ai }i∈ω is any

                                         58
Borel partition of Ŷ , then there is some j such that E∞K ⊑B E ↾ Aj (since
                                                          A ∪B ∪C
there must be some j so that player II wins the game Gj j j j ). Hence,
since E and E∞K are bi-embeddable, the first half of the theorem follows
for E∞K .
    Suppose now that F is a countable Borel equivalence relation on the
standard Borel space X, and E∞K ≤B F via the Borel reduction g : Y∞K →
X. By Lusin-Novikov uniformization, we can partition Y∞K into countably
many Borel sets {Ai }i<ω on which g is injective. But then E∞K ⊑B E∞K ↾
Ai for some j.


References
 [1] Scot Adams and Alexander S. Kechris, Linear algebraic groups and countable Borel
     equivalence relations, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (2000), no. 4, 909–943 (electronic).
     MR1775739 (2001g:03086)
 [2] Alessandro Andretta, Riccardo Camerlo, and Greg Hjorth, Conjugacy equivalence
     relation on subgroups, Fund. Math. 167 (2001), no. 3, 189–212. MR1815088
     (2001m:03091)
 [3] Ruiyuan Chen and Alexander Kechris, Structurable equivalence relations, 2016.
     Preprint.
 [4] R. Dougherty, S. Jackson, and A. S. Kechris, The structure of hyperfinite Borel equiv-
     alence relations, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 341 (1994), no. 1, 193–225. MR1149121
     (94c:03066)
 [5] Randall Dougherty and Alexander S. Kechris, The universality of recursive isomor-
     phism on ω ω , 1991. Preprint.
 [6]          , How many Turing degrees are there?, Computability theory and its applica-
       tions (Boulder, CO, 1999), 2000, pp. 83–94. MR1770736 (2001d:03104)
 [7] H. A. Dye, On groups of measure preserving transformation. I, Amer. J. Math. 81
     (1959), 119–159. MR0131516 (24 #A1366)
 [8]          , On groups of measure preserving transformations. II, Amer. J. Math. 85
       (1963), 551–576. MR0158048 (28 #1275)
 [9] Jacob Feldman and Calvin C. Moore, Ergodic equivalence relations, cohomology, and
     von Neumann algebras. I, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 234 (1977), no. 2, 289–324.
     MR0578656 (58 #28261a)
[10] Harvey M. Friedman, Higher set theory and mathematical practice, Ann. Math. Logic
     2 (1970/1971), no. 3, 325–357. MR0284327 (44 #1556)
[11] Damien Gaboriau, Invariants l2 de relations d’équivalence et de groupes, Publ. Math.
     Inst. Hautes Études Sci. 95 (2002), 93–150. MR1953191 (2004b:22009)
[12] Sherwood J. Hachtman, Calibrating determinacy strength in levels of the borel hier-
     archy, 2016. Preprint.
[13] L. A. Harrington, A. S. Kechris, and A. Louveau, A Glimm-Effros dichotomy for
     Borel equivalence relations, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (1990), no. 4, 903–928. MR1057041
     (91h:28023)


                                            59
[14] Leo Harrington, Analytic determinacy and 0♯ , J. Symbolic Logic 43 (1978), no. 4,
     685–693. MR518675 (80b:03065)
[15] G. Hjorth and A. S. Kechris, The complexity of the classification of Riemann surfaces
     and complex manifolds, Illinois J. Math. 44 (2000), no. 1, 104–137. MR1731384
     (2000m:03115)
[16] Greg Hjorth and Alexander S. Kechris, Rigidity theorems for actions of product
     groups and countable Borel equivalence relations, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 177 (2005),
     no. 833, viii+109. MR2155451 (2006f:03078)
[17] S. Jackson, A. S. Kechris, and A. Louveau, Countable Borel equivalence relations, J.
     Math. Log. 2 (2002), no. 1, 1–80. MR1900547 (2003f:03066)
[18] Akihiro Kanamori, The higher infinite, Perspectives in Mathematical Logic, Springer-
     Verlag, Berlin, 1994. Large cardinals in set theory from their beginnings. MR1321144
     (96k:03125)
[19] Vladimir Kanovei, Marcin Sabok, and Jindřich Zapletal, Canonical Ramsey theory
     on Polish spaces, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 202, Cambridge University
     Press, 2013.
[20] A. S. Kechris, S. Solecki, and S. Todorcevic, Borel chromatic numbers, Adv. Math.
     141 (1999), no. 1, 1–44. MR1667145 (2000e:03132)
[21] Alexander S. Kechris, The structure of Borel equivalence relations in Polish spaces,
     Set theory of the continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), 1992, pp. 89–102. MR1233813
     (94h:03093)
[22]          , Classical descriptive set theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 156,
       Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995. MR1321597 (96e:03057)
[23]         , New directions in descriptive set theory, Bull. Symbolic Logic 5 (1999), no. 2,
       161–174. MR1791302 (2001h:03090)
[24] Alexander S. Kechris and Benjamin D. Miller, Topics in orbit equivalence, Lec-
     ture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 1852, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004. MR2095154
     (2005f:37010)
[25] Wolfgang Krieger, On non-singular transformations of a measure space. I, II, Z.
     Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verw. Gebiete 11 (1969), 83-97; ibid. 11 (1969), 98–
     119. MR0240279 (39 #1628)
[26] Andrew S. Marks, Recursion theory and countable Borel equivalence relations, Ph.D.
     Thesis, 2012.
[27]          , Structure in complete sections of the shift action of a residually finite group.,
       2013. Unpublished note available at http://math.ucla.edu/~ marks/.
[28]          , A determinacy approach to Borel combinatorics, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 29
       (2016), no. 2, 579–600. MR3454384
[29]          , The universality of polynomial time Turing equivalence, 2016. Preprint.
[30] Andrew S. Marks, Theodore A. Slaman, and John R. Steel, Martin’s conjecture,
     arithmetic equivalence, and countable borel equivalence relations, Ordinal definability
     and recursion theory. The Cabal Seminar Vol. III, 2016, pp. 493–520.
[31] Donald A. Martin, The axiom of determinateness and reduction principles in the
     analytical hierarchy, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 74 (1968), 687–689. MR0227022 (37
     #2607)


                                                60
[32]         , Measurable cardinals and analytic games, Fund. Math. 66 (1969/1970), 287–
       291. MR0258637 (41 #3283)
[33]          , Determinacy, 2013. Draft manuscript.
[34] Gerald E. Sacks, Degrees of unsolvability, 2nd edition, Princeton University Press,
     Princeton, N.J., 1966.
[35] Ramez L. Sami, Turing determinacy and the continuum hypothesis, Arch. Math. Logic
     28 (1989), no. 3, 149–154. MR1008089 (90i:03058)
[36] Brandon Seward and Robin Tucker-Drob, Borel structurability on the 2-shift of a
     countable group, 2016. To appear in Annals of Pure and Applied Logic.
[37] Theodore A. Slaman, Aspects of the Turing jump, Logic Colloquium 2000, 2005,
     pp. 365–382. MR2143887 (2006b:03049)
[38] Theodore A. Slaman and John R. Steel, Definable functions on degrees, Cabal Seminar
     81–85, 1988, pp. 37–55. MR960895 (89m:03033)
[39] Simon Thomas, Some applications of superrigidity to Borel equivalence relations, Set
     theory (Piscataway, NJ, 1999), 2002, pp. 129–134. MR1903855 (2003j:03061)
[40]         , Martin’s conjecture and strong ergodicity, Arch. Math. Logic 48 (2009), no. 8,
       749–759. MR2563815 (2011g:03120)
[41]          , Popa superrigidity and countable Borel equivalence relations, Ann. Pure Appl.
       Logic 158 (2009), no. 3, 175–189. MR2500091 (2009m:03074)
[42]           , Universal Borel actions of countable groups, Groups Geom. Dyn. 6 (2012),
       no. 2, 389–407. MR2914864
[43] Simon Thomas and Boban Velickovic, On the complexity of the isomorphism relation
     for finitely generated groups, J. Algebra 217 (1999), no. 1, 352–373. MR1700491
     (2000i:20001)
[44] Jay Williams, Universal countable Borel quasi-orders, J. Symb. Log. 79 (2014), no. 3,
     928–954. MR3305823
[45] W. Hugh Woodin, The axiom of determinacy, forcing axioms, and the nonstationary
     ideal, revised, de Gruyter Series in Logic and its Applications, vol. 1, Walter de
     Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, 2010. MR2723878 (2011g:03002)
[46] Robert J. Zimmer, Ergodic theory and semisimple groups, Monographs in Mathemat-
     ics, vol. 81, Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1984. MR776417 (86j:22014)




                                              61
