                                            LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS


                                                                                CHAD MUSICK


                                                  Abstract. For classical knots, many characteristics are difficult to determine
                                                  from arbitrary diagrams of the knot. Bridge number is of this type. It is
                                                  possible to have a bridge presentation of a knot in which the number of bridges
arXiv:2609.06492v1 [math.GT] 6 Sep 2026




                                                  is only locally minimal, as shown in [8]. Here, we give a method for beginning
                                                  with an arbitrary classical knot diagram having n crossings and producing a
                                                  locally minimal bridge presentation of the knot with size O(n2 ). This method
                                                  requires only polynomial time and space. For some classes of knots, any local
                                                  minimum is also the global minimum, which was shown for the trivial knot
                                                  in [7]. Because the unknot is the only knot with bridge number 1, unknot
                                                  recognition is in P .



                                              A problem of some interest in knot theory is to find knot diagrams with a minimal
                                          number of bridges. Ozawa and Takao [8] proved that diagrams can have a locally
                                          but not globally minimal number of bridges for some knots. Despite this, some
                                          classes of knots are known to have no bridge presentations that are only locally
                                          minimal. Otal’s earlier result [7] establishes that no diagram of the trivial knot has
                                          a locally minimal bridge count higher than 1.
                                              In writing [5], this author used the method described here to find an upper bound
                                          for every 11-crossing prime knot and a diagram realizing that bound. In combina-
                                          tion with lower bounds known from other knot characteristics, this completed the
                                          catalog of the bridge numbers of all 11-crossing prime knots. Here, we present the
                                          method in a way that keeps the time and space complexity bounded polynomially
                                          relative to the number of crossings in the original diagram, although we do not
                                          prove a non-exponential bound on the number of crossings of the diagram realizing
                                          this locally minimal bridge position.
                                              In [6], this author described a grammar to characterize embeddings of links in
                                          S 3 . We impose some restrictions on that grammar here in order to make topo-
                                          logical possibilities legible directly from that characterization, without geometric
                                          reconstruction. We briefly show a variant of the earlier encoding, specialized for
                                          the purpose of characterizing bridges and underpass-avoidance moves in knot dia-
                                          grams.
                                              In this paper, we establish a combinatorial grammar that can be used to begin
                                          with an arbitrary knot diagram, characterize it, and find a locally minimal bridge
                                          presentation in polynomial time and space relative to the number of crossings in
                                          the initial diagram.

                                                   1. Bridge Presentations and 3-Page Bridge Embeddings
                                          Definition 1 (bridge presentation). We define a bridge presentation in the follow-
                                          ing way, which constructs a Heegaard splitting between two 3-balls.
                                             Identify S 3 with R3 ∪ {∞}. Let
                                                                                                         
                                                   −           3        3           +           3         3
                                                 B = x ∈ R : ∥x∥ ≤          ;     B = x ∈ R : ∥x∥ ≥           ∪ {∞}.
                                                                        2                                 2

                                            2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 57K10.
                                                                                        1
2                                  CHAD MUSICK


Then
                        Σ = B− ∩ B+;        S 3 = B − ∪Σ B +
is the standard genus-zero Heegaard splitting of S 3 , with Heegaard sphere Σ.
    This is a bridge presentation when each of B − and B + contains only a trivial
tangle.
   A combinatorial version of this is a 3-page embedding that keeps the underpasses
on their own page and bridges on a pair of pages. See Dynnikov [2, 3] for a general
definition of a 3-page embedding of a link and some algebraic results for such
embeddings. Here, we perform the one-point compactification of the binding line
by adding a point at ∞, and we restrict the arc placement to keep the embedding
in bridge-presentation form.
Definition 2 (3-page bridge embedding). A 3-page bridge embedding of a knot K
is an embedding of K into 3 pages, which we label U , S, and N for underpasses,
south, and north, respectively, with the following characteristics.
       • The binding line with a point added at ∞ is the binding equator.
       • Each page is a disc.
       • No page has any crossings between arcs.
       • The binding equator of the pages has a cyclic order, along the edge of each
         page.
       • Joining pages S and N forms a copy of S 2 with the binding equator along
         the equator of that sphere.
       • Each arc in U lies along the equator. These arcs may skip punctures but
         are pairwise disjoint.
       • The interior of each arc in S ∪ N is entirely within one of the two pages.
       • Every puncture on the binding has exactly zero or two incident edges and
         at most one incident edge in any one page.
       • The curve traced by following the arcs through the pages is a single loop.
   We note that the 3-page bridge embedding is equivalent to a bridge presentation
by putting page U on one hemisphere of a sphere with radius 1 and center at the
origin of R3 , putting pages S and N as the two hemispheres of a sphere with radius
2 and center at the origin of R3 , aligning the equators of the two spheres to lie
on the plane z = 0, and drawing segments between punctures incident to arcs at
different radii along rays from the origin. This matches Definition 1.
Lemma 1. Given a knot K in a 3-page bridge embedding, K is a bridge presenta-
tion.
Proof. Σ is a bridge sphere of K with 2n punctures. By construction, each compo-
nent of K ∩ B − and K ∩ B + is a trivial tangle.                              □

   In the proofs that follow, vertices that are incident to an edge in page U are
treated differently than those that are not, so we name them.
Definition 3. A terminal vertex is a vertex with an incident edge in page U . A
non-terminal vertex is a vertex with no incident edge in page U .
   We will later use an embedding with weighted edges for notational and computa-
tional convenience, but that notation is equivalent to this 3-page bridge embedding
and so to a bridge presentation of the knot.
Lemma 2. Given binding-adjacent non-terminal vertices v1 and v2 of a 3-page
bridge embedding with no arc v1 v2 , quotienting together v1 and v2 is reversible.
                LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                         3


Proof. See Fig. 1. If either v1 or v2 is empty, this is trivially true, so suppose
neither is empty.
   Without loss of generality, let one path include av1 b and the other include cv2 d,
and assume a < b < c < d in some linearization of the cyclic binding order. Because
these do not cross, v1 ≤ v2 . Recovering the pair avb, cvd as av2 b, cv1 d would force
v2 < v1 , but v1 ≤ v2 , so the reconstruction is well-defined.                      □


     a                c            a             c                a              c

          v1     v2                       v                           v1    v2


      b               d             b            d                b              d
(a) Before vertex quotient     (b) With vertex quotient     (c) Erroneous reconstruc-
                                                            tion violates non-crossing

          Figure 1. Visual proof of Lemma 2. Vertices v1 and v2 are adjacent
          by assumption and non-terminal, so they have an even number
          of incident edges. The other vertices may be terminal or non-
          terminal.

   Later, we will drop the requirement that the adjacent non-terminal vertices have
no edge between them (see Lemma 10) and maintain the same knot, but at the cost
of not maintaining the same embedding.

1.1. Construction of the 3-Page Bridge Embedding. For a knot shadow with
n crossings, the existence of a subhamiltonian cycle of the graph vertices and an
O(n2 )-time algorithm to find that cycle are proven by Bekos, Gronemann, and
Raftopoulou [1]. We use this result to construct a 3-page bridge embedding of the
knot diagram, which is particularly nice to work with for bridge reduction.
   We begin with a standard knot diagram KD . Using the method of [1], we
construct a subhamiltonian cycle on the intersections of the knot shadow. These
intersections correspond to the knot crossings, so we have constructed a subhamil-
tonian cycle on the crossings. This cycle is almost the binding equator. Creating
the binding equator requires only separating the pieces onto the three pages of our
embedding. We do this now.
   Figure 2 shows the different cases for the modification to the binding equator.
In all cases, general position gives us either 3 or 4 intersections between the binding
equator and the knot. We use 2 as bridge ends for each crossing, 1 point for the
crossing of the bridge over the binding, and in some cases 1 additional point to
exit via the desired face. In all cases, the bridge alternates between sides of the
binding equator, corresponding with pages S and N and maintaining the necessary
matching condition between the pages.
   In words: suppose without loss of generality that the crossing runs up–down
and left–right, dividing the local neighborhood into 4 quadrants, which we give
the conventional names counter-clockwise from the top right corner. Let the left–
right strand be the underpassing strand. Place cuts left and right of the crossing.
Suppose that the binding equator arrives through quadrant I. In all cases, it should
touch both cuts in sequence to allow pushing the underpass to the boundary of page
U , then depart through one of the quadrants. Every quadrant has one cut mark, so
we lose no generality by assuming one end of the binding equator is in quadrant I.
We examine cases for the four possible departure quadrants. If we depart through
4                                   CHAD MUSICK


quadrant I, touch right, left, then cross up, and depart. If we depart through
quadrant II or III, touch right, left, and depart. If we depart through quadrant IV,
touch right, left, then cross down, and depart.




     (a) I to I           (b) I to II          (c) I to III          (d) I to IV

        Figure 2. Construction of travel for the binding equator in a 3-
        page bridge embedding, with the horizontal gap representing the
        underpass.


Lemma 3. The construction using the subhamiltonian cycle produces a 3-page
bridge embedding, with each crossing contributing 1 or 2 crossings between a bridge
and the binding equator, giving at most 4n letters to describe all bridges of an
n-crossing knot diagram.
Proof. By construction, every underpass lies on the boundary of the binding equator
and can be pushed to page U with the anti-matching condition. Also by construc-
tion, every bridge starts on the binding equator, alternates its arcs between pages
S and N , then ends on the binding equator with the anti-matching condition.
   The count of length contributions from bridges is a direct consequence of the
sum of n crossings, each adding no more than 2 arcs for bridges plus at most 2
letters for the bridge ends.                                                     □

    Having this embedding and, from Lemma 2, that we do not need to explicitly
distinguish between adjacent non-terminal vertices, we can give a simple gram-
mar that characterizes the diagram, the embedding, and the bridge presentation
simultaneously.
    In [6], this author described a grammar to characterize embeddings of links in
S 3 . There are three relevant definitions for the present problem of bridge-count
minimization.
Definition 4 (embedding grammar). Each bridge endpoint (equivalently, under-
pass endpoint) is given a distinct label, its letter.
   The binding equator is written as the circle word. This word begins with a
semicolon symbol ; and then lists, in order as they occur moving eastward (anti-
clockwise) on the binding equator, the names of the terminal vertices.
   The path of each bridge is described by the bridge word of that bridge. The
bridge word begins with either + or -, indicating that its first arc lies in page
N or page S, respectively. Each point at which the interior of a bridge crosses
the binding equator is listed as the symbol of the terminal vertex nearest in the
westward direction.
   By construction, the path of each underpass is exactly one arc between adjacent
terminal vertices, and we omit these because they can be reconstructed from the
circle word.
   An example is helpful. Figure 3 shows a trefoil in a 3-page bridge embedding.
In the figure, the underpasses are omitted but can be read from the circle word.
They lie on the boundary of page U , joining 0 with 1, 2 with 3, and 4 with 5.
               LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                        5




                                        4   1

                                                    0
                                    5
                                                3
                                        2


        Figure 3. Trefoil in a 3-page bridge embedding with sentence
        +142+304+520;014523. The sentence +142+304+520;145230 en-
        codes a trivial knot by forcing a different pairing of vertices to
        underpasses.

                         Table 1. Metagrammar symbols

           Symbol     Meaning
           a          Terminal vertex name
           a          Non-terminal vertex adjacent to a
           a◦ , a′    Vertex a on (resp., not on) underpass with end a
           A          Bridge word starting or ending with vertex a
           ab         Underpass with ends a and b
           ±          Sign, as + or -
           ∓          Opposite sign of ±
           A′         Bridge-looping word of bridge A (see Definition 6)
           A#B        Concatenated value of A and B (see Definition 5)
           ∅          Empty string


The interior of the circle shows page N , and the exterior shows page S. Moving
counter-clockwise around the circle is moving east on the binding equator.
   In this paper, we impose some restrictions on the grammar not present in the
fully general grammar of [6]. First, we consider only ordinary crossings, omit-
ting the other types of crossings (e.g., virtual crossings). Second, we require that
the word of each underpass ab is +ab with a and b adjacent terminal vertices on
the binding equator (ignoring intervening non-terminal vertices). This makes the
words’ topological possibilities legible directly from that characterization, without
geometric reconstruction, and we omit the underpass words. Finally, we require
that the circle word’s first two letters are the ends of a shared underpass, which
prevents ambiguity about matching for the ends of underpasses.

                            2. Metagrammar Rules
   We describe a metagrammar here, which can be turned into a full grammar
according to the specific diagram, and this metagrammar is unambiguous due to
Lemma 2. See Table 1 for the meaning of symbols when not otherwise defined.
   We have four types of metagrammar rules, listed in Table 2. The normalization,
quotient, and underpass closure rules are eagerly applied. The underpass closure
move is conditioned on whether either of a specific pair of symbols appears in
any bridge word. Underpass avoidance is likewise conditioned on the absence of a
specific symbol in at least one of the bridges leading from the underpass. No rule
introduces new symbols or revives previously eliminated symbols, which will be
important to containing the complexity of the eventual construction. We note that
none of the rules requires a specific symbol count, though some require knowing
6                                   CHAD MUSICK


                            Table 2. Metagrammar rules

        Rule name                   Rule         Notes

                                ±aa →7 ∓a        Removes trivial initial arc
        Normalization            aa → 7 a        Removes trivial terminal arc
                                 aa 7→ ∅         Removes trivial internal arc

        Underpass avoidance       a◦    7→ A′    Requires: a◦ ∈
                                                              /A

        Underpass closure        A, B   7→ A#B   Requires: ∃ ab; ∀C a◦ , b◦ ∈
                                                                            /C

        Quotient                   a    7→ b     Requires: a and b adjacent

the presence (or absence) of a symbol in a word or words and some require knowing
the odd/even parity of the number of occurrences of a symbol.
   We note here that the choice of non-eager moves and, specifically, which order
to perform underpass avoidances and via which bridge, results in a system that is
not proven to be confluent. That is, different choices and different ordering may
result in different end states, which is why we can guarantee only local minimality
of the number of bridges in the final diagram in light of the results from Ozawa and
Takao [8] showing that local bridge minimality without global bridge minimality is
possible.
Definition 5 (bridge concatenation). Let A and B be bridge words sharing an
underpass ab, with A = ±Va for a well-formed fragment V and B = ±bW for a well-
formed fragment W. The bridge concatenation A#B is ±VW (resp., ±VaW) if the final
arc of A and the initial arc of B share (resp., do not share) a page.
Remark. We may, if needed, replace any bridge word starting at a and ending at
b with a word starting at b and ending at a by reversing the order of the letters
and, if the number of letters is odd, swapping the sign. These two encode the same
arcs on the same pages.
Definition 6 (bridge-looping word). The bridge-looping word A′ is the characteri-
zation of a trivial knot passing around bridge A and around no other bridge.
Remark. Let ±aWc be a bridge word A or C with well-formed (possibly empty)
fragment W. Because a bridge can be named from either end, A and C are the same
                                                          ←−
word if and only if a bridge runs between a and c. Let W be W in reversed order. A
                                     ◦ ′←− ′ ◦                ←−
characterization of A is either ±a Wc c W a a or ±a Wc′ c◦ W a′ a◦ . Which is correct
                     ′            ◦                   ◦

depends on the odd/even parity of the bridge-word length and the relative positions
of the two vertices bounding the underpass incident to c. One of these words will
cross A and the other will not.
   Because A′ is the characterization of a trivial knot, it forms a 1-bridge cycle and
lives on pages S ∪ N . Thus, it has no terminal vertices. For use in substitution,
the bridge-looping word will be in one of two positions: (1) The position written
here; (2) The opposite orientation, found by reversing the order of the letters and
swapping the sign.
   The necessity to consider various cases for the bridge-looping word is a conse-
quence of choosing a linearization and orientation of an unoriented cycle. We note
that when underpass ab exists, the vertices a◦ and b◦ are the same vertex. The
difference between using A′ and using B′ is which of the two bridges incident to ab
is used to avoid ab.
                 LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                            7


   If a bridge-looping word is considered as a set of arcs each characterized by a pair
of vertices and a page, then the two possible words as geometry are identical. The
difference is because the representation as arc counts does not encode an orientation
or a start.
   We explicitly note that the length of the replacement word for a bridge with
k letters is 2k + 1. This matters for the length of the grammar produced by the
metagrammar.
   When used for underpass avoidance as a replacement, the initial and terminal a◦
are omitted because we are splitting letters xa◦ y into arcs xa and ay then splicing
in the new word, so normalization would immediately eliminate these letters. The
growth is therefore by 2k − 1 letters before any other normalization that may occur.
See Definition 13 for the definition in arc form, which is more natural and does not
have special cases.
   Figure 4 shows the geometry corresponding to the grammatical rule and why
this is useful. By putting the additional trivial knot into the diagram looping B
and performing standard knot composition, the underpass incident to b is avoided.
Because this is knot composition with a trivial knot, the type of knot is unchanged.
Alternatively, but with the same result, we can view the avoidance as an ambient
isotopy of the arc crossing over the underpass or, to use Tawn’s characterization
in [10, 11], as the replacement of an arc by forming a loop using the arc and
substituting the complement in that loop for the original arc.
   No matter how it is viewed, the knot type and the bridge presentation are pre-
served, up to the unambiguous recovery of vertices by Lemma 2, but the diagram
is obviously changed.

            v∗               x                      v∗                             x

            a    b◦1 b◦2     b                      a      b◦1   b◦2   b◦3   b◦4   b

            w∗               y                      w∗                             y
    (a) Before avoidance, looping B.                     (b) Denormalize the loop.
     v∗                            x                        v∗               x


      a    b◦1   b◦2   b◦3   b◦4   b                        a                b

     w∗                            y                        w∗               y
    (c) Perform surgery on the ends.            (d) Normalization clears the crossings.

          Figure 4. Geometry of avoiding underpass ab by composition with
          ∥v∗ ∥ copies of the loop around bridge B. The loop is a trivial
          knot, and the dashed arc indicates the remainder of that loop. By
          construction, vertices a and b are terminal, v∗ and w∗ are multisets
          of vertices that may be terminal or non-terminal, and x and y are
          non-terminal.


                   3. Geometric Effects of Grammar Rules
   The grammar and the geometry are equivalent. We prove a few little lemmas to
show this.
8                                  CHAD MUSICK


Lemma 4. Let K be a 3-page bridge embedding. A bridge A that contains vertex
a◦ cannot be used for avoiding the underpass incident to a.
Proof. The bridge-looping word around A must also include a◦ , so pushing crossings
along A does not avoid the underpass incident to a.                              □

Lemma 5. Let K be a 3-page bridge embedding. If ab exists, A contains a◦ , and B
contains b◦ , then crossings cannot be removed from ab by the underpass avoidance
move.
Proof. Apply Lemma 4 in each direction from ab.                                   □

Lemma 6. If K is a 3-page bridge embedding with no grammatical moves available,
then K is a locally minimal bridge presentation.
Proof. Suppose there are n underpasses in K and no moves are available. Then
from Lemma 5, no crossings can be removed by an underpass avoidance rule and,
because there are no grammatical moves available, no eager grammar rules will
change the bridge words.
   From Tawn [10, 11], every ambient isotopy that does not introduce a new bridge
but changes crossings can be constructed as the composition of isotopies around
a path between two vertices. But, we have n underpasses to avoid, and repeated
application of Lemma 4 therefore produces a chain of required bridge detours. Since
there are only n bridges and no underpass can be closed during this chain, the chain
must eventually repeat a bridge. Such a repetition does not complete an avoidance.
Escaping the resulting cycle would require introducing an additional bridge.
   Moving the vertices does not help. K is a bridge presentation, and Scharlemann
and Tomova [9] proved that one of the spheres in a bridge splitting may be held
fixed during bridge perturbation and stabilization without preventing the discovery
of canceling disc pairs. We may therefore hold the underpass sphere constant
without affecting the available topological moves.
   Thus, if no grammatical move is available, then no sequence of geometric moves
can change the number of bridges without either leaving bridge position or intro-
ducing a new bridge. The number of bridges is locally minimal.                    □

                        4. Containing the Complexity
   In this section, we show the size and time complexities of different elements of
the process in order to reach a worst-case complexity. We note, and will show,
that a naive application without the quotient rule could result in a system that
has crossings exponential relative to the number of initial crossings. Despite this,
by tracking arcs instead of sequences and making use of the quotient move, we
may contain these possibly 2O(n) crossings in O(n) space for each of the n initial
underpasses.
   In this section, we show only the gross complexities. Implementation details
such as indexing, algorithms for bit arithmetic, and the specific methods chosen for
tasks may result in sharper or weaker bounds, which we will note where relevant.
   On space complexity, we have
     O(n)         ×       O(n)      ×       O(n)                     = O(n3 ).
     Bridges              Arcs              Bits per arc count
   This bound is sharp for the representation as arcs with counts if the maximum
number of crossings is 2O(n) . However, some supplementary structures may be
required during calculations and some other proof may show a better bound on the
number of crossings.
               LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                          9


   On time complexity, we will show O(poly(n)) to reduce a diagram with n initial
crossings. In a coarse sense, the time is probably not worse than O(n8 ), but this
sharper bound makes unproven assumptions about the complexities of some of
the inner steps (specifically, the normalization of internal repetition of letters) and
should be regarded cautiously.
   Because each underpass closure reduces the number of bridges by 1 until local
minimality, performing the bridge avoidance moves in aggregate by summing the
counts of indistinguishable arcs (rather than literally modifying the word) means
there are only O(n) large steps. Within each of these large steps, there are O(n)
words to consider with addition and multiplication of potentially O(n)-bit integers
for each of O(n) pairings. Because the arithmetic is on O(n)-bit words, we assume
a conservative bound of O(n2 ) time, which gives an overall time complexity of
    O(n)     ×     O(n)         ×     O(n)     ×     O(n2 )              = O(n5 ).
    Steps          Bridges            Arcs           Bit arithmetic
Remark. As noted in §1.1, it may take time O(n2 ) to construct the 3-page bridge
embedding from a knot diagram, but the construction time is dominated by the
calculation time, even when we later assume O(1) time for bit arithmetic in special
cases.
   Despite this optimistic bound, normalization requires O(poly(n)) time. Struc-
turally, this seems like it is somewhere around O(n3 ) each time it occurs (see Lemma
10), but we do not prove a better bound than polynomial.
Lemma 7. At most n underpass closures are needed to reduce a diagram with an
initial n bridges to a locally minimal bridge position.
Proof. Each closure reduces the number of bridges by 1 and no move creates a new
underpass.                                                                     □
   Straight-line programs (SLPs) are a fundamental concept of theoretical computer
science. An SLP is a context-free grammar that generates exactly one string. An
SLP of size O(n) will terminate in a string of length at most 2O(n) . See Lohrey [4]
for a survey. We use only this result from the theory of SLPs, not any optimization
algorithms or other results.
Lemma 8. Any sequence of metagrammar moves used here can generate a straight-
line program that produces one string, the characterization of the resulting 3-page
bridge embedding, with length at most 2O(n) .
Proof. We use the construction from §1.1 to characterize a diagram with n crossings
in O(n) distinct symbols. All terminal symbols will be from this set, although some
symbols that appear in the initial encoding may not appear in the output. The
metagrammar (see Table 2) has a fixed size independent of n, which may be applied
to each of the O(n) vertex labels.
   At each underpass avoidance move, we use the grammar rule a◦ 7→ A′ for some a◦
in the initial set of symbols. Every other rule is length-reducing or length-neutral
without using a new symbol on either side of the rule. This gives us O(n) grammar
size for changes and O(n) grammar size for the initial diagram, which is an O(n)
grammar for the whole system. We need Lemma 9 here to be sure that only O(n)
objects (whether bridges and their bridge-looping words or arcs) need to appear on
the right-hand side at any stage.
   The metagrammar is not itself a context-free grammar, relying on context in
some places and conditionality in others. However, we are interested in a worst-case
analysis of the total output size, so the conditionality is only a problem because
10                                   CHAD MUSICK


it would, if unaddressed, put what may be a terminal symbol on the left-hand-
side of the production rule. To avoid this, we never formally create an uninvoked
rule, despite the metagrammar telling us how we could construct it. In spirit,
we construct a grammar after the fact to evaluate the potential size of the final
sentence.
      • Normalization is not context-free, but it is strictly length-reducing.
      • Quotient is conditional but context-free because the left-hand side is elim-
         inated everywhere when invoked, so the left-hand side is a non-terminal
         symbol.
      • Underpass closure is conditional but context-free and length-reducing.
      • Underpass avoidance is conditional but context-free.
   The constructed grammar is a directed acyclic graph because we construct the
rules exactly when we will apply them, which avoids any forward-reference to rules
and thus any cycles of rule application. We can index these rules, if desired, by
writing a new rule and using the count of underpasses already closed as an index
for any replacements if explicit grammar rules are desired. This is an SLP of size
O(n).
   From Lemma 6, after all moves, the outcome is a sentence characterizing a 3-page
bridge embedding of a diagram as a locally minimal bridge presentation.           □
Remark. Because we construct our grammar retroactively, time-complexity results
from the theory of SLPs cannot be directly applied, but we can analyze the time-
complexity separately. We do our time-cost accounting in arc form after doing this
space-cost accounting in grammar form by appeal to an SLP.
Lemma 9. At most O(n) arcs are needed across the entire sentence of an initially
n-crossing knot diagram.
Proof. From the non-crossing condition and the initial number of vertices, this is,
at worst, two maximal outerplanar graphs, one on page S and another on page
N . Each of these has at most 4n − 3 arcs, so the sentence encodes at most 8n − 6
arcs for bridges and n arcs for underpasses. From Lemma 2, we never need new
vertices that remain beyond one quotient action, and the only distinct arcs that
may be added, rather than just replacing an existing arc, are a single arc added
during underpass avoidance, and all arcs must still fit within the 9m − 6 distinct
arcs when m bridges remain.                                                      □
     Here, we are not considering the multiplicity of indistinguishable arcs.

                5. Sentence Perspective and Arc Perspective
   In the proof of Theorem 1, we use a formal grammar on words but mention that
this corresponds directly to a set of arcs. This grammar and its pieces are relatively
unknown, so in this section, we describe how to convert between the two styles,
which is also necessary for compressed output of final diagrams as edge-weighted
graphs, and how the two perspectives simplify or complicate different steps.
   We make a set of granular definitions here to clarify the relation between the
two ways of considering the geometry of the 3-page bridge embeddings. For all
definitions, assume that n is the number of bridges.
Definition 7 (vertex label). There are 2n endpoints of the n bridges, and a vertex
label is a member of a set of 2n distinct labels.
  We may use any labels that are distinct, and in figures we have used both
numerals and lower-case roman letters. The labels are atomic and have no inherent
meaning, though a convention such as “labels are in order of knot traversal” can
               LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                          11


be helpful for reading diagrams visually. This is the convention we have followed
here.
Definition 8 (circle word). In the grammar, given a list of 2n distinct vertex
labels, a circle word is a semicolon followed by an ordered list of these symbols.
Using this word, each vertex label is associated to the natural number such that
the ith label has value 2i − 2 for i = 1, 2, . . . , 2n.
Definition 9 (cyclic order, east, west). We associate half of the 4n vertices to
vertex labels in the circle word. These are the terminal vertices. In the grammar,
this means they are either the first or last letter/label in a bridge word. In the
embedding, this means they have exactly one edge incident to the vertex on page
U.
   The cyclic order is given by the abelian group (Z4n , +), with σ(x) = y meaning
y ≡ x + 1( mod 4n) among all vertices and σ(x) = y meaning y ≡ x + 2( mod 4n)
among all terminal vertices.
   Letting xE = σ(x) and σ(xW ) = x, we call xE the vertex east of x and call xW
the vertex west of x.
   Because of Lemma 2, non-terminal vertices are indistinguishable up to the near-
est terminal vertex moving west, and we use that label for them. That is, if x is a
label, we will have two vertices with that label, one terminal and one to the east
of that terminal vertex. In the grammar, we can directly identify between them
because of the position in a bridge word, so this does not cause ambiguity and
simplifies diagram routing.
Definition 10 (bridge word in grammar). A bridge word begins with a + or -
symbol and is followed by at least two vertex labels. The first and last vertex labels
cannot be the same because this would form a loop beginning and ending at the
same terminal vertex, which is not a bridge.
   Note that we ignore the case where there is exactly one bridge in the diagram
because when this happens, we declare the diagram trivial and finish.
   Given the circle word, we know the arrangement of vertex labels, which we may
treat as either a linear order or as a cyclic order. The cyclic order is more convenient
because it makes every arc a chord and eliminates the irrelevant distinction between
the two kinds of non-interleaving pairs of arcs (nested or unnested in the linear
order).
   In the pages of the embedding, every bridge is a path along arcs in S ∪ N , and
the bridge word says exactly how these are embedded up to ambient isotopy. Let
us define an arc in our context.
Definition 11 (arc). An arc is an unordered pair of vertex positions together with
a page (U , S, or N ).
   We can immediately take care of underpasses, which we will not consider again
until later. Note that because the vertex pair is unordered, (x, y, P ) = (y, x, P ) for
any labels x and y and page P . We explicitly permit (x, x, P ) as an arc to be dealt
with by the normalization rules. (See Lemma 10.)
Definition 12 (underpass embedding). An underpass in the 3-page bridge embed-
ding from the viewpoint of arcs is an arc (a, b, U ), where a and b are terminal and
aE = b or bE = a among terminal vertices.
   This says exactly what the grammar construction did: an underpass lives on
page U and is an arc between adjacent terminal vertices (ignoring intervening non-
terminal vertices), using the east/west meaning for adjacency. The direction is not
12                                  CHAD MUSICK


well-defined in exactly one case: when there is exactly one bridge. In that case, the
diagram is trivial.
   Now we decompose a bridge word and show its representation as arcs.
   If the bridge word begins with + (resp., -), then the first named arc belongs in
page N (resp., S). After that, the next named arc belongs in the opposite page,
switching pages between S and N at each letter and using the next two letters as
the arc ends. For example, if the complete bridge word is +abad, then we have arc
(a, b, N ), arc (b, a, S), and arc (a, d, N ) appearing in that order. The order of the
arcs in the geometry can be reconstructed, so in terms of arcs, each bridge word
encodes a multiset of arcs with their multiplicities. Note that the letter a appears
in the bridge word twice, once as a terminal vertex and once as the non-terminal
vertex immediately east of that terminal vertex.
   For a bridge word of length k, there are k − 1 arcs encoded. Whether the
non-terminal vertices b and a imply a knot crossing can be determined from the
underpass arcs. If a is (resp., is not) on the west end of an underpass, then the
non-terminal vertex with label a does (resp., does not) indicate a knot crossing. In
the metagrammar, we write this as a◦ (crossing) or a′ (non-crossing), and we can
know immediately from the circle word what the symbols of those two vertices will
be. This geometric interpretation also makes immediately clear why we can reverse
the direction in which a bridge is written and why it might or might not require
switching the sign, depending on only the parity of the length of the word. (Odd
length requires switching; even length does not.)
   The definition of a bridge-looping word and how to use it in underpass avoidance
can seem a bit arbitrary in the grammar, although every outcome is of the same
length. The case is straightforward in arc form.

Definition 13 (bridge-looping word). As a set of arcs, given a bridge A with ends
a and b with initial arc (a, r, X), terminal arc (b, s, Y ), and multiset M of non-
terminal arcs, the bridge-looping set of arcs is found by the following steps.
     (1) Begin with M .
     (2) Double all of the multiplicities of M .
     (3) Add (aW , aE , −X) where −X is the page in {S, N } that is not X.
     (4) Add (bW , bE , −Y ) where −Y is the page in {S, N } that is not Y .
     (5) Add (aE , r, X) and (aW , r, X).
     (6) Add (bE , s, Y ) and (bW , s, Y ).

   Geometrically, this puts caps on the two ends of the bridge and surrounds its
internal arcs. All of the complication in the grammar comes from trying to linearize
a circle and orient a collection of unoriented arcs. We note that if the bridge word
is exactly two letters and the two letters are adjacent as terminal vertices, then
this will include a sequence of three arcs that will have a trivial arc in the middle
that will be removed via normalization. Geometrically, this is easy: the two caps
will have one shared endpoint.

Definition 14 (Underpass avoidance). From the arc perspective of the bridge-
looping word and bridge words, underpass avoidance no longer requires case-by-
case, letter-by-letter analysis. Instead, we do the following for each bridge that
crosses the underpass to be avoided. Let us suppose without loss of generality that
the presence of label a in the middle of a bridge word indicates a crossing of the
underpass with west end a and that we will avoid it via bridge A.
     (1) Get the multiset of the bridge-looping word for A.
     (2) Remove arcs (a, x, N ) and (a, y, S).
     (3) Multiply all arc multiplicities by the number of crossings being removed.
                LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                           13


    (4) In each bridge that crosses at a, replace (a, w, N ) with (x, w, N ) and replace
        (a, v, S) with (y, v, S).
   Notice that we can do this in bulk. Geometrically, we do not need to operate one
bridge at a time for the avoidance in this form, but caution is nevertheless needed.
Although the summed arcs across all bridges will encode the diagram correctly,
recovering a specific bridge word may require full expansion of the diagram, and
we have only an exponential bound for the actual number of arcs. Because we need
to know the bridges individually to find their bridge-looping words and perform
normalizations, we keep them separate during underpass avoidance.
   Twice now, we have mentioned eliminating trivial arcs, by which we mean elim-
inating arcs between adjacent vertices. This is just the geometric equivalent of the
normalizing moves on the grammar. It also gives a practical bound on the number
of normalizations that might be performed in succession. Each move from 3 to
1 arc (as in underpass avoidance) occurs with the quotienting of multiple labels,
and the number of labels decreases monotonically as underpasses are closed. Each
move from 2 arcs to 1 arc is the simplification of the end of a bridge, and there
are only two distinct points that can be involved (the vertices east and west of the
terminal vertex), so this can occur at most 4 times per bridge isotopy, twice at each
end; otherwise, there is a cycle on those non-terminal vertices that would make the
bridge self-intersecting. Any additional instances would be handled by the rule for
repeated-letter normalization.
   Algorithmically, because arcs that are literally (x, x, P ) are not safe, we use arc-
bundle expansion to handle normalization and underpass avoidance. See Fig. 4 for
the technique used in underpass avoidance. For discharging trivial arcs as a kind
of diagram-altering quotient, we use the technique shown in Fig. 5. Lemma 10
proves that this terminates in O(poly(n)) steps despite not having a better bound
on weights than exponential.
Lemma 10. Two adjacent non-terminal vertices in a non-crossing path may be
quotiented together in O(poly(n)) steps.
Proof. Let the adjacent non-terminal vertices be v1 and v2 . If there is no edge
between them, then Lemma 2 completes the proof.
    Suppose there is an arc v1 v2 with weight w(v1 v2 ) and a vertex v3 with edges
v1 v3 and v2 v3 . If w(v1 v2 ) is greater than min(w(v1 v3 ), w(v2 v3 )), then the path is
self-intersecting, contrary to the non-crossing assumption. We split this vertex v3
into two copies and shift the edge weights as shown in Fig. 5. This eliminates the
triangle by creating 0 or 1 triangles elsewhere.
    In contrast, if there is no such v3 , then we can choose an arbitrary v3 with no
edge v2 v3 , so w(v1 v2 ) = min(w(v1 v3 ), w(v2 v3 )) = 0, and Lemma 2 lets us stop.
    By repeated application, we move the quotient along the path until we discharge
the edges. This process must terminate because it would otherwise form a cycle,
which would correspond to a cycle in the original path, contrary to assumption. By
Lemma 9, there are only O(n) distinct arcs to follow during this process.               □
   Although this process, which may be viewed as the action of a zipper moving
a bigon through the diagram, takes only O(n) steps, the bookkeeping required for
doing so is complicated enough that selection of algorithms for splitting the arc
bundles, managing the bit arithmetic, and following the diagram is non-trivial, so
only O(poly(n)) is assumed here.
   In addition to the above proof, we note that each geometric change in the arcs
after the vertex quotient corresponds to the elimination of w(v1 v2 ) letter-doubles
in the sentence. In the grammar, this is the internal normalization move. This
is guaranteed to terminate correctly in grammar terms, and Lemma 10 is about
14                                                 CHAD MUSICK


counting how many steps this can take. The grammar rule aa → ∅ is not context-
free, but we may verify the count of Lemma 10 by examining the grammar, noting
that eliminating x doublings eliminates 2x letters and lowers the total of the edge
weights by 2x. The elimination of one set of doubled-letters may expose a different
set of doubled-letters, but will not expose more than one distinct letter at a time,
and no letter pair will repeat in the normalization.

                         w(ab)
              b                     a                                                 a

                                         w(
       bc)




                                                                                          w
                                                                         c)
                                             ad




                                                                                          (a
     w(




                                                                      (b
                                                                               (ae)




                                                                                             d)
                                                                      w
                                               )
                                  )



     c∗                                       d∗
                  w(be




                                                                           )−w
                                 w(ae




                                                                 c∗                               d∗
                   )




                                                                          w(be
                                        e)
          w




                                                                                                 de)
                                                                 w(
             (c




                                    (d




                                                                  ce)
              e)




                                  w




                                                                                               w(
                          e                                               e1              e2
                                                                                  w(ae)
(a) Normalizing before quotient. The
weight w(ab) = min(w(ae), w(be)), and we                  (b) Merging a and b, transferring the resid-
assume wlog that it is w(ae).                             ual weight.

          Figure 5. Normalization of trivial arcs via quotient moves. The
          vertices a and b are adjacent and non-terminal, and e is non-
          terminal. Labels c∗ and d∗ indicate sets of vertices (perhaps empty
          or singleton). The total weight is reduced by 2w(ab) = 2w(ae).


              6. Finding Locally Minimal Bridge Presentations
Theorem 1. Given a knot diagram K with n crossings, a locally minimal bridge
presentation of the same knot type can be found in polynomial time and space. The
sequence of choices determining this presentation can be encoded as a certificate of
length O(n) if only the bridge count is needed or O(n2 ) for the entire diagram.
Proof. We first convert the diagram to a 3-page bridge embedding. From Bekos,
Gronemann, and Raftopoulou [1], we can do this in time O(n2 ). From Lemma 3,
the length of the sentence describing this embedding is O(n).
   From Lemma 9, the number of distinct arcs in the diagram is O(n). Because
the grammar forms a straight-line program (see Lemma 8) with maximum length
2O(n) and each crossing is represented by a letter in the final full characterization,
the largest arc multiplicity possible is 2O(n) , which requires O(n) bits to store. We
may give the full diagram in space O(n2 ) by summing all arcs together across the
remaining bridges, at the cost of making the per-bridge information take (naively)
exponential time to reconstruct.
   On time, we require arithmetic on O(n)-bit numbers, which takes time O(n2 )
under typical complexity rules.
   Between each bridge reduction, we must perform 1 underpass avoidance for each
crossing being moved off of the underpass being avoided, after which the underpass
is closed in constant time. Performing the avoidance is done by manipulating the
arc counts. Specifically, replacing an arc repeated k times in m places, with all
repetition counts being O(n)-bit numbers, can be effected by multiplying the counts
together and then summing them. The cost O(n2 ) for multiplication dominates this
time. We track these counts separately for each bridge.
               LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                       15


   The eager grammar moves (all but underpass avoidance) are less complicated
than bridge avoidance and, like bridge avoidance, can be done via the manipulation
of arc counts, rather than direct manipulation of the characterization sequence.
However, normalization of non-terminal arcs to remove trivial arcs can require
chasing the unwinding. From Lemma 9, this is at most O(n) distinct arcs involved,
but the bookkeeping for doing this has only been shown to be polynomial, giving
time and space bound O(poly(n)).
   By Lemma 6, the sequence of moves produces a bridge presentation that is locally
minimal.
   The certificate contains the initial 3-page bridge embedding, the underpass avoid-
ances in order and direction, and either the number of bridges or the resulting
diagram. The certificate therefore has length O(n) for only the bridge count and
length O(n2 ) for the resulting bridge presentation.                               □
Corollary 1. Given a knot diagram K with n crossings, it can be decided in poly-
nomial time and space whether K is trivial, with a certificate of size O(n).
Proof. From Otal [7], a locally minimal bridge presentation of the trivial knot has
exactly 1 bridge. From Theorem 1, a locally minimal bridge count may be found
for K in polynomial time and space. K is trivial if and only if the count is 1, and
the certificate that omits the diagram is sufficient for unknot recognition.      □
6.1. A Conjecture on Bridge Number. This author suspects, but does not
know how to prove, that the bridge number of any knot may be found by beginning
with an n-crossing diagram in bridge position and not increasing the number of
bridges to more than n. Specifically, the 3-page bridge presentation as constructed
in §1.1 seems to have enough freedom that some ordered choice of underpass avoid-
ances and the bridges by which to avoid them will produce a globally minimal
bridge presentation. If so, the certificate length would be O(n), although this does
not imply anything faster than exponential time for validation by the naive method
of trying all possible move sequences.
   Formally:
Conjecture. Given a diagram of knot K with n crossings, a certificate of length
O(n) exists for certifying br(K), the bridge number of K.

                      Appendix A. Minimizing a Trefoil
   We minimize a trefoil, starting with the sentence +142+304+520;014523. (See
Fig. 3.)
   Apply underpass avoidance to avoid underpass 23 via bridge 3. Notice that 3◦ =
2, contained in bridge 5. The bridge-looping word around bridge 3 is +2014032. In
this case, it is small enough to find this by inspection: the interior of bridge 3 is 0,
with end pair (2, 3) next to 3 and end pair (1, 4) next to 4. To avoid 2, we use the
internal 01403. If 2 appeared first in page S, we would need to use 30410 instead.
   Applying the rule, +520 7→ +5014030, and then normalization gives +501400
and then +50140 since both 0 and 3 are adjacent to 0. Now, we have the sentence
+142+304+50140;014523. We close underpass 23 to combine the bridge words for
bridges 1 and 3, getting the word +14304. We quotient the now non-terminal
points, the crossing vertex 2, and the non-crossing vertex 3, sending them all to
the non-crossing vertex 5, so the word becomes +14504.
   The non-terminal points 0 and 4 are the underpass-crossing points, and every
bridge has its own undercrossing point. The resulting sentence is +14504+50140;0145.
See Fig. 6, which shows the pages separately in compressed form (all edges have
weight 1 here) and, in Fig. 6d, joined and fully expanded.
16                                 CHAD MUSICK


                      1                                            1
                  ◦        •                               ◦               •

              4                0                       4                       0
                  •        ◦                               •               ◦
                      5                                            5
                  (a) Page S                               (b) Page N


                      1                                        1

              4                0                       4                       0

                      5                                                5

                  (c) Page U                       (d) All pages together

        Figure 6. Pages of the 3-page embedding of the 2-bridge presenta-
        tion of a trefoil with sentence +14504+50140;0145. Vertex labels
        0, 1, 4, and 5 indicate terminal vertices. Vertex labels • and ◦
        indicate non-terminal vertices that are crossing (•) or non-crossing
        (◦) in the knot diagram.


          Appendix B. Finding the Right Bridge-Looping Word
   The main text asserts that finding the correct part of the bridge-looping word
to use for underpass avoidance depends on only terminal vertex positions and word
length. We now prove that.

Lemma 11. The correct order between a◦ and a′ switches when the bridge word
has even length.

Proof. An even-length word implies an odd number of arcs. Suppose we begin
immediately west of one end of a chord and follow the chord. At the other end of
the chord, we will be immediately east of the far end of the chord. Induction on
parity completes the proof.                                                    □

Lemma 12. The correct side to start avoidance depends on the orientation of the
two ends of the underpass being avoided.

Proof. If the bridge being taken is west (resp., east) of the crossing point, then
we need to start the avoidance west (resp., east) of that terminal endpoint. We
can then use the parity of the bridge being used in order to determine whether to
initially pass east or west of the far end of the bridge. We will pass east and west
in succession, so we are deciding only the order here.                            □

Lemma 13. Whether to reverse the bridge-looping word depends on page agreement
between the arc being re-routed and the arc being used for re-routing.

Proof. Because we do not want to cross the equatorial binding, we reverse the
looping word if and only if that makes the initial page of the looping word agree
with the page of the arc just before the crossing arc. See Fig. 4.             □
                 LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                                 17


                 Table 3. Potential initial grammar rules of knot 63

      B, C   =    -bhc      D, E   =       -dbe      F, G   =   -fkg      H, I   =   -hdi
      J, K   =    -jek      L, A   =       +lja         b   =   a◦ , b◦      d   =   c◦ , d◦
         e   =    e◦ , f◦      h   =       g◦ , h◦      j   =   i◦ , j◦      k   =   k◦ , l◦
      A′N    =    ajlkj      A′S   =       jklja     B′N    =   ghdch      B′S   =   hcdhg
      C′N    =    hgbhc      C′S   =       chbgh     D′N    =   ibaeb      D′S   =   beabi
      E′N    =    bdiba      E′S   =       abidb     F′N    =   fkghk      F′S   =   khgkf
      G′N    =    kefkg      G′S   =       gkfek     H′N    =   cdjid      H′S   =   dijdc
      I′N    =    dchdi      I′S   =       idhcd     J′N    =   lefke      J′S   =   ekfel
      K′N    =    ejlef      K′S   =       felje     L′N    =   jbajl      L′S   =   ljabj

      Appendix C. Reducing Knot 63 to a 2-Bridge Presentation
   Knot 63 with Dowker code 4, 8, 10, 2, 12, 6 has a 3-page bridge embedding char-
acterized by the sentence -bhc-dbe-fkg-hdi-jek+lja;efkljidchgba. We pick
this knot because it is small enough to trace the moves by hand, rational, and does
not have a 2-block rational decomposition, which makes it interesting for the effect
on the edge multiplicities at the end. See Fig. 7 for a standard knot diagram that is
minimal in number of crossings, has 6 bridges, and is in a 3-page bridge embedding.
Underpasses are omitted in the figure. From the circle word, these underpasses are
ef, . . . , ba.


                                       h        c       d
                                   g                            i
                                   b                            j

                                   a e          f       k       l



        Figure 7. Knot 63 with sentence -bhc-dbe-fkg-hdi-jek+lja
        ;efkljidchgba encoding a 3-page bridge presentation.

   We perform reduction by the grammar rules. This is shown in Table 3. Some
normalizations have been omitted for brevity. In the table, we write the underpass
avoidances in four forms with X′P giving the word fragment to use when traversing
bridge X to avoid vertex x◦ in an approach through page P . Because each bridge
has two names and P can be N or S, this gives us 4 distinct fragments for each
bridge, according to the end being avoided and the page with the first arc in the
avoidance. These all arise from the same loop around the same bridge. Because
using an underpass avoidance move is followed by closing the underpass, we never
use both routes for underpass avoidance, but we list two versions in this table for
clarity. Similarly, we never need both names for a bridge, but we include both in
the table because it makes the selections clearer during underpass avoidance.
   Table 3 contains enough information to reconstruct the original sentence (hence,
the diagram). Because the underpass avoidance word X′S is just the word X′N in
reversed order, we do not write both versions in Table 4.
   Table 4 ends with two bridges, D and H. Because d = d◦ ∈ D and h = h◦ ∈
H, the bridge presentation is locally minimal. See Fig. 11 for a chord diagram
of the bridge presentation represented by the sentence -hdghdchgdhcdhgdchdghc
18                                              CHAD MUSICK


            Table 4. Reducing the number of bridges in knot 63 to 2.

                      Rules                            Changes
                  b    7→ B′                D   = -dB′S e
                                                = -dhcdhge
                                                = -dhcdhe
                  L      7→       L#C       L   = +ljhc
                  B          7→   ∅
                a,b       7 →     ∅
                a,b    7 →        g                  (See Fig. 8)
                  e         7→    F′        J   = -jF′S k
                                                = -jkhghkfk
                                                = -jkhgkk
                                                = -jkhgk
                  D      7→       D#G       D   = -dhcdhkg
                  F          7→   ∅
                e,f       7 →     ∅
                e,f    7 →        g                  (See Fig. 9)
                  j         7→    I′        L   = +lI′N hc
                                                = +ldchdlhc
                  H          7→   H#K       H   = -hdlkhk
                  I      7→       ∅
                i,j       7 →     ∅
                i,j    7 →        l                 (See Fig. 10)
                  k         7→    L′        D   = -dhcdhL′S g
                                                = -dhcdhldchdlhdchldhcdg
                                            H   = -hdlL′S hk
                                                = -hdlldchdlhdchldhcdhk
                                                = -hddchdlhdchldhcdhk
                                                = -hchdlhdchldhcdhk
                                                = -hdlhdchldhcdhk
                  H 7→ H#C                  H   = -hdlhdchldhcdhkdchdlhc
                  L 7→ ∅
                k,l 7→ ∅
                k,l →
                    7  g

-dhcdhgdchdghdchgdhcdg;dchg. Starting at Fig. 7 and ending at Fig. 11, we show
the evolution of the diagram as different underpasses are closed and the number of
bridges goes down.


                                        h         c    d
                                                              i
                                        g                     j

                                        e         f    k      l



        Figure 8. Knot 63 with sentence -dhcdhe-fkg-hdi-jek+ljhc
        ;efkljidchg encoding a 3-page bridge presentation.
                 LOCALLY MINIMAL BRIDGE PRESENTATIONS OF KNOTS                               19




                                     h        c          d
                                                             i
                                                             j
                                     g
                                                     k       l


         Figure 9. Knot 63 with sentence -dhcdhkg-hdi-jkhk+ljhc
         ;kljidchg encoding a 3-page bridge presentation.




                                        h                    d
                                                 c


                                        g
                                                     k       l

         Figure 10. Knot 63 with sentence -dhcdhkg-hdlkhk-ldchdlhc
         ;kldchg encoding a 3-page bridge presentation.

             c                               c                                  c
         ◦   7    •                      ◦           •

     h                d             h                    d              h                d
                                        7



                                                     7
             4




                                             4




         •   7    ◦                      •           ◦
             g                               g                                  g
         (a) Page S                      (b) Page N                         (c) Page U

         Figure 11. Pages of the 3-page embedding of the 2-bridge pre-
         sentation of knot 63 with sentence -hdghdchgdhcdhgdchdghc
         -dhcdhgdchdghdchgdhcdg;dchg.


                                         References
1. Michael A. Bekos, Martin Gronemann, and Chrysanthi N. Raftopoulou, Two-page book em-
   beddings of 4-planar graphs, Algorithmica 75 (2016), no. 1, 158–185.
2. Ivan A. Dynnikov, Three-page approach to knot theory. encoding and local moves, Functional
   Analysis and Its Applications 33 (1999), no. 4, 260–269.
3.         , Three-page approach to knot theory. universal semigroup, Functional Analysis and
   Its Applications 34 (2000), no. 1, 24–32.
4. Markus Lohrey, Algorithmics on SLP-compressed strings: A survey, Groups Complexity
   Cryptology 4 (2012), no. 2, 241–299.
5. Chad Musick, Minimal bridge projections for 11-crossing prime knots, 2012, arXiv:1208.4233
   [math.GT].
6.         , A method of encoding generalized link diagrams, Journal of Knot Theory and Its
   Ramifications 22 (2013), no. 10, 1350055.
7. Jean-Pierre Otal, Présentations en ponts du nœud trivial, Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des
   Sciences de Paris, Série I 294 (1982), 553–556.
8. Makoto Ozawa and Kazuto Takao, A locally minimal, but not globally minimal, bridge position
   of a knot, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 155 (2013), no. 1,
   181–190.
20                                      CHAD MUSICK


 9. Martin Scharlemann and Maggy Tomova, Uniqueness of bridge surfaces for 2-bridge knots,
     Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 144 (2008), no. 3, 639–650.
10. Stephen Tawn, A presentation for hilden’s subgroup of the braid group, Mathematical Research
     Letters 15 (2008), no. 6, 1277–1293.
11.         , Erratum: A presentation for hilden’s subgroup of the braid group, Mathematical
     Research Letters 18 (2011), no. 1, 175–180.
    Email address: chad.e.musick@gmail.com
