                                                      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES
                                                           AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION


                                                                               MARC LACKENBY


                                                   Abstract.      We present a new algorithm to determine whether a compact
                                                   orientable surface properly embedded in a compact orientable 3-manifold is
                                                   incompressible. As a special case, this provides a new algorithm to detect the
                                                   unknot. The central technique is the use of hierarchies. Unlike previous algo-
                                                   rithms, no challenging invariants need to be computed and no lengthy search
                                                   procedures are required. This algorithm leads to a new proof that determin-
arXiv:2607.23350v1 [math.GT] 25 Jul 2026




                                                   ing whether a compact orientable 3-manifold has incompressible boundary is
                                                   in NP.




                                                                                   Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                         1
                                             2. Hierarchies and boundary patterns                                                    4
                                             3. Essential hierarchies                                                                8
                                             4. Handle structures and normal surfaces                                               12
                                             5. Decomposing a handle structure along a normal surface                               16
                                             6. The algorithm to decide whether a pattern is essential                              23
                                             7. An example                                                                          30
                                             8. The algorithm to determine incompressibility                                        31
                                             9. The number of steps                                                                 34
                                             10. A refined algorithm using interior parallelity bundles                             35
                                             11. Handle structures of uniform type                                                  38
                                             12. Fundamental decomposing surfaces                                                   43
                                             13. Certifying an inessential pattern                                                  45
                                             14. Certifying an essential hierarchy                                                  49
                                             References                                                                             54




                                                                               1. Introduction
                                              Incompressible orientable surfaces occupy a central position in 3-manifold the-
                                           ory. It is therefore very natural to ask whether a given orientable surface properly
                                           embedded in a 3-manifold is incompressible. The following result provides an algo-
                                           rithm to determine this.
                                           Theorem 1.1. Let T be a triangulation of a compact orientable irreducible 3-
                                           manifold M , possibly with boundary. Let S be a compact orientable normal surface
                                           properly embedded in M . Then there is an algorithm to determine whether S is
                                           incompressible.
                                                                                         1
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     2


   This theorem is not new, but the algorithm is. The first algorithmic solution
to the problem in Theorem 1.1 was given by Haken [3]. His procedure was to cut
the manifold M along S and then triangulate the new 3-manifold M \\S. Then he
searched for possible normal compression discs for the two copies of S in M \\S.
In order to make this a finite procedure, he showed that it was possible to restrict
to ‘fundamental’ normal discs. A more recent algorithm, due to the author [16],
is more complicated, and uses sutured manifold hierarchies. Both these algorithms
are useful and have interesting theoretical consequences. But they both have the
downside that they require a search through a possibly very extensive search space,
for example, the set of all fundamental normal surfaces. The algorithm presented
here has the significant advantage that it does not require examination of a large
search space. An interesting application of Theorem 1.1 is the following.
Corollary 1.2. There is an algorithm to determine whether a given knot in the
3-sphere is trivial.
   This follows from Theorem 1.1 because the exterior of a knot in the 3-sphere has
incompressible boundary if and only if the knot is non-trivial. Again, this result is
not new. There are now many known algorithms to detect the unknot, the first of
which was due to Haken [3]. Some require the computation of knot invariants, such
as Khovanov homology [10] or Heegaard Floer homology [19, 20]. Others require a
possibly extensive search: a search for a spanning disc [5, 16], a homomorphism from
the fundamental group of the knot complement to a finite group with non-abelian
image [11], sequences of Reidemeister moves [15] or sequences of grid diagrams [2].
As a result, none of these algorithms are likely to run in polynomial time. Indeed,
in the case of Khovanov homology, there is an exponential lower bound on its worst-
case running time [7], subject to some standard conjectures in complexity theory.
The algorithm that we give seems amenable to possible speed-up, which we will
explore in future work. Furthermore, in a companion paper [17], we will show how
this algorithm can be extended to determine whether a given link in the 3-sphere
is hyperbolic.
   The algorithm generalises to 3-manifolds with a boundary pattern. Recall that
a boundary pattern for a compact orientable 3-manifold M is a collection P of
disjoint simple closed curves and trivalent graphs embedded in ∂M . A boundary
pattern P is essential if, for every disc D properly embedded in M that intersects
P transversely in at most three points away from the vertices of P , there is a
disc D′ in ∂M that intersects P in the empty set, a single arc, or a graph with a
single 3-valent vertex in the interior of D′ and three 1-valent vertices on ∂D′ . (See
Figure 1.) If there is a disc D properly embedded in M intersecting P transversely
at most three times away from the vertices, but there is no corresponding disc D′ ,
then D is termed a violating disc. In the final case, when D′ intersects P in a graph
with a single 3-valent vertex in the interior of D′ and three 1-valent vertices on ∂D′ ,
this graph is known as a tripod. Boundary patterns will be the focus of this paper.
At this stage, we observe that when P is the empty pattern, then P is essential if
and only if ∂M is incompressible.
Theorem 1.3. Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with
boundary pattern. Let T be a triangulation of M in which P is simplicial. Then
there is an algorithm to determine whether P is essential. Moreover, if P is not
essential, the algorithm provides a violating disc.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                      3




                                                         Forbidden




                       Figure 1. Essential boundary pattern

   When P is essential and M irreducible, the algorithm outputs an essential hi-
erarchy for (M, P ). Such hierarchies, which are defined in Section 2, will play a
central role in this paper. They are a finite sequence of decompositions along prop-
erly embedded orientable surfaces where the final manifold is a collection of 3-balls
with an essential boundary pattern.
   In the later parts of the paper, we will establish that the algorithms given above
can be used to show that the decision problems are in NP. Moreover, we will drop
the hypothesis that the 3-manifold is irreducible. Specifically, we will consider the
following problems.
   The decision problem Incompressible boundary takes, as its input a trian-
gulation of a compact orientable 3-manifold M and it asks whether ∂M is incom-
pressible.
Theorem 1.4. The decision problem Incompressible boundary is in NP.
   This theorem was proved by the author in [16], using sutured manifold hierar-
chies, based on argument of Agol. The problem was also shown to be in co-NP by
Ivanov [6].
   This has applications for the famous problem Knottedness. This takes, as its
input, either a diagram of a knot K or a triangulation of its exterior, and it asks
whether K is a non-trivial knot.
Corollary 1.5. The decision problem Knottedness is in NP.
   This was one of the main theorems in [16]. Previously, Kuperberg [11] showed
that Knottedness is in NP, conditionally on the Generalised Riemann Hypothesis.
   The decision problem Essential boundary pattern takes, as its input, a
triangulation of compact orientable 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P that
is simplicial, and it asks whether P is essential. The following is a new result.
Theorem 1.6. The decision problem Essential boundary pattern is in NP
and co-NP.
    When P is inessential, the certificate is a violating disc in normal form. When P
is essential and M is irreducible, the certificate is an essential hierarchy for (M, P ).
The fact that essential hierarchies can be encoded efficiently and can be certified
as essential will be extremely useful in future work [17].
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                 4


    Much of the theory of hierarchies as explained in Section 2 is due to Johannson
[8]. The presentation here follows that of a graduate course [12] given by the
author in 1999. One of the goals of that course was to provide a new proof of
the loop theorem using hierarchies. The fact that the theory also has algorithmic
applications was observed in a conversation with Ian Agol in 2013. The author
developed and expanded the theory over the intervening years, resulting in this
paper and its sequel [17].
    The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we recall some basic
material on hierarchies and boundary patterns. In Section 3, we explore essential
hierarchies and prove one direction of Theorem 2.5, which asserts that when a
3-manifold admits an essential hierarchy, then it is irreducible and has essential
boundary pattern. In Section 4, we introduce normal surfaces, in the context of
handle structures with a boundary pattern. In Section 5, we examine how handle
structures behave when decomposed along a normal surface. The goal here is to
establish an upper bound on the number of decompositions in a hierarchy. This
gives the other direction of Theorem 2.5, which gives a sufficient condition for a
3-manifold with boundary pattern to admits an essential hierarchy. In Section 6, we
present the algorithm required by Theorem 1.3, and in Section 7, an implementation
of the algorithm in a specific example is given. The algorithm to determine whether
a surface is incompressible, as required by Theorem 1.1, is given in Section 8.
A crude analysis of the number of steps in the algorithm is given in Section 9.
The crucial quantity that controls an upper bound on the running time is the
number of decompositions in the hierarchy. Therefore, in Section 10, we give a
more complicated algorithm for constructing a hierarchy, that has the advantage
that the number of decompositions is explicitly controlled. In Section 11, we show
that the handle structures created in the hierarchy have uniform type, which means
that each handle meets the pattern and its neighbouring handles in one of finitely
many types, independent of the manifold. This is important for the later parts of
the paper, in Sections 12, 13 and 14, where we show that the decision problem in
Theorem 1.6, deciding whether a pattern is essential, is in NP and co-NP.
Remark 1.7. The author was partially supported by EPSRC grant EP/Y004256/1.
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright
licence to any author accepted manuscript arising from this submission.

                   2. Hierarchies and boundary patterns
  We will use the following terminology, which has become standard.
Definition 2.1. Let M be a manifold and let S be either a codimension one
submanifold properly embedded in M or a compact codimension zero submanifold.
Then the manifold M \\S obtained by cutting M along S is defined as follows. Pick
a Riemannian metric on M . Then M − S inherits a Riemannian metric and M \\S
is the defined to be metric completion of M − S. We also permit S not to be a
subset of M as long as S and M are both subsets of some larger space and S ∩ M
satisfies the above conditions, in which case M \\S is defined to be M \\(S ∩ M ).
When M is compact and S is a codimension one submanifold, then the inclusion
M − S → M induces a quotient map M \\S → M .
   Our algorithm makes use of hierarchies. Here, one starts with a compact ori-
entable 3-manifold, and then one cuts along a properly embedded orientable surface,
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  5


forming a new 3-manifold. In this manifold, one finds another properly embedded
orientable surface, and one cuts along this. The process continues until the final
manifold is a collection of 3-balls. The manifolds in the hierarchy will inherit a
boundary pattern, as follows.
Definition 2.2. Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with boundary
pattern. Then a compact orientable surface S properly embedded in M is transverse
to P if it is disjoint from the vertices and intersects the edges transversely. We
then say that S is a decomposing surface. The manifold M \\S inherits a boundary
pattern P ′ , where P ′ is the union of P ∩ (M \\S) and the copies of ∂S in ∂(M \\S).
We write
                                          S
                                 (M, P ) −→ (M \\S, P ′ )
for this decomposition. We also denote (M \\S, P ′ ) by (M, P )\\S. (See Figure 2.)


                       S
           M                                 M \\ S


                                P                                    P'



                Figure 2. Decomposing (M, P ) along a surface S

Definition 2.3. Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with boundary
pattern. Then a partial hierarchy for (M, P ) is a sequence of decompositions
                                   1S           S2      S ℓ
             (M, P ) = (M1 , P1 ) −→ (M2 , P2 ) −→ . . . −→ (Mℓ+1 , Pℓ+1 ).
It is a hierarchy if Mℓ+1 is a disjoint union of 3-balls.
   This is a modification of the standard terminology, since we do not require the
surfaces to be incompressible (although they will end up being so in the cases of
interest to us).
   Recall, from Section 1, the definition of an essential boundary pattern. At first
sight, this is a strange definition, because it is not at all clear why one should be
interested only in simple closed curves that intersect the pattern in at most three
points. We will give more motivation for it in the results that follow.
Definition 2.4. An essential hierarchy for a compact orientable 3-manifold M
with boundary pattern P is a sequence of decompositions
                                   1S           S2      S ℓ
             (M, P ) = (M1 , P1 ) −→ (M2 , P2 ) −→ . . . −→ (Mℓ+1 , Pℓ+1 ).
where (Mℓ+1 , Pℓ+1 ) is a collection of balls with essential boundary pattern.
   Again, it is not immediately clear why one should only be concerned with whether
the final pattern is essential. But this is explained by the following result.
Theorem 2.5 (Essential hierarchy iff essential pattern and irreducible). Let M be
a compact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . Then (M, P ) admits
an essential hierarchy if and only if the following all hold:
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                       6


    (1) either M contains a properly embedded orientable incompressible surface
        with no 2-sphere components, or ∂M is non-empty;
    (2) P is essential;
    (3) M is irreducible.

   It is relatively straightforward to determine quickly whether a boundary pattern
for a 3-ball is essential. This can be rephrased in standard graph-theoretic terms
as follows. Recall that a graph is simple if it has no edge loops and does not have
multiple edges between pairs of vertices. A simple graph is n-connected for some
positive integer n if it has at least n + 1 vertices and there is no set of n − 1 vertices
whose removal disconnects the graph.

Proposition 2.6 (Essential pattern for a ball). Let M be a 3-ball, and let P be a
boundary pattern for M . Then P is essential if and only if P is empty, a simple
closed curve or a connected graph, and in the latter case, the planar graph dual to
P is either a simple 4-connected graph or the complete graph on 3 or 4 vertices.

Proof. We first show that the given conditions on P imply that P is essential. If
P is empty or a simple closed curve, then clearly P is essential. So suppose that
P is a connected graph and that the graph G dual to P is simple and 4-connected
or the complete graph on 4 vertices. Consider a simple closed curve C in ∂M that
intersects P transversely in at most 3 points. If C is disjoint from P , then it must
bound a disc in ∂M disjoint from P , since P is connected and ∂M is a sphere.
If C intersects P at one point, this specifies an edge loop in G, contrary to our
assumption that G is simple. If C intersects P at two points, then these two points
must lie on the same edge of P , as otherwise we obtain two edges between the same
pair of vertices of G. Hence, C bounds a disc in ∂M intersecting P in an arc. If
C intersects P at three points, then this specifies a closed walk of length 3 in G.
This is a cycle because otherwise G is not simple. Removing the vertices in this
cycle does not separate G, because G is 4-connected or the complete graph on 3 or
4 vertices. Hence, C must bound a disc intersecting no regions of ∂M − P other
than the three that C visits. This implies that P intersects this disc in a tripod.
Thus we have shown that P is essential.
   Conversely, suppose that P is essential. We may suppose that P is non-empty
and not a simple closed curve, as the implication is immediate in those cases. Then
P is clearly connected as otherwise there is a simple closed curve in ∂M − P that
does not bound a disc in ∂M disjoint from P . Let G be its dual planar graph.
An edge loop in G would give a simple closed curve intersecting the pattern once,
contradicting the assumption that P is essential. More than one edge between a
pair of vertices would give a simple closed curve in ∂M intersecting P in exactly
two points that lie in different edges of P . Again this contradicts the assumption
that P is essential. Consider a collection of at most three vertices in G. We will
show that these do not separate G. Each vertex corresponds to a region of ∂M − P ,
and for these vertices to disconnect G, the union of these regions must disconnect
∂M . If they do then there must be a simple closed curve lying in the union of these
regions that separates at least two other regions of ∂M − P . Since P is essential,
this curve bounds a disc in ∂M intersecting P in an arc or a tripod. This implies
that these three vertices did not in fact separate G. Note that removing these three
vertices of G may create the empty graph, but in this case, G is the complete graph
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                             7


on 3 vertices. Hence, we have shown that G is 4-connected or the complete graph
on 3 or 4 vertices.                                                           □
   Note that it can be determined in polynomial time (as a function of the number
of vertices and edges) whether a graph is simple and 4-connected or the complete
graph on 4 vertices.
   Theorem 2.5 is an extremely powerful tool for showing that a pattern is essential,
as the following example demonstrates.
Example 2.7. The knot 52 is shown in Figure 3. Let M be its exterior and let P
be the empty pattern. A hierarchy for (M, P ) is given. The final manifold consists
of two 3-balls, and the boundary pattern of one of them is shown. It is easy to
check that this pattern is essential, and hence by Theorem 2.5, (M, P ) is essential
and so the knot 52 is not the unknot.




                  (i) The knot 52                   (ii) The first surface in the hierarchy




          (iii) The exterior of this surface      (iv) The second surface in the hierarchy




         (v) The pattern of one of the balls        (vi) A simplified copy of the pattern


                               Figure 3. An essential hierarchy

   Theorem 2.5 is not new. It is implicit in work of Johannson [8] and a version
of it was used by author in lecture notes in 1999 [12]. However, because it is so
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   8


central to our work and because we will need details of the argument later in the
paper, we give a full proof.

                                3. Essential hierarchies
   Our aim is to prove Theorem 2.5. We first show that if (M, P ) admits an essential
hierarchy, then P is essential and M is irreducible. We will also establish that the
decomposing surfaces have the following important property.
Definition 3.1. Let M be a compact orientable 3-manifold and let P be a boundary
pattern. Let S be a compact surface properly embedded in M . Then a pattern-
compression disc for S is a disc D embedded in M such that
    (1) D ∩ S is an arc α in ∂D;
    (2) ∂D\\α = D ∩ ∂M intersects P at most once; and
    (3) α does not separate off a disc from S intersecting P at most once.
If no such pattern-compression disc exists, then S is pattern-incompressible. (See
Figure 4.) If D is a pattern-compression disc for S, then the surface obtained from
S by cutting along S ∩ D and then attaching two parallel copies of D is the surface
obtained by pattern-compressing along D.


                        S                                     S

                            D

                                 P
              �M


                        S                                     S

                            D


              �M

        Figure 4. A pattern-incompressible surface. (For the sake of clar-
        ity, we have assumed here that M is irreducible and P is essential.)

  A key step in the proof of Theorem 2.5 is the following.
Lemma 3.2 (Essential pattern pulls back). Let
                                              S
                                             → (M ′ , P ′ )
                                     (M, P ) −
be a decomposition and suppose that P ′ is essential. Then P is essential and S is
incompressible and pattern-incompressible.
Proof. We first show that P is essential. Let D be a disc properly embedded in M
that is transverse to P and that intersects P at most three times. We wish to show
that D is not a violating disc.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     9


   Perform a small isotopy to S, leaving P invariant, so that afterwards S ∩ D is a
collection of simple closed curves and arcs properly embedded in D.
   If there is a simple closed curve of S ∩ D, there is one that is innermost in D.
It bounds a disc D′ in M ′ that is disjoint from P ′ . Since we are assuming that P ′
is essential, ∂D′ bounds a disc D′′ in ∂M ′ that is disjoint from the pattern. This
disc is a subset of S. We can remove D′ from D and replace it by a parallel copy
of D′′ . The result is violating for P if and only if D was violating. However, its
intersection with S contains fewer simple closed curves.
   So, we may assume that D ∩ S is a collection of arcs properly embedded in D.
Say there are n > 0 of them. Then at the endpoints of these arcs, we see 4n points
of intersection with P ′ . We also have at most 3 points of intersection between
∂D and P . So, in the n + 1 discs D\\(D ∩ S), there are at most 4n + 3 points
of intersection with P ′ . Hence, one these discs, D1 say, has at most three points
of intersection with P ′ in its boundary. Necessarily, it has at least two points of
intersection with P ′ . We are assuming that P ′ is essential. Hence, ∂D1 bounds
a disc D2 in ∂M ′ . This disc D2 intersects P ′ either in a single arc or a tripod.
Therefore, D2 ∩ S is a disc. We may remove D1 from D and replace it by D2 ∩ S,
and then perform a further small isotopy to give a disc D3 properly embedded in
M that is transverse to P and that has fewer components of intersection with S.
This is a violating disc for M if and only if D was.
   So we may assume that D is disjoint from S and hence lies in M ′ . Since P ′ is
essential, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M ′ intersecting P ′ in the empty set, an arc or a
tripod. Since ∂D′ is disjoint from S, all of D′ must be disjoint from S. So, D′ lies
in ∂M . So, D was not a violating disc, and so we have proved that P is essential.
   We now show that S is incompressible. Consider a disc D embedded in the
interior of M such that D ∩ S = ∂D. Then D is properly embedded in M ′ and
is disjoint from the pattern P ′ . Since P ′ is essential, ∂D bounds a disc in ∂M ′
disjoint from P ′ . This is a disc in S. So D is not a compression disc for S.
   We now show that S is pattern-incompressible. Let D be a disc embedded in
M such that D ∩ S is an arc in ∂D, and the remainder of ∂D is an arc in ∂M
intersecting P at most once. Then D lies in M ′ and intersects P ′ at least twice and
at most three times. Since P ′ is essential, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M ′ intersecting
P ′ in an arc or a tripod. The intersection between D′ and S is a disc separated
off by D ∩ S that intersects P at most once. So D is not a pattern-compression
disc.                                                                               □
Lemma 3.3 (Irreducible and essential pattern pulls back). Let
                                          S
                                         → (M ′ , P ′ )
                                 (M, P ) −
be a decomposition and suppose that M ′ is irreducible and P ′ is essential. Then M
is irreducible and P is essential.
Proof. The fact that P is essential is a result of Lemma 3.2. We need to show that
M is irreducible. Consider a 2-sphere S 2 properly embedded in M . This intersects
S in a collection of simple closed curves. An innermost one bounds a disc D′ in
M ′ that is disjoint from P ′ . Since P ′ is essential, ∂D′ bounds a disc D′′ in S and
because M ′ is irreducible, we may isotope D′′ across to D′ and then a little further,
to remove this curve of S 2 ∩ S. So we may assume that S is disjoint from S 2 , and
hence S 2 lies in M ′ . As M ′ is irreducible, S 2 bounds a ball in M ′ and this is also
a ball in M .                                                                         □
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  10


    In many circumstances, it is also the case that when P is essential and M is
irreducible, then P ′ is also essential and M ′ is also irreducible. However, in order
to guarantee this, we require that the decomposing surface S is incompressible and
pattern-incompressible. We now investigate how to arrange this.
    When we pattern-compress a surface, we would like to say that the new surface
is, in some sense, simpler than the original one. We formalise this as follows, using
the following measure of complexity.
Definition 3.4. The pattern-complexity χp (S) of a properly embedded surface S
is defined to be −4χ(S) + |S ∩ P |.
  A useful feature of pattern-complexity is the following immediate result.
Lemma 3.5. If S is a compact connected orientable surface satisfying χp (S) < 0,
then S is a sphere or disc intersecting the pattern in at most three points.
Lemma 3.6 (Pattern-compression simplifies). Let S be a properly embedded con-
nected orientable surface that is non-separating. Let S ′ be obtained from S by
pattern-compressing or compressing. Then at least one component of S ′ is also
non-separating and has smaller pattern-complexity than S.
Proof. The lemma is straightforward and well known in the case of a compression.
So suppose that we pattern-compress S. We decrease −4χ(S) by 4 and increase
|S ∩ P | by at most 2. So χp certainly goes down by at least 2. Note that at
least one component of S ′ is non-separating. Thus, the lemma is proved in the
case where S ′ is connected. However, we need to consider the possibility that we
have created a separating component S1′ with negative pattern-complexity. Suppose
that this occurs. Let S2′ be the other component of S ′ which is necessarily non-
separating. Note that S1′ is a disc and it must intersect P at least twice by the
definition of a pattern-compression. If S1′ has three points of intersection with
P , then |S2′ ∩ P | < |S ∩ P | and hence χp (S2′ ) < χp (S). If S1′ has two points of
intersection with P , then both of these must lie in S by the definition of a pattern-
compression. Hence, again χp (S2′ ) < χp (S).                                       □
Corollary 3.7 (Simplest surface pattern-incompressible). Let (M, P ) be a com-
pact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern. Let S be a properly embedded
connected orientable surface that is non-separating and that has smallest pattern-
complexity among all such surfaces. Then S is pattern-incompressible and incom-
pressible.
Lemma 3.8 (Essential pushes forward). Let M be a compact orientable 3-manifold
with essential boundary pattern P . Let S be a connected pattern-incompressible
incompressible surface properly embedded in M , which is not a disc intersecting P
in at most 3 points. Then M \\S inherits an essential boundary pattern P ′ .
Proof. Let D be a disc properly embedded in M \\S with ∂D ∩ P ′ at most three
points. The curve ∂D may run through parts of ∂(M \\S) coming from ∂M and
parts coming from S. Note however the points where it swaps must be points of
∂D ∩ P ′ , and that at most one side of any point of ∂D ∩ P ′ lies in S. Hence, at
most one arc or simple closed curve of ∂D\\P ′ lies in S.
  Case 1. ∂D is disjoint from S.
  Then ∂D ⊂ ∂M . Since P is essential, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting
P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. If S intersects D′ , then pick a simple closed
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                 11


curve of S ∩ D′ innermost in D′ . The disc this bounds cannot be a compression
disc for S. Hence, S must be a disc. By assumption, S intersects P in at least 4
points. Hence, it intersects some edge of P ∩ D′ more than once. We can therefore
find a pattern-compression disc for S, which is contrary to assumption. Hence, D′
is disjoint from S, and therefore lies in ∂(M \\S). This verifies that D is not a
violating disc for P ′ .
  Case 2. ∂D lies in S.
  By the incompressibility of S, ∂D bounds a disc D′ in S. This is a disc in
∂(M \\S) disjoint from P ′ . So D is not violating.
  Case 3. ∂D intersects S in an arc.
   Then ∂D\\S intersects P at most once. Since D is not a pattern-compression
disc for S, D ∩ S separates off a disc D1 of S intersecting P in at most one point.
Then, D ∪ D1 is a disc properly embedded in M , intersecting P in at most two
points. Since P is essential, there is therefore a disc D2 in ∂M with ∂D2 = ∂(D∪D1 )
and with D2 ∩ P either empty or an arc. Therefore, D1 ∪ D2 is a disc in ∂(M \\S)
intersecting P ′ in an arc or a tripod.
   This gives that P ′ is essential.                                             □

  We also have following well known result.
Lemma 3.9 (Irreducible pushes forward). Let M be a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold. Let S be a properly embedded incompressible surface with no
2-sphere components. Then M \\S is irreducible.
  We will occasionally want to cut along surfaces in the expectation that they are
pattern-incompressible. An example of this is as follows.
Lemma 3.10 (Decomposition along square). Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable
3-manifold with an essential boundary pattern. Let S be a properly embedded disc
that intersects P four times. Then S is pattern-incompressible unless ∂S bounds a
disc D in ∂M that has one of the following forms:
    (1) D ∩ P consists of two arcs; or
    (2) D ∩ P is a graph with two vertices joined by an edge, along with four edges
         running to the boundary of D.
Proof. Suppose that, on the contrary, S has a pattern-compression disc D′ . Then
S\\D′ has two components S1 and S2 , each of which is a disc intersecting P twice.
For i = 1 and 2, let Di′ be Si ∪ D′ isotoped a little so that it is disjoint from S.
Then Di′ is properly embedded in M and intersects P either two or three times.
If each of these discs intersects P twice, then using the fact that P is essential,
we deduce that ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M as in (1) above. If both D1′ and D2′
intersect P three times, then we deduce that ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M as in (1)
or (2) above.                                                                     □

Definition 3.11. We say that a disc S properly embedded in M intersecting the
pattern four times is a square. It is trivial if ∂S bounds a disc D in ∂M satisfying
(1) or (2) of Lemma 3.10. (See Figure 5.) Otherwise it is non-trivial.
  We rephrase and extend Lemma 3.10 as follows.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     12


             ∂M                                    ∂M
                      D                                     D


                  P                                     P


                              Figure 5. Trivial squares

Lemma 3.12. Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary
pattern. Let S be a non-trivial square. Then a pattern-compression disc for S
yields a violating disc for (M, P ). This violating disc is one of the components of
the surface obtained by pattern-compressing S.
    We now have many of the elements required for the proof of Theorem 2.5. Let
(M, P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with an essential boundary
pattern. Our aim is to build an essential hierarchy for (M, P ). If M is closed, then
by assumption, it contains a properly embedded incompressible orientable surface
with no 2-sphere components. Decomposing along this surface gives an irreducible
3-manifold with non-empty boundary and essential (empty) boundary pattern. So,
we may assume that ∂M is non-empty. If ∂M is a union of spheres, then these
bound 3-balls by the irreducibility of M , and so in this case there is nothing to prove.
Hence, we may assume that b1 (∂M ) > 0. Since b1 (M ) ≥ b1 (∂M )/2, we deduce that
b1 (M ) > 0. Therefore, M contains a properly embedded connected orientable non-
separating surface S. By picking S to have smallest pattern-complexity, we may
assume that S is incompressible and pattern-incompressible by Corollary 3.7. When
we decompose along such a surface, Lemmas 3.8 and 3.9 imply that the resulting
manifold is irreducible and has essential boundary pattern. We may therefore repeat
with this manifold. However, we must show that this process can be arranged to
terminate. In [12], a proof was given using Kneser’s theorem bounding the number
of disjoint non-parallel properly embedded incompressible boundary-incompressible
surfaces in a compact 3-manifold. In the following section, we give an alternative
proof. Although longer than the proof in [12], it will be more useful because it will
lead to a good bound on the length of the resulting hierarchy.

                  4. Handle structures and normal surfaces
   Our algorithm deals with partial hierarchies. The way that the surfaces in these
partial hierarchies are encoded is as normal surfaces. Normal surface theory takes
place in a 3-manifold equipped either with a triangulation or with a handle struc-
ture. We mostly use handle structures, as they behave better than triangulations
when the 3-manifold is decomposed along a normal surface. Normal surfaces in
handle structures have been used in the theory of hierarchies since the work of
Haken [4] and Waldhausen [22]. One of their particular uses is as a method for
controlling the length of hierarchies, in other words the number of decompositions
until the manifold has been cut up into balls.
Definition 4.1. In this paper, a handle structure on a 3-manifold or a 2-manifold
will satisfy the following conditions:
    (1) each i-handle Di × Dk−i (k = 2 or 3) intersects the handles of lower index
         in ∂Di × Dk−i ;
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  13


    (2) any two i-handles are disjoint;
    (3) in the case of a 3-manifold, the intersection of any 1-handle D1 × D2 with
        any 2-handle D2 × D1 is of the form D1 × α in D1 × D2 where α is a
        collection of arcs in ∂D2 , and of the form β × D1 in D2 × D1 where β is a
        collection of arcs in ∂D2 ;
    (4) any 2-handle runs over at least one 1-handle.
Definition 4.2. Let H be a handle structure for a 3-manifold and for i ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3},
let Hi denote the union of the i-handles. The characteristic surface for H is H0 ∩
(H1 ∪ H2 ). We denote it by F(H), or simply by F when the context is clear. It has
a handle structure consisting of just 0-handles and 1-handles, where the 0-handles
are F 0 (H) = H0 ∩ H1 and the 1-handles are F 1 (H) = H0 ∩ H2 . We will view the
characteristic surface as a subsurface of ∂H0 .
  We denote the number of 0-handles in the handle structure H by |H|.
Definition 4.3. A handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P
is a handle structure for M satisfying Definition 4.1 such that P is disjoint from the
2-handles and, for each 1-handle H1 = D1 × D2 , the intersection H1 ∩ P is D1 × X
where X is a finite set of points in ∂D2 .
  We will be decomposing handle structures along normal surfaces. But first we
deal with the following weaker notion.
Definition 4.4. Let H be a handle structure of a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . We say that a surface S properly embedded in M is standard with
respect to H if the following hold:
    (1) it intersects each 0-handle in a collection of disjoint properly embedded
        discs;
    (2) it intersects each 1-handle D1 × D2 in a surface of the form D1 × C for
        some arcs C properly embedded in D2 ;
    (3) it intersects each 2-handle D2 × D1 in a surface of the form D2 × X for
        some finite collection of points X in the interior of D1 ;
    (4) it is disjoint from the 3-handles;
    (5) it intersects P transversely.
  We have analogous definitions for 1-manifolds in surfaces.
Definition 4.5. Let H be a handle structure of a surface F . We say that a 1-
manifold C properly embedded in F is standard with respect to H if the following
hold:
    (1) it intersects each 0-handle in a union of disjoint properly embedded arcs;
    (2) it intersects each 1-handle D1 × D1 in a union of arcs parallel to the core
        of the handle, that is, arcs of the form D1 × X for some finite collection of
        points X in the interior of D1 ;
    (3) it is disjoint from the 2-handles.
Definition 4.6. Let H be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . A curve C in ∂H0 is normal if it intersects P and ∂F transversely, its
intersection with F is standard and the following all hold:
    (1) C does not lie entirely in ∂M − P ;
    (2) C does not bound a disc in ∂H0 − F that intersects P in a single arc or a
        tripod;
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     14


    (3) C intersects each 1-handle of F in at most one arc;
    (4) C intersects each component of ∂H0 − (F ∪ P ) in at most one arc;
    (5) C does not intersect components of F 1 and ∂H0 −(F ∪P ) that are adjacent;
    (6) if C intersects two components of ∂H0 − (F ∪ P ) that are incident along
        an arc of P ∩ H0 , then C also intersects this arc;
    (7) there is no disc in ∂H0 that has boundary equal to the union of a sub-arc
        of C and a sub-arc of ∂F 0 is otherwise disjoint from C and F , and that
        intersects P in at most two arcs, each of which runs from ∂F 0 to C.
See Figure 6.


                                                                C
         F1   F0             F1                                     β
                                                                C

        C
                                      C
                                  C
                   P                                P                       P

                   (1)                    (2)                               (3)




                                                            C
                                                        γ

                             C                          β                         C
                         β                                              β
                                                        C
                   P                       P                        C       P
                             C
                   (4)                    (5)                               (6)


                                       C




                                           β

                                                α

                                           P

                                          (7)


        Figure 6. Configurations of the curve C in ∂H0 that violate nor-
        mality. In cases (3)-(7), arcs α, β or γ are shown that are part of
        the boundary of a simplifying disc.


Definition 4.7. Let H be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . A surface S properly embedded in M is normal with respect to H if it
is standard and each component of S ∩ ∂H0 is normal.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   15


   In the case where the pattern P is empty, Definition 4.6 becomes the usual
definition of a normal surface in a handle structure, for example as in [18, Definition
3.4.1]. Most of the conditions in Definition 4.6 are natural generalisations to the
case of general pattern. The possible exception is (7), which seems somewhat ad
hoc. However, it will be used to establish that manifolds appearing in a hierarchy
embed in the original manifold in a ‘simple’ way. (See Theorem 11.3.)
   There is a way of understanding the definition of normality in terms of simplifying
discs, as follows.
Definition 4.8. Let H be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary
pattern P . Let S be a standard surface properly embedded in M . Then a sim-
plifying disc for S is a disc D lying in a 0-handle H0 of H satisfying one of the
following:
     (1) ∂D is the concatenation of two arcs α ⊂ S and β ⊂ ∂H0 , where α = D ∩ S,
         and β = D ∩ ∂H0 is an arc on the boundary of a 2-handle of H that is
         vertical in its product structure (see Figure 7 and Figure 6 (3));
     (2) ∂D is disjoint from P and is the concatenation of three arcs α ⊂ S, β ⊂
         ∂H0 ∩ ∂M and γ ⊂ ∂H0 ∩ H2 , where α = D ∩ S, β = D ∩ ∂M and γ is
         an arc on the boundary of a 2-handle of H that is vertical in its product
         structure (see Figure 6 (5));
     (3) ∂D intersects P at most once and is the concatenation of two arcs α ⊂ S
         and β ⊂ ∂H0 , where α = D ∩ S, and β = D ∩ ∂H0 is an arc in ∂M that is
         not parallel to an arc of S ∩ ∂H0 ∩ ∂M intersecting P at most once (Figure
         6 (4) and (6));
     (4) D is a subset of ∂H0 and ∂D is the concatenation of two arcs α = D ∩ S
         and β = D ∩ F 0 , and with the properties that D is otherwise disjoint from
         F and that D intersects P in at most two arcs, each of which runs from
         ∂F 0 to C (see Figure 6 (7)).

                         part of 2-handle    part of 0-handle H0


                                                   D
                                                            part of S∩H 0
                     S                                  α
                     S
                                               β




                            Figure 7. A simplifying disc D

  The following is immediate from the definition of normality.
Lemma 4.9. Let H be a handle structure for a 3-manifold M with boundary pattern
P . Then a surface S properly embedded in M is normal if and only if the following
all hold:
    (1) S is standard;
    (2) S has no simplifying disc;
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   16


   (3) no component of S is a disc lying in a 0-handle that is parallel to a disc in
       ∂M ∩ ∂H0 intersecting P in the empty set, an arc or tripod.
  We will want to place properly embedded surfaces into normal form. In general,
we may need to make modifications to the surface in order to do this. These
modifications will not increase the following quantities.
Definition 4.10. Let H be a handle structure of a compact orientable 3-manifold
M , and let S be a standard surface properly embedded in M . The weight of S is the
number of components of S ∩ H2 . The extended weight of S is |S ∩ H2 | + |S ∩ H1 |.
Lemma 4.11 (Normalising a surface). Let M be a compact orientable 3-manifold
with boundary pattern P . Let S be a compact orientable surface properly embedded
in M transverse to P that is non-trivial in H2 (M, ∂M ). Then, after applying a
sequence of isotopies preserving P , compressions and pattern-compressions, some
component of the resulting surface is normal and either non-separating or a violating
disc. Moreover, if S is standard in H, then the weight and extended weight of the
resulting normal surface are at most the weight and extended weight of S.
Proof. We may readily ensure that S is standard. In particular, if S intersects some
0-handle H0 in anything other than discs, then we may modify it, keeping S ∩ ∂H0
unchanged but ensuring that each of these curves bounds a disc in H0 . This process
is achieved by a sequence of isotopies and compressions.
    We may further assume that S has no component that is a boundary-parallel disc,
as we could remove this component and the surface would still be homologically
non-trivial.
    Suppose that S is not normal. Then by Lemma 4.9, S has a simplifying disc.
The first and second types of simplifying disc can be used to pattern-isotope S to
reduce its weight without increasing |S ∩ H1 |. The third type of simplifying disc is
a potential pattern-compression disc for S. It satisfies (1) and (2) in Definition 3.1,
but possibly not (3). We can pattern-compress S along this disc. If S was a violating
disc, then some component of the resulting surface is again a violating disc, and
we work with this instead. If S was non-separating, but the pattern-compression
produces a violating disc, then we work with this violating disc instead. However,
if the pattern-compression creates a component that is a boundary parallel disc,
but not a violating disc, then discard it. The resulting surface has smaller extended
weight and no greater weight than S. On the other hand, if the pattern-compression
does not create a violating disc or a boundary-parallel disc, then some component
of the resulting surface is non-separating, has smaller χp and no greater weight
or extended weight. The fourth type of simplifying disc specifies an isotopy of S,
which reduces the number of components of S ∩ H1 and that leaves the weight of
S unchanged. At each stage, we are either reducing χp or leaving it unchanged
and reducing extended weight. So this process terminates. The resulting surface
is normal, connected, and orientable. Moreover, it is either non-separating or a
violating disc.                                                                      □

     5. Decomposing a handle structure along a normal surface
   We now wish to show that when (M, P ) is decomposed along a normal surface,
the resulting manifold is, in some sense, simpler than the original one. The notion
of complexity that goes down is defined in terms of handle structures. Its definition
needs to take account of the boundary pattern, as follows.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                 17


Definition 5.1. Let H be a handle structure for (M, P ), and let F(H) be its
characteristic surface. For a 0-handle H of H, its index I(H) is defined to be the
sum of χp (F ), over all components F of H ∩ F(H).
   Note that χp (F ) can be computed from the 0-handles D of F , as follows. Define
the index of D to be
                              X
                                 −4 + 2|D ∩ F 1 | + |D ∩ P | .
                                                            
                      I(D) =
                               D
                  P
Then χp (F ) is   D I(D), as D ranges over each 0-handle of F .

Lemma 5.2 (Behaviour of index under decomposition). Let H′ be obtained from
H by decomposing along a standard surface S. Let D be a 0-handle of F. Then
the sum, over all components D′ of D ∩ H′ , of I(D′ ) is equal to I(D). Hence, for
any component F of F (H), the sum, over all components F ′ of F ∩ H′ , of χp (F ′ )
is equal to χp (F ).
Proof. Let D be 0-handle of F. Its intersection with S is a collection of properly
embedded arcs. Say that there are n of them. (See Figure 8.) Then decomposing D
along these arcs gives n+1 discs and so this changes the index by −4n. The endpoint
of each arc either lies in F 1 (H) or in ∂M . In the former case, this component of
F 1 (H) is decomposed along the extension of the arc into F 1 (H). Hence this gives
an increase of 2 to the index. If the endpoint of the arc lies in ∂M , then we get
two new points of intersection between D ∩ H′ and the boundary pattern. Hence,
again this increases the index by 2. So each arc leads to an increase in index by 4.
Therefore, in total, the index is unchanged.                                      □

                                                                         P'
                                                                         P'
          F(H)                                     F(H')


                                       decompose


                                                                          P'
                                   S                                     P'
                      P   S                                P' P' P'

                      Figure 8. Decomposition of F (H) along S

  We will mostly want to deal with handle structures with the following property.
Definition 5.3. A handle structure H for (M, P ) is admissible if the following
both hold:
   (1) each 0-handle of F either has positive index or has zero index and is disjoint
       from P ;
   (2) for any simple closed curve C lying in a 0-handle of H, that is disjoint
       from F, and that intersects P at most 3 times, C bounds a disc in ∂H0
       intersecting P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  18

                                                                    P       P

                                P          P             P      P
        F1            F1
                                                                        P


           Figure 9. The possible 0-handles of F with negative index

                                                 P      P           P
                                                 P      P           P
                 F1        F1        F1

                                               not admissible


             Figure 10. The possible 0-handles of F with zero index

Proposition 5.4 (Create admissible handle structure). Let (M, P ) be a
compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern, and let H be
a handle structure for (M, P ). Then there is an algorithm that either creates an
admissible handle structure for a manifold (M ′ , P ′ ) that is obtained from (M, P )
by decomposing along disjoint non-trivial squares or provides a violating disc for
(M, P ).
Proof. The procedure that we will follow will not increase the index of any 0-handle
of F. It will strictly decrease the number of 1-handles of H at each stage, and so
it is guaranteed to terminate. Suppose that there is a 0-handle D of F that either
has negative index or has zero index and intersects P . Then D has at most one arc
of intersection with F 1 . (See Figures 9 and 10.)
    Suppose that it has exactly one such arc. Then D lies in a 1-handle H1 of H and
the arc lies in a 2-handle H2 of H, and we may remove H1 ∪ H2 from the handle
structure. There may be one or two arcs of P running along H1 . If so, then we
need to replace each component of F 1 ∩ H2 with one or two arcs of P .
    Suppose now that D is disjoint from F 1 . Then it is properly embedded in M . If
D has negative index, it intersects P in at most 3 points. We can then determine
whether ∂D bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting P in either the empty set, an
arc or a tripod. If so, D ∪ D′ bounds a 3-ball in M , by irreducibility. We remove
this submanifold bounded by D ∪ D′ , and we insert into D the boundary pattern
that was in D′ . On the other hand, if ∂D does not bound such a disc D′ , then D
is a violating disc. It might not be normal, but in this case, we can find another
properly embedded disc in H0 , disjoint from F, that also forms a violating disc
and intersecting P fewer times. Hence, we may assume that D is normal, and the
algorithm terminates with this disc. Suppose now that D has zero index, and hence
is a square. If it is a trivial square, it bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting P as in
(1) or (2) of Lemma 3.10. We can then remove the submanifold bounded by D ∪D′ ,
and insert into D the boundary pattern that was in D′ . If D is a non-trivial square,
then we decompose along it.
    Now suppose that there is a simple closed curve C lying in a 0-handle of H,
that is disjoint from F , and that intersects P at most 3 times, but that C does not
bound a disc in ∂H0 intersecting P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. There is
always such a curve C when ∂H0 \\(F ∪ P ) is not a union of discs. In that case, we
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                      19


pick C to be boundary parallel in a component of ∂H0 \\(F ∪ P ) that is not a disc.
We can determine whether C bounds a disc D′ in ∂M intersecting P in the empty
set, an arc or a tripod. If there is no such disc D′ in ∂M , then a disc properly
embedded in H0 bounded by C is a violating disc. On the other hand, if there is
such a disc D′ , then we can remove the submanifold bounded by D ∪ D′ and insert
into D the boundary pattern that was in D′ .
   We have performed a sequence of decompositions along squares. We need to
explain why we can take these squares all to be disjoint. We also need to explain
why a violating disc that is produced in the above process actually forms a violating
disc for (M, P ). We note that when we decompose along a square, the copies of
this disc in the resulting 3-manifold lie in 0-handles and are disjoint from handles of
higher index. In particular, they are disjoint from the later decomposing squares.
Moreover, they are disjoint from any later violating discs that are produced. Thus,
the squares are all disjoint from each other, and any violating disc that is produced
is actually a violating disc for (M, P ).
                                                                                     □

  One of the reasons why we work with admissible handle structures is that they
behave well when they are decomposed along a normal surface, as follows.
Lemma 5.5 (Decomposing an admissible handle structure). Let (M, P ) be a com-
pact orientable 3-manifold with a boundary pattern, and let H be an admissible
handle structure for (M, P ). Let S be a normal surface properly embedded in M ,
and let H′ be the handle structure obtained by cutting along S. Then each 0-handle
of F(H′ ) has non-negative index.
Proof. Suppose that D′ is a 0-handle of F(H′ ) with negative index. The possibilities
for D′ are shown in Figure 9.
   Suppose first that D′ intersects F 1 (H′ ) in a single arc and is disjoint from P ′ . If
∂D′ is disjoint from S, then D′ forms a 0-handle of F(H) that violates the assump-
tion that H is admissible. Therefore, ∂D′ must intersect S and this intersection
must be an arc, because ∂D′ is disjoint from P ′ . But this implies that S violated
(3) in the definition of normality.
   Suppose now that D′ intersects F 1 (H′ ) in a single arc and intersects P ′ in a
point. Again, ∂D′ cannot be disjoint from S. It must therefore intersect S in an
arc. But this implies that S violated (5) in the definition of normality.
   Suppose that D′ misses F 1 (H′ ). Now D′ is a subset of a 0-handle D of F 0 (H),
and its boundary alternates between arcs of S ∩ D and arcs lying in ∂D. Since D′
intersects the pattern at most three times, there can be at most three such arcs.
But in fact, there must be an even number of them. There must be at least one arc
of S ∩ D lying in ∂D′ , as otherwise D′ = D, contradicting the assumption that H
is admissible. Hence, D′ ∩ S is an outermost arc in D. The remainder of ∂D′ is an
arc A in ∂D intersecting P at most once. The arcs of S ∩ (∂H0 \\(F ∪ P )) incident
to ∂D′ lie in the same component of ∂H0 \\(F ∪ P ) or in adjacent components of
∂H0 \\(F ∪ P ). Hence, by (4) and (6) in the definition of normality, they are either
equal or they meet at a point of P . So the endpoints of D′ ∩ S are joined by an
arc of S ∩ (∂H0 \\F). The union of this latter arc and A is a simple closed curve
C that intersects P in at most two points. So by admissibility, C bounds a disc in
∂H0 intersecting P in an arc or the empty set. But then (7) in the definition of
normality is contradicted.                                                               □
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  20


   In an admissible handle structure, we permit some 0-handles of F to have zero
index. These give rise to the following types of handle of H.
Definition 5.6. Let H be a handle structure for (M, P ). A handle H of H is an
interior parallelity handle if one of the following holds:
    (1) it is a 0-handle disjoint from P , each 0-handle of F ∩ H has index zero and
         F ∩ H is connected;
    (2) it is a 1-handle disjoint from P and each 0-handle of F ∩ H has index zero;
    (3) it is a 2-handle.
Each interior parallelity handle can be given a product structure D2 × I so that the
intersection with any other 0-handle, 1-handle or 2-handle is of the form α×I where
α is a union of arcs in ∂D2 . These product structures are viewed as forming an I-
bundle structure and this I-bundle structure can be chosen compatibly over all the
parallelity handles. The union of the parallelity handles is the interior parallelity
bundle for H.
   We will define more general versions of this structure in Section 14, which will
give rise to ‘parallelity bundles’. These important subsets of a handle structure have
had numerous applications, for example [14]. We recall the following terminology.
Definition 5.7. Let B be an I-bundle over a surface F . Then its vertical boundary
∂v B is the I-bundle over ∂F , and its horizontal boundary ∂h B is the (∂I)-bundle
over F .
   When we decompose a handle structure H along a normal surface, we would
like the resulting handle structure H′ to be simpler than H, in some sense. The
measure of complexity that we will use is as follows.
Definition 5.8. Define the q-complexity cq (H) to be
                              X
                                (max{I(H), 0})2 ,
                                 H
where the sum is taken over 0-handles H of H. Here, ‘q’ stands for ‘quadratic’.
Proposition 5.9 (Decomposition and q-complexity). Let H be an admissible han-
dle structure for (M, P ). Let S be a compact orientable connected non-separating
properly embedded normal surface. Let H′ be the handle structure obtained from H
by cutting along S. Then cq (H′ ) ≤ cq (H). Moreover, if this is an equality, then S
is homologous in H2 (M, ∂M ) to a vertical surface in the interior parallelity bundle
for H.
Proof. Consider any 0-handle H of H. By Lemma 5.2, the sum, over all 0-handles
H ′ of H ∩ H′ , of I(H ′ ) is equal to I(H). By Lemma 5.5, each 0-handle H ′ has
non-negative index. Hence,
                                 X
                                     I(H ′ )2 ≤ I(H)2 ,
                                 H′
with equality if and only at most one 0-handle of H ∩ H′ has positive index and
the remaining components have zero index. We deduce that cq (H′ ) ≤ cq (H).
   Suppose that this is an equality. We will show that S is homologous to a surface
in B. Consider a component S ′ of S\\B. We will define a transverse orientation
on S ′ and will show that S ′ with this transverse orientation is homologous to a
2-chain in ∂M ∪ B. Since S ′ is connected, this transverse orientation is either the
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  21


same as or opposite to the one it inherits from S. Hence, S ′ is homologous in
H2 (M \\B, ∂(M \\B)) to a 2-chain in B. Since this is true for each component of
S\\B, we deduce that S is homologous to a 2-chain in B.
    We first define the transverse orientation on the components of S ′ ∩ H0 . Each
such component lies within a 0-handle H of H not lying in B. This 0-handle cannot
be disjoint from the 1-handles, since it would then form a 3-ball component of M ,
which cannot contain a properly embedded non-separating surface. It therefore
has at least one 0-handle of F (H). It cannot be the case that all 0-handles of
H ∩ F(H) have zero index since H would then be part of the interior parallelity
bundle, contrary to assumption. So H ∩ F(H) has positive index. This is the same
index as a unique 0-handle H ′ of H ∩ H′ . The remaining 0-handles of H ∩ H′ have
zero index. We orient this component of S ′ ∩ H0 away from H ′ . This transverse
orientation extends over the components of S ′ ∩H1 as follows. Each such component
lies within a 1-handle H1 that has two components of intersection with F 0 (H).
Since H is admissible and H1 does not lie in the interior parallelity bundle, these
two components of F 0 (H) have positive index. They are divided up by S ′ into
components of F 0 (H′ ). In each of these two components of F 0 (H), exactly one of
these components of F 0 (H′ ) has positive index. The adjacent discs of S ′ ∩ H0 point
away from this. Hence, we may extend the transverse orientation consistently over
the components of S ′ ∩ H1 . Note that S ′ is actually disjoint from the 2-handles,
since these are part of the interior parallelity bundle.
    We now show that S ′ with this transverse orientation is homologous to a 2-chain
in B. Each component of S ′ ∩ Hi is a disc. It lies within a handle H of H. If we
were to cut H along this component of S ′ ∩ Hi , we would obtain two 3-balls. We
say that the 3-ball component into which this component points is associated with
it. The union of these balls forms a 3-chain, the boundary of which is the union of
S ′ and a 2-chain in ∂M ∪ B. Thus, S ′ is equal in H2 (M \\B, ∂(M \\B)) to a 2-chain
in B, and so S is equal in H2 (M, ∂M ) to a 2-chain in B with boundary in ∂M . By
replacing this 2-chain with a 2-chain that is equal in H2 (M, ∂M ), we may assume
that it is a surface properly embedded in B disjoint from ∂v B. Furthermore, we may
assume that it is incompressible and also admits no boundary compression discs
disjoint from ∂v B. Each component of such a surface is either vertical or horizontal
in B. But an orientable horizontal surface is homologically trivial. Hence, we have
shown that S is homologous to a vertical surface in B.                              □

Lemma 5.10 (Cutting along a vertical surface). Let (M, P ) be a compact orientable
3-manifold with a boundary pattern. Let H be an admissible handle structure for
(M, P ) and let B be its interior parallelity bundle. Let S be a vertical surface in
B that is properly embedded and non-separating in M . Then S may be placed in
normal form and when H is cut along S, the resulting handle structure H′ satisfies
cq (H′ ) = cq (H). Moreover, the following quantities do not increase and at least one
strictly decreases: the total number of components of F 1 in the 0-handles of H with
positive index, and the number of interior parallelity 0-handles.

Proof. The interior parallelity bundle is an I-bundle over a surface F . We give F a
handle structure as follows. Each i-handle of B vertically projects onto an i-handle
of F . In addition, we create a 0-handle of F for each component of ∂v B ∩ F 0 and a
1-handle of F for each component of ∂v B ∩ F 1 . We call the latter handles boundary
handles, since they form a regular neighbourhood of ∂F . They are added to ensure
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    22


that we really do have a handle structure for F . Without them, we would have
1-handles or 2-handles not completely attached to lower index handles.
   The vertical surface S projects to a simple closed curve C in F . We isotope
C so that it is normal in the handle structure of F . A corresponding isotopy of
S makes it normal. When C runs over any boundary 0-handles of F , then the
corresponding normal discs of S lie in 0-handles of H that are not parallelity 0-
handles and hence that have positive index. When we decompose along these discs,
then this reduces the number of components of F 1 in these handles. When C
runs through 0-handles in the interior of F , the corresponding normal discs of S
decompose interior parallelity 0-handles of H. This reduces the number of such
0-handles.
   By Proposition 5.9, cq (H′ ) ≤ cq (H). In fact, this is an equality because the
effect on F of the decomposition is to remove some lines of index zero 0-handles
and 1-handles and replace them by two parallel arcs of pattern. Hence for any
0-handle H of H, its index is unchanged by the decomposition.                   □
  The following is easily verified.
Lemma 5.11. The algorithm Create admissible handle structure in Propo-
sition 5.4 does not increase any of the following quantities: the q-complexity of H,
the total number of components of F 1 in the 0-handles of H with positive index,
and the number of interior parallelity 0-handles.
  We are now in a position to complete the proof of Theorem 2.5.
Proof. We have proved one direction of the theorem in Lemma 3.3. Therefore, let
(M, P ) be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with an essential boundary
pattern. If M is closed, then we are assuming that it contains a properly embedded
orientable incompressible surface with no 2-sphere components. We must show that
(M, P ) admits an essential hierarchy.
   If M is closed, we can decompose along the hypothesised surface, and the re-
sulting manifold is irreducible by Lemma 3.9 and has non-empty boundary and
essential (empty) pattern. So we may assume that ∂M is non-empty.
   Let H be a handle structure for (M, P ). By Proposition 5.4, there is a decom-
position along non-trivial squares, after which the manifold (which we continue
to denote by (M, P )) has an admissible handle structure. By Lemma 3.12, these
squares are pattern-incompressible and they are automatically incompressible be-
cause they are discs. Hence, by Lemma 3.8, the resulting pattern is essential and
by Lemma 3.9, the manifold is irreducible.
   If ∂M has any sphere components, these bound 3-balls. Thus, we may assume
that ∂M is not a union of spheres. Therefore, b1 (M ) > 0, and so M contains a con-
nected properly embedded non-separating orientable surface. Let S be such a sur-
face with smallest pattern-complexity. By Corollary 3.7, S is pattern-incompressible
and incompressible. By Lemma 4.11, it may be placed into normal form.
   By Lemma 3.8, the manifold M ′ obtained by decomposing along S inherits an
essential boundary pattern and by Lemma 3.9, it is irreducible. By Proposition
5.9, the handle structure H′ that it inherits has q-complexity at most that of H.
Moreover, its q-complexity is strictly less unless S is homologous to a vertical surface
in the interior parallelity bundle.
   In the case where S is homologous to a vertical surface in the interior parallelity
bundle, we instead use Lemma 5.10 to decompose along such a surface. This leaves
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    23


cq (H) unchanged. But it decreases the quantity m(H) which is the sum of the total
number of components of F 1 in the 0-handles with positive index, and the number
of interior parallelity 0-handles.
    Thus, if we consider the ordered pair (cq (H), m(H)) and we compare such pairs
using lexicographical ordering, then we have reduced this pair. We now apply
Proposition 5.4 to turn H′ into an admissible handle structure. By Lemma 5.11,
this does not increase cq (H′ ) or m(H′ ). Thus, we can repeat with this new handle
structure. Since the complexity pairs are being reduced at each stage, this process
must terminate, and so creates an essential hierarchy for (M, P ).               □

      6. The algorithm to decide whether a pattern is essential
    In this section, we present our algorithm required by Theorem 1.3. Thus, we are
given a triangulation for a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M in which
P is simplicial, and we must decide whether P is essential. We may assume that
∂M is non-empty, as otherwise, the pattern is trivially essential. The first step is
to build a handle structure H for (M, P ). In our algorithm, we will store several
lists:
     (1) handle structures H1 , . . . , Hℓ for 3-manifolds M1 , . . . , Mℓ with boundary
         patterns P1 , . . . , Pℓ ;
     (2) normal surfaces S1 , . . . , Sℓ−1 , where each Si is a normal surface in Hi and
         where (Mi+1 , Pi+1 ) = (Mi , Pi )\\Si with Hi+1 its induced handle structure.
    The algorithm is as follows:
     (1) Set H1 to be the initial handle structure H and set ℓ to be 0.
     (2) Apply the algorithm Create admissible handle structure in Propo-
         sition 5.4 to Hℓ+1 . If this produces a violating disc D, go to Step (12).
     (3) If Proposition 5.4 creates an admissible handle structure, then add any
         decomposing squares that have been used to the hierarchy. Increase ℓ by 1
         (if no squares were used) or 2 (if squares were used).
     (4) Using linear algebra compute b1 (Mℓ ).
     (5) If b1 (Mℓ ) = 0, then go to Step (9).
     (6) By reaching this step, b1 (Mℓ ) must be positive. If there is a vertical
         connected surface in the interior parallelity bundle for Mℓ that is non-
         separating in Mℓ , let Sℓ be such a surface, isotoped so that is normal as in
         Lemma 5.10. Otherwise, let Sℓ be any connected, non-separating, properly
         embedded, oriented normal surface Sℓ in Mℓ . (See Theorem 6.2 below for
         a simple and fast construction of such a surface.)
     (7) Is some component of Sℓ a violating disc for (Mℓ , Pℓ )? If yes, then set D
         to be this component and go to Step (12).
     (8) Set (Mℓ+1 , Pℓ+1 ) to be (Mℓ , Pℓ )\\Sℓ and set Hℓ+1 to be its induced handle
         structure. Go to Step (2).
     (9) By reaching this step, b1 (Mℓ ) must be 0, and so ∂Mℓ must be a union of
         spheres. Examine whether the intersection of Pℓ with each such sphere is
         connected. If not, then we obtain a violating disc. Then examine all isotopy
         classes of simple closed loops in ∂Mℓ that intersect Pℓ transversely in at
         most 3 points. (Equivalently, consider whether the intersection between Pℓ
         and each component of ∂Mℓ is connected. If it is, examine all closed loops
         of length at most 3 in the dual graph.) For each such simple closed curve,
         determine whether it bounds a violating disc.
          INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                                                                                                                       24


  (10) If no violating disc is found, then (Mℓ , Pℓ ) is essential, and therefore by
       Theorem 2.5, so is (M, P ). In this situation, the algorithm terminates with
       a declaration that P is essential and it outputs the hierarchy that has been
       constructed.
  (11) By reaching this step, ∂Mℓ is a union of spheres and the algorithm has
       found a closed loop in ∂Mℓ that bounds a violating disc D.
  (12) Is D a violating disc for the initial manifold (M, P )? If so, then the al-
       gorithm terminates by declaring that P is inessential and it outputs the
       violating disc D.
  (13) By reaching this step, D must run over at least one surface in the hierarchy.
       Let Sj be the last surface in the hierarchy that intersects D.
  (14) Is D a compression disc or pattern-compression disc for Sj ? If not, then
       ∂D ∩ Sj must in fact be a boundary-parallel arc in Sj , separating off a disc
       D′ that intersects the pattern Pj at most once. Moreover, D ∪ D′ must be
       a violating disc for (Mj , Pj ). In this case, replace D by D ∪ D′ and go to
       Step (12).
  (15) By reaching this step, D forms a compression disc or pattern-compression
       disc for Sj in Mj . Compress or pattern-compress Sj along this disc to form
       a properly embedded surface. Perform isotopies and possibly compressions
       and pattern-compressions to this surface, and possibly discard components,
       to obtain a compact orientable connected properly embedded normal sur-
       face S j that is non-separating in Mj or that is a violating disc for Pj .
       Replace Sj by S j . Discard all later surfaces in the hierarchy. Set ℓ to be
       equal to j. Go to Step (7).


                                                                                    Start here.
                                                                                    Set H 1 = H.
                                                                                    Set l = 0. 1
    The hierarchy construction loop
                                                               Either convert H l+1 into an admissible                Set Ml+1 = Ml \\ Sl and
  Increase l by 1 (if no No                                    handle structure using decompositions
                                  Does this create a                                                                  let Hl+1 be the induced
  squares were used)                                           along non-trivial squares or provide
                                  violating disc?                                                                     handle structure
  or 2 (otherwise) 3                                     2     a violating disc
                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                     2
                                            Yes
                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                 No
                                                                                      Yes                                   6
   Compute                                 Yes    Is there a non-separating                    Set S l to be this surface
                    Is b1 (Ml ) > 0?              vertical surface in the interior                                                   Is some component
   b1(Ml ) 4                                                                                                                6                                    Yes Set D to be 7
                                       5          parallelity bundle for Hl ?                                                        of S l a violating
                                                                                            Find a connected orientable                                              this component
                         No                                                          No                                              disc for (Ml , Pl )? 7
                                                                                            non-separating properly
                                                                                            embedded normal surface S l



  Then ∂M l is spheres. Is                 Yes Pick a 11            Is this a 12               Let S j be the                   Is D a compression or         Yes Use D to simplify
                                                                                                                                                                                       15
  there a curve in ∂M l      9                 violating            violating disc             last surface that                pattern-compression               S j. Set l = j and
  bounding a violating disc?                                                              No
                                               disc D               for (M,P)?                 D runs over      13              disc for S j ?    14              discard later surfaces.
               No                                                     Yes                                                            No
                                                                                                                                                                The surface
                                                                                                                 ∂D ∩ Sj must be an arc separating
      P is essential    10                        12   P is inessential                     Replace D by                                                        simplification
                                                                                                                 off a disc D′ in S j that intersects
                                                                                            D ∪ D′    14                                                        process
                                                                                                                 the pattern at most once.            14




       Figure 11. The algorithm to determine whether a pattern is essential


Theorem 6.1 (The algorithm works). This algorithm terminates with the correct
declaration either that P is essential or that P is inessential. Moreover when P
is essential, the algorithm outputs an essential hierarchy for (M, P ). When P is
inessential, it outputs a violating disc.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                          25


Proof. It is clear that if the algorithm terminates, then its output is correct. For if
it terminates by declaring that P is inessential, then it does so because it has found
a violating disc. If it terminates by declaring that P is essential, then it does so
because it has found an essential hierarchy for (M, P ).
    We must show that the algorithm terminates. We first note that it cannot
remain in the hierarchy construction loop (Steps (2) to (8)) forever. Suppose that,
on the contrary, it does. Each time we go through Step (6), we have an admissible
handle structure Hℓ . If there is no non-separating vertical surface in the interior
parallelity bundle, then any connected normal orientable non-separating surface
is chosen or a violating disc is found. If a violating disc is found, then we leave
the hierarchy construction loop. If a connected normal orientable non-separating
surface is chosen, then by Proposition 5.9, cutting along this surface strictly reduces
the q-complexity cq (Hℓ ). When there is a vertical surface, then by Lemma 5.10,
cutting along it leaves cq (Hℓ ) unchanged, but it reduces m(Hℓ ). Then when the
handle structure is made admissible in Step (2) using Proposition 5.4, none of
these quantities increases. Hence, the ordered pair (cq (Hℓ ), m(Hℓ )) decreases at
each stage. But this contradicts the fact that these pairs are well-ordered.
    So, if the algorithm does not terminate, it must leave the hierarchy construction
loop infinitely often. Index these occurrences by the natural numbers i. At the ith
stage, let
                                               (S1i , . . . , Sℓ(i)
                                                               i
                                                                    )
be the partial hierarchy that is currently stored. When the algorithm leaves the
hierarchy construction loop and does not immediately then terminate, a violating
disc D is found. Furthermore, D runs over at least one surface in the partial hier-
archy, unless the algorithm immediately terminates. Let Sji be the last surface that
it runs over. Suppose first that D is not a compression disc or pattern-compression
disc for Sji . Then D ∩ Sji is either a simple closed curve that bounds a disc in Sji or
an arc in Sji that separates off a disc in Sji intersecting Pj at most once. If D ∩ Sji is
a simple closed curve bounding a disc D′ in Sj , then D ∪D′ is a sphere. By the irre-
ducibility of M , this bounds a ball in M . The boundary of this ball is disjoint from
the surfaces S1i , . . . , Sj−1
                            i
                                  . Hence, each of these surfaces must be disjoint from the
ball, by our assumption that each surface is either connected and non-separating or
a disjoint union of non-trivial squares. Thus, D ∪ D′ bounds a ball in Mj . None of
                          i              i
the later surfaces Sj+1       , . . . , Sℓ(i) can enter this ball, again by our assumption that
each is either connected and non-separating or a disjoint union non-trivial squares.
Therefore, D′ lies in Mℓ(i) and its interior is disjoint from Pℓ(i) . This contradicts
the assumption that D is a violating disc for (Mℓ(i) , Pℓ(i) ). Suppose now that D ∩Sji
is an arc in Sji that separates off a disc D′ in Sji intersecting Pj at most once. Then
D ∪ D′ is a disc properly embedded in Mj intersecting the pattern at most twice.
Suppose that this is not a violating disc for (Mj , Pj ). Then ∂(D ∪ D′ ) bounds a
disc D′′ in ∂Mj that intersects Pj either in a single arc of the empty set. The union
of these three discs bounds a ball that none of the earlier surfaces or later surfaces
can enter. Hence, D′ ∪ D′′ contains an arc or tripod of Pℓ(i) . This contradicts the
fact that D is a violating disc for (Mℓ(i) , Pℓ(i) ). Hence, the algorithm does produce
a violating disc for (Mj , Pj ), as claimed in Step (14).
    Hence, the algorithm eventually produces a compression or pattern-compression
disc for some Sji and the later surfaces are discarded. This reduces χp (Sji ). Now,
χp (S1i ) can decrease only finitely many times. Hence, there is some point after
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                       26


which S1i remains unchanged. Let S1 be this final surface. After this point, the
manifold obtained by cutting along S1 remains unchanged. We therefore consider
the surfaces S2i after this point. Again, these can change only finitely many times,
and so there is some final surface S2 . Repeating this process, we obtain an infinite
sequence of surfaces S1 , S2 , . . . . We must show that this cannot occur. Let Hj be
the handle structure obtained from H by cutting along S1 , . . . Sj .
   Now we note that if some surface in one of these hierarchies is a disc that inter-
sects the pattern four times, and at some stage we decrease its pattern-complexity,
then this creates a violating disc. This is then used to simplify an earlier surface in
the hierarchy. Thus, none of the surfaces Sj in our infinite list is obtained from a
square by pattern-compressing.
   Thus, the surfaces S1 , S2 , . . . and handle structures H1 , H2 , . . . have the follow-
ing property. Suppose that some Hj is admissible. If there is no non-separating
vertical surface in the interior parallelity bundle, then Sj is some connected normal
orientable non-separating surface. On the other hand, if there is such a vertical
surface, then Sj is as in Lemma 5.10. Then the next surfaces after Sj are possible
squares. The result is an admissible handle structure, and so on. As argued in the
proof of Theorem 2.5, this is impossible, because the ordered pair (cq (Hj ), m(Hj ))
decreases as we pass from one admissible handle structure to the next one.                □

   One reason why the above algorithm works so well is that, in a compact ori-
entable 3-manifold M with b1 (M ) > 0, it is a very easy to construct a connected,
non-separating, properly embedded, oriented surface. We make this precise in the
following theorem. This seems to be well known, but it is so central to the efficiency
of our algorithm that we give a proof.
Theorem 6.2 (Build non-separating surface). There is an algorithm that
takes, as its input, a triangulation T or handle structure H for a compact orientable
3-manifold M with boundary pattern P , and with b1 (M ) > 0. In the case where
∂M is non-empty, we also assume that H has no 3-handles. The algorithm builds
a connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented, normal surface S with
weight at most c|T | or extended weight at most c|H| . Here, c is a constant that is
universal in the case of a triangulation. In the case of a handle structure, c depends
on the number N , which is the maximum, over each 0-handle of H, of the number
of components of intersection between the 0-handle and each of the following: the
1-handles, the 2-handles, the vertices of P and the edges of P . The running time
is bounded above by a polynomial function of |T | or |H|, where the polynomial is
universal for triangulations and depends on N in the case of handle structures.
Proof. Let us initially assume that M is given via a triangulation T , since this case
is more straightforward.
   We are assuming that H 1 (M ) is non-zero. Any non-zero element of this group
can be represented by a simplicial 1-cocycle, and indeed such a 1-cocycle is unique
if we require that its evaluation on each edge in some given maximal tree in the
1-skeleton is zero. So, one can set up a system of linear equations, with a vari-
able for each oriented edge not in this tree, and an equation specifying that the
total evaluation around each face is zero. Then any non-zero real solution to these
equations represents a non-trivial element of H 1 (M ; R). In fact, one can ensure
that the coefficients of this element are rational, by imposing enough extra con-
straints specifying that some edges have zero evaluation, until the solution space is
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    27


1-dimensional, and then requiring that the sum of the coefficients is 1. Then we can
multiply through by a suitable integer to obtain a non-zero solution with integer
coefficients, which is a 1-cocycle representing a non-trivial element of H 1 (M ).
    The size of the co-ordinates of this solution are bounded above by 212|T | for the
following reason. The system of equations has at most n = E − V + 1 variables,
where E and V are the number of edges of T . This is because a maximal tree has
V − 1 edges in it. Note that E − V + 1 ≤ E ≤ 6|T |. There is an equation for
each face, as well as an equation that requires that the sum of the coefficients is 1.
We also have extra conditions that require that some edges evaluate to zero. These
equations are combined into a single matrix equation Av = w, where A represents
the above equations, v is the solution, and w is the vector with all zeroes except the
final entry, which is 1. We are assuming that the kernel of A is zero, and hence the
rank of A is equal to the number of variables. There is a square submatrix B of A
with the same number of columns of A having the same rank. Thus B is invertible.
We have Bv = w′ , where w′ consists of some of the entries of w, and so all entries
are zero apart from one. Then v = B −1 w′ . Note that B −1 = (det(B))−1 adj(B),
where det(B) is the determinant of B and adj(B) is the adjugate matrix. We can
obtain an integral solution by multiplying through by det(B). Each co-ordinate of
this integral solution is an entry of the adjugate matrix, which is the determinant
of a minor of B. The size   √ of this  is at most the product of the l2 norms of the
rows, which is at most 3 n ≤ 2 ≤ 212|T | , as required. Note that the procedure
                          n        2n

used to produce this solution runs in polynomial time, since it involves computing
(n − 1)2 determinants.
    From this, one can build a properly embedded surface representing an element
of H2 (M, ∂M ) dual to this 1-cocycle c, as follows. First, for each edge e of the
triangulation, place a collection of |c(e)| points along the interior of the edge. These
will be the intersection points between e and the surface. Pick a circular ordering
on the edges of each face. Since the evaluation of c around the face is zero, we may
join the points in the edges in pairs by a collection of disjoint normal arcs, so that
for each arc, one endpoint lies on an edge with positive evaluation and one endpoint
lies on an edge with negative evaluation. These arcs form the intersection between
the surface and the face. In the boundary of each tetrahedron, these arcs combine
to form a collection of normal curves, each with length three or four, and we may
fill these in with normal triangles and squares. The result is a compact oriented
properly embedded surface dual to c. Any component of this surface can be used
as the required surface S. Such a component can be found using the algorithm of
Agol, Hass and Thurston [1, Corollary 17].
    We now consider the case where M comes equipped with a handle structure
H. When ∂M is non-empty, we are assuming that H has no 3-handles. This
determines a cell structure on M , as follows. Each handle becomes a 3-cell. The
2-cells arise from the components of intersection between handles, as well as the
components of intersection between a handle and ∂M \\P . Some of these surfaces
might not be discs, in which case we decompose them along arcs forming 1-cells,
until they become discs. We will explain how to do this below. The remaining
1-cells arise from the components of intersection between any three handles, as well
as the components of intersection between pairs of handles and ∂M \\P , and also
the components of intersection between a handle and an edge of P . Finally, the
0-cells arise as follows: the components of intersection between four handles; the
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     28


components of intersection between any three handles and ∂M \\P ; the components
of intersection between any two handles and P ; the vertices of P . One arrangement
when non-disc components of intersection between handles arises is when a 1-handle
of H is disjoint from H2 and P . In that case, we insert a single vertical 1-cell running
along the 1-handle. The other scenario where non-disc components arise is in the
boundary of a 0-handle, since the intersection between the 0-handle and ∂M \\P
or H3 may have components other than discs. In that case, we insert properly
embedded 1-cells into the planar surface, but without adding any new 0-cells.
   We now pick a maximal tree in the 1-skeleton of this cell structure. Our approach
will depend on whether M is closed or has non-empty boundary. When M is closed,
we pick a maximal tree in the 1-skeleton of each 3-handle. The union of these trees
forms a forest in M . In each 1-handle disjoint from the 2-handles, we also add
the new vertical 1-cell to this forest. We then extend this to a maximal tree in
all of M . The effect of this is that, for each 1-cocycle c that is zero on the edges
in the maximal tree, the evaluation of each 1-cell in each 3-handle is zero. This is
automatic for 1-cells in the maximal tree. But for any other 1-cell in a 3-handle, the
evaluation of c on that edge is equal to the evaluation of the loop that runs along
the edge, then through the maximal tree back to the start of the edge. This loop lies
entirely in the 3-handle, and so is homotopically trivial, and hence its evaluation
is zero, as claimed. When M has non-empty boundary, we pick a maximal tree
in the 1-skeleton of each 2-handle and again any new vertical edges in a 1-handle
are included in this forest. We also add each component of P ∩ H1 to this forest.
Furthermore, for each disc component of H1 ∩ ∂M , we pick one of its arcs of
intersection with H0 and we declare that all but one of the 1-cells in that arc lies
in the forest. We again extend this to a maximal tree in M . This has the effect
that the evaluation of each 1-cell in each 2-handle is actually zero.
   As above, such cocycles c are solutions to a system of linear equations. The
variables correspond to the oriented 1-cells not in the maximal tree, and there is
an equation for each 2-cell. The argument above also gives that there is a non-zero
integral cocycle with the property that its value on each 1-cell has modulus that is
bounded above by an exponential function of |H|, where the exponent only depends
on the uniform type of H.
   We now construct a surface S that is dual to this 1-cocycle c. For each 1-cell e, we
insert |c(e)| points into its interior. These will be the points of intersection between
S and e. Each 2-cell is a polygon, and we have specified the intersection between S
and the boundary of this polygon. Since the total evaluation of the oriented edges
in this boundary is zero, we can insert transversely oriented arcs into the interior
of the polygon joining these points. Note that the 1-cells that are vertical in the
1-handles have zero evaluation, for the following reason. Each such 1-cell is either in
the boundary of a 3-handle, or in the intersection between a 2-handle and ∂M , or is
an inserted 1-cell in a 1-handle disjoint from the 2-handles. For each such 1-cell, its
evaluation is zero. Each 2-cell in the vertical boundary of a 1-handle has four sides,
and we have just shown that the two vertical sides have zero evaluation. Hence, the
remaining two sides have the same evaluation. So the arcs that we insert into such
a 2-cell can be isotoped to be vertical. We can also ensure that the arcs in the two
polygons at the ends of this 1-handle correspond via the product structure. In the
boundary of each handle, these arcs patch together to form closed curves. We can
insert discs into the handle bounded by these curves. The result is a transversely
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   29


oriented, properly embedded surface dual to c. It is standard because it is disjoint
from the 3-handles and respects the product structure of the other handles of H.
For 1-handles, we have already arranged this. For 2-handles in a closed 3-manifold
M , this follows from the fact that the surface misses the 3-handles and intersects
each 1-cell in points of the same sign. When M has non-empty boundary, the
surface misses the 2-handles. Note also that all the points of intersection between
the surface and any arc component of H0 ∩ H1 ∩ ∂M have the same sign.
   We need to arrange that this surface is in fact normal. We observe that when
M is closed, we have in fact already arranged this. When M is closed, the only
normality condition that is not automatic is (3) of Definition 4.6. However, for
each disc that we have inserted into a 0-handle, it runs over each component of F 1
at most once. For if it ran over a component of F 1 more than once, then there
would be two arcs of intersection in that component of F 1 with opposite transverse
orientations. However, all the arcs of intersection between S and any component
of F 1 are compatibly oriented.
   We now deal with the case where M has non-empty boundary. Each component
of S ∩ H0 intersects each component of ∂F 0 \\(P ∪ F 1 ) and each component of
intersection between the edges of P and H0 at most once, since S intersects each
such component in points of the same sign. (This latter property is convenient at
this stage, but we will not maintain it in the modifications that we make below.)
So this results in finitely many types of disc in S ∩ H0 . For each such disc type D,
we define its complexity to be |D ∩ P |2 + |D ∩ F 1 |2 . This quantity is bounded above
by a constant depending only on the type of H. The complexity of S is equal to the
sum of the complexities of its disc types. Note that in this sum, we only consider
one disc of S ∩ H0 of each type in each 0-handle. Hence, the complexity is bounded
above by a constant times |H0 |, where the constant only depends on the uniform
type of H.
   We now examine the normality conditions (1)-(7) from Definition 4.6. Conditions
(1) and (2) are automatically satisfied. In our setting, S is disjoint from the 2-
handles, and so (3) and (5) are satisfied. If a curve of S∩∂H0 intersects a component
of ∂H0 − (F ∪ P ) in more than one arc, contradicting (4), then we can pattern
compress such a disc. We can pattern compress all discs of this type. For each such
disc, this creates two discs D1 and D2 . Discs of these types may already exist in S,
but this does not affect our argument. The points of intersection between D and P
are shared out between D1 and D2 . The same is true for D ∩ F 1 . Hence, the total
complexity of S decreases. Note that when a pattern-compression is performed,
then the class that S represents in H2 (M, ∂M ) is unchanged. A similar argument
works when (6) in the definition of normality is violated. We pattern compress the
disc D to discs D1 and D2 . This introduces two points of intersection with P , but
the complexity of these discs still decreases. Finally note that condition (7) must
be satisfied, since if it were not, then we obtain two points of intersection between
S and a component of H1 ∩ H0 ∩ ∂M that are oriented towards or away from each
other, contrary to our construction. Thus we have constructed a normal surface.
Any component of this is our required normal surface.                                □


Remark 6.3. While this gives a simple construction of some surface S, mostly
using only elementary linear algebra, it is not necessary to follow this construction
in step (6) of the above algorithm to determine whether a boundary pattern is
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  30


essential. Indeed, any connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented,
normal surface can be used.
Remark 6.4. When Theorem 6.2 is applied to a handle structure H, both the
upper bound on the extended weight of the surface and the running time of the
algorithm depend on the quantity N . In most applications, N is bounded above by
a universal constant. For example, this is true when H is dual to a triangulation of
M in which P is simplicial. More generally, we will see in Section 11 that typically
H can be arranged to be of ‘uniform type’ as one proceeds down a hierarchy. This
term is defined in Definition 11.2, but it implies that N is bounded above by a
universal constant.

                                 7. An example
    We give an example of this algorithm in practice. We use it to show that the
tripus 3-manifold has incompressible boundary. This manifold is shown in (i) of
Figure 12. There, a 3-ball (represented by the outer circle) is shown, containing
a properly embedded graph. The tripus manifold is the exterior of this graph.
It is a famous example of a 3-manifold admitting a hyperbolic structure with to-
tally geodesic boundary. Totally geodesic boundary components of a hyperbolic
3-manifold are always incompressible. However, the application of our algorithm
gives a straightforward alternative proof of this.
    The first decomposing surface is a thrice-punctured sphere as shown in (ii) of
Figure 12. The exterior of this surface, with its boundary pattern, is shown in
(iii). The next surface is the four discs shown in red in (iv). The exterior of these
discs is two 3-balls. Their boundary patterns are shown in (v) and (vi). It is easily
checked that they are essential. Hence, the empty boundary pattern for the tripus
manifold is essential. In other words, the boundary is incompressible. Furthermore,
the manifold is irreducible.
    A skeptical reader may object that we have not quite followed the algorithm
from Section 6, in several ways. We have not specified an initial handle structure H
for the manifold. Of course we could have done so, and we could have realised the
first surface as normal, and we could have decomposed H along it, thereby forming
a new handle structure H2 , and so on. Although a computer implementation would
have used handle structures, we have chosen to avoid them in this example, for ease
of exposition.
    We deviated from the algorithm in another way, because the second surface is a
union of discs which is separating, whereas the surfaces in Step (6) are required to
be connected and non-separating. However, we could instead have chosen three of
the four discs, and decomposed along of each of these in turn. These are connected
and non-separating. The resulting manifold would have been a single 3-ball. Its
boundary pattern would have been essential, by an application of Lemma 3.2 and
because decomposition along the fourth disc gives an essential pattern. We chose
to decompose along four discs rather than three, again for ease of visualisation and
exposition.
    A reader may also object that we have been very fortuitous that we did not need
to leave the hierarchy construction loop. So suppose instead that we had initially
used a slightly different set of decomposing surfaces. Suppose that we used the
same first surface, but that the second surface was a slightly different collection
of discs S2 , as shown in (i) of Figure 13. Then when we decompose along these
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                       31




            (i) The tripus manifold           (ii) The first surface in the hierarchy




        (iii) The exterior of this surface   (iv) Four discs forming the next surface




               (v) The top 3-ball                     (vi) The bottom 3-ball


            Figure 12. An essential hierarchy for the tripus manifold

discs, we get two three balls, with boundary patterns as shown in (ii) and (iii). The
pattern in (ii) is inessential; a curve bounding a violating disc D is shown. This
would have been discovered in step (9) of the algorithm. It runs over one of the
discs in S2 . When we pattern-compress S2 along D, the result is five discs, one of
which is boundary-parallel. Removing this from the collection, we obtain the four
discs described in Figure 12 (iv). Hence, the algorithm would again terminate with
the correct declaration that the boundary of the tripus manifold is incompressible.

             8. The algorithm to determine incompressibility
  In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.1.
Lemma 8.1. Let S be a compact orientable surface properly embedded in a compact
orientable 3-manifold M . Let D be a compression disc for ∂M that is disjoint from
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                       32



             Note that the top
             left disc is different
             from the one in the
             previous hierarchy




                               (i) An alternative collection of four discs
            boundary of a          forming the second surface of a
            violating disc         hierarchy for the tripus manifold




               (ii) The top 3-ball                            (iii) The bottom 3-ball

        Figure 13. An alternative decomposing surface. A curve bound-
        ing a violating disc is shown.

S. Then S is incompressible in M if and only if it is incompressible in M \\D. Also,
S is boundary-incompressible in M if and only if it is boundary-incompressible in
M \\D.
Proof. One direction is clear. A compression or boundary-compression disc for S in
M \\D can be slid off the copies of D in ∂(M \\D). It then becomes a compression
or boundary-compression disc for S in M .
   Suppose that D′ is a compression or boundary-compression disc for S in M . The
intersection between this and D is a collection of simple closed curves and properly
embedded arcs. Consider a simple closed curve that is innermost in D. It bounds
a disc in D. We may surger D′ along this disc, and remove the resulting 2-sphere
component. The result is a new compression or boundary-compression disc for S
that intersects D a fewer number of times. Hence, we may assume that D ∩ D′
contains no simple closed curves. When D′ is a compression disc, this implies that
D ∩ D′ = ∅, since if there were an arc of intersection, its boundary would lie in S,
whereas D is assumed to be disjoint from S. So suppose that D′ is a boundary-
compression disc for S. Now consider an arc of D′ ∩ D that is outermost in D. It
separates off a sub-disc in D with interior disjoint from D′ . We may surger D′ along
this disc, giving two discs D1′ and D2′ . One of these is a boundary-compression disc
for S. Hence, again by minimising |D ∩ D′ |, we may assume that D ∩ D′ = ∅. But
then D′ lies in M \\D, and it forms a compression or boundary-compression disc
for S in M \\D.                                                                     □
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   33


Theorem 8.2 (Determining incompressibility and boundary-incompress-
ibility). There is an algorithm that takes, as its input a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold M and a compact orientable properly embedded surface S, and
determines whether S is incompressible and boundary-incompressible. Furthermore,
when S is compressible or boundary-compressible, the algorithm outputs a compres-
sion disc or a boundary-compression disc.
Proof. We may remove the disc components of S without affecting whether S is
compressible or boundary-compressible. So suppose that S has no disc components.
Give M the empty boundary pattern, and let P be the pattern that M \\S inherits.
Running the algorithm provided by Theorem 1.3 on (M \\S, P ) establishes whether
P is essential. Furthermore, when it is inessential, the algorithm provides a violating
disc.
   First suppose that P is essential. Then S is incompressible and boundary-
incompressible, by Lemma 3.2. Hence, in this case, our algorithm terminates with
the declaration that S is incompressible and boundary-incompressible.
   Now suppose that P has a violating disc D. Then ∂D intersects P an even
number of times, since P is where the copies of S in ∂(M \\S) meet the parts of
the boundary coming from ∂M . So, ∂D intersects P zero times or twice. If ∂D
intersects P twice, then D forms a potential boundary-compression disc for S. If
this is an actual boundary-compression disc, then the algorithm terminates and
provides this disc. On the other hand, if D ∩ S separates off a subdisc D′ from
S, then D ∪ D′ yields a violating disc for P that is disjoint from P . So we may
suppose that ∂D is disjoint from P . It then lies in a copy of S or in ∂M \\S. In the
former case, D is a compression disc for S. Suppose that D lies in ∂M \\S. If it
forms a compression disc for ∂M , then we cut M along D and by Lemma 8.1, S is
compressible or boundary-compressible in M \\D if and only if it was beforehand.
Thus, we can work with this new manifold, which has boundary with higher Euler
characteristic. Suppose that D is not a compression disc for ∂M . Then ∂D bounds
a disc D′ in ∂M . The boundary of S must intersect this disc, since D is a violating
disc. Pick an innermost curve of ∂S ∩D′ in D′ . This bounds a disc in D′ that forms
a compression disc for S, since we are assuming that S has no disc components. □

Theorem 8.3 (Determining incompressibility). There is an algorithm that
takes, as its input, a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M and a compact
orientable properly embedded surface S, and determines whether S is incompress-
ible. Furthermore, when S is compressible, the algorithm outputs a compression
disc.
Proof. Again we may assume that S has no disc components. Give M the empty
boundary pattern, and let P be the pattern that M \\S inherits. Now replace
each curve of P by two parallel curves, forming a new pattern P ′ . The algorithm
given in Theorem 1.3 is then applied to (M \\S, P ′ ). If P ′ is essential, then S is
incompressible and the algorithm terminates with this declaration. So suppose that
P ′ has a violating disc D. The boundary of M \\S consists of parts coming from
S and parts coming from ∂M , and between these lie annuli lying between parallel
curves of P ′ . Hence, ∂D intersects P ′ an even number of times. Moreover, if it
intersects P ′ twice, then one arc of ∂D\\P ′ is boundary parallel in an annular
component of ∂(M \\S)\\P ′ . In that case, we may isotope ∂D to form a violating
disc disjoint from P ′ . So we may assume that D is disjoint from P ′ . It either
        INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                                         34


forms a compression disc for S or it is disjoint from S. In the former case, the
algorithm terminates and provides this disc D. In the latter case, it either forms
a compression disc for ∂M , in which case we compress along it and continue, or it
can be used to find a compression disc for S lying in ∂M .                       □

                                     9. The number of steps
    There are various steps in the algorithm from Theorem 1.3 that are not described
with enough precision to be able to estimate their running time. So, we will initially
content ourselves with an analysis of the number of times that the algorithm goes
through any of the steps in Section 6. We do this in terms of two quantities:
     (1) the maximal length L of any of the hierarchies; thus the variable ℓ will be
          at most L throughout;
     (2) the maximal pattern-complexity g of any decomposing surface.
At present, we will not attempt to bound these two quantities. But we can bound
the number of steps in the algorithm in terms of L and g.
    When the algorithm is in the hierarchy construction loop, namely Steps (2)-(8),
it continues until a violating disc is found or until it reaches a manifold Mℓ+1 with
b1 (Mℓ+1 ) = 0. The number of times it can iterate this loop is at most L. By
this stage, we have produced a list of surfaces S1 , . . . , Sℓ with pattern-complexity
χp (S1 ), . . . , χp (Sℓ ). It may be the case that the final surface Sℓ has negative pattern-
complexity, in which case it is a violating disc (because it is assumed to be connected
and non-separating), and we do not include it in this list. The algorithm then
proceeds through the surface simplification process, namely Steps (9)-(15). If it
does not terminate here, then we pattern-compress or compress some Sj and thereby
reduce its pattern-complexity by at least one. We discard the later surfaces and
return to Step (7) to create new ones.
    In order to find an upper bound on the number of times we can leave the hierarchy
construction loop, we define the (g, L)-complexity of the hierarchy S1 , . . . , Sℓ to be
                                         ℓ
                                         X
                                               χp (Si )(g + 1)L−i .
                                         i=1

In other words, we extend the list χp (S1 ), . . . , χp (Sℓ ) to one of length L by adding
zeroes, and then we view this L-tuple of integers as the digits of a number in base
g + 1. This number is the (g, L)-complexity. Importantly, it goes down by at
least one between successive occasions where we leave the hierarchy construction
loop. This is where we compress or pattern-compress a surface Sj and we discard
the later surfaces beyond Sj . When new ones are created to replace them, all we
have is an upper bound of g on their pattern-complexity. Thus, the L-tuple of
pattern-complexities might change as follows:
 (χp (S1 ), . . . , χp (Sj ), χp (Sj+1 ), . . . , χp (SL )) −→ (χp (S1 ), . . . , χp (Sj ) − 1, g, . . . , g).
But if we view these L-tuples as the digits of a number in base g +1, we see that this
number has gone down by at least 1. Since the (g, L)-complexity is never more than
(g + 1)L , we deduce that the number of times we leave the hierarchy construction
loop is at most (g + 1)L . Hence, the number of times that we perform any step of
the algorithm is at most L(g + 1)L . The extra factor L is because we may go round
the hierarchy construction loop at most L times before leaving it. We summarise
this as follows.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  35


Proposition 9.1 (Number of iterations). The number of times that the above
algorithm can iterate through any step is at most L(g + 1)L , where L is the maximal
length of any of the hierarchies and g is the maximum pattern-complexity of any of
the surfaces.

      10. A refined algorithm using interior parallelity bundles
    We saw in Proposition 9.1 that the quantity L, which provides an upper bound
to the length of any of the partial hierarchies that we construct, is key to control-
ling the running time of the algorithm. With our current algorithm, it is not so
straightforward to give good estimates on L. This is because the proof at the end of
Section 5 that the hierarchies terminate uses the ordered pairs (cq (H), m(H)). Al-
though lexicographical ordering on these pairs is enough to establish termination,
it does not establish how quickly this happens. Now under many circumstances
cq (H) strictly decreases. The quantity m(H) only becomes relevant when H has a
non-separating vertical surface in its interior parallelity bundle. Therefore, in this
section, we show how we may remove every component of the interior parallelity
bundle that is not an I-bundle over a disc. This will lead to a somewhat more
complicated algorithm. But it will mean that we can provide a linear bound on
L in terms of the initial q-complexity of H. The first change that we make to the
algorithm is as follows.
First modification to the algorithm: After Step (2), once the handle structure has
been made admissible, we then do the following:
   (2′ ) Replace each component of the interior parallelity bundle that is an I-
         bundle over a disc by a single 2-handle.
  (2′′ ) Cut along the vertical boundary components of the remaining I-bundles and
         further decompose these using squares into 3-balls with essential boundary
         patterns.
   This ensures that the resulting 3-manifold has interior parallelity bundle that
consists solely of 2-handles and hence cannot contain a non-separating vertical sur-
face. Therefore, by Proposition 5.9, the q-complexity cq (Hi ) of the handle structure
Hi strictly decreases when we decompose along a connected non-separating normal
surface Si .
   However, this algorithm has an extra complication. In the previous algorithm
described in Section 6, if a non-trivial square was found to be pattern-compressible,
this led to a violating disc. This is in turn was used to simplify an earlier surface
in the hierarchy. Hence, pattern-compressed squares never survive in the hierarchy.
But what about the annuli that are used in step (2′′ )? What if these are compressed
or pattern-compressed? We now explain how to deal with this situation.
Proposition 10.1 ((Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary). Let M be
a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold other than a 3-ball, and let P be a
boundary pattern for M . Let H be an admissible handle structure for (M, P ). Let
B be a component of the interior parallelity bundle B that is not an I-bundle over
a disc, and let A be a vertical boundary component of B. Suppose that A has a
pattern-compression or compression disc E. Then there is an algorithm that, given
H, A and E, either creates a handle structure for (M, P ) with smaller q-complexity
or produces a violating disc for (M, P ).
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    36


Proof. Suppose first that E is a pattern-compression disc. Pattern-compress A
along E to form a properly embedded disc D. If this is a violating disc, then the
algorithm produces this disc and stops. So, suppose that D is not violating. Its
boundary therefore bounds a disc D′ in ∂M that intersects P either in the empty
set or a single arc. Since M is irreducible, D ∪ D′ bounds a 3-ball in M . If the arc
D ∩ ∂M is disjoint from D′ , then we deduce that A is parallel to an annulus A′ in
∂M that intersects P either in the empty set or a single core curve. On the other
hand, if D ∩ ∂M lies in D′ , then we deduce that A is compressible. Indeed one of
the discs of D′ \\∂A forms a compression disc for A when pushed a little into the
interior of M . We will later examine the case where A is compressible, and so we
now suppose that A is parallel to the annulus A′ .
   Consider first the case where the solid torus between A and A′ contains B.
Then we remove this solid torus from the handle structure, thereby removing this
component of B and possibly others. If A′ contained a core curve of P , then we
transfer this across to A. This has the effect of replacing some components of
F 0 (H) and F 1 (H) by an arc of P , which does not increase the q-complexity of
H. Moreover, the solid torus cannot be an entire component of B, and so it must
contain a 0-handle of H of positive index. So removing this solid torus strictly
reduced cq (H).
   So, suppose that the interior of B is disjoint from this solid torus. If B is an
I-bundle over a disc, then this implies that M is a 3-ball which is contrary to one
of the hypotheses of the proposition. Suppose that B is an I-bundle over a surface
F with a single boundary component other than a disc. This then contains a non-
separating essential arc. The I-bundle over this arc, together with two meridian
discs for the solid torus, forms a violating disc for (M, P ). Suppose now that B is
an I-bundle over a surface with more than one boundary component. Pick an arc
in the base surface with exactly one endpoint on the boundary component that this
the image of A. Let A′′ be the vertical boundary component incident to the other
endpoint of this arc. The I-bundle over this arc, together with a meridian disc for
the solid torus, gives a pattern-compression disc for A′′ . If we pattern-compress
along this disc and we create a violating disc, then the algorithm outputs this. If it
does not create a violating disc, then again there are two cases. It might lead to a
compression disc for A′′ , which we will consider later. If not, then A′′ is parallel to
an annulus in ∂M intersecting P either in the empty set or a single core curve. But
now the region between A′′ and this annulus contains B. Hence, we may remove
this solid torus, thereby removing B from the handle structure.
   We now consider the case where A has a compression disc E. This compresses
D to two discs D1 and D2 . If one of ∂D1 or ∂D2 does not bound a disc in ∂M ,
then D1 or D2 is violating, and the algorithm outputs this disc. So we may suppose
that D1 and D2 are parallel to discs D1′ and D2′ in ∂M . It may be that D1′ and
D2′ are nested, in which case suppose that D1′ ⊂ D2′ . It may also be the case that
D1′ contains boundary components of ∂h B other than ∂D1′ . But by changing our
choice of A if necessary, we may assume that this is not the case. If one of D1′ or D2′
has non-empty intersection with the pattern, it forms a violating disc. So, suppose
that D1′ and D2′ are disjoint from the pattern.
   The first case we consider is where D1′ and D2′ are disjoint. Then D1′ ∪ A ∪
D2′ bounds a ball. This ball does not contain B because ∂h B has no boundary
components in D1′ , and B is not an I-bundle over a disc. We may modify the
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     37


handle structure in the ball by declaring that it is a single interior parallelity 0-
handle. This reduces the q-complexity of the handle structure.
   Suppose now that D1′ and D2′ are nested. Then D1′ lies within D2′ , by our earlier
assumption. The fact that B is not an I-bundle over a disc imply that the interior
of ∂D1′ is disjoint from B. Hence, B lies in the region between A and D2′ \\D1′ . We
remove this region from the handle structure. This reduces the q-complexity of the
handle structure.                                                                  □
  Thus, the algorithm in Section 6 is also modified as follows.
Further modification to the algorithm: In Step (13), we again consider a violating
disc D. This forms a pattern-compression disc for some surface Sj in the hierarchy.
If Sj is a square, then this creates a new violating disc. If Sj is the vertical boundary
of the interior parallelity bundle for Hj , we apply the algorithm in Proposition 10.1.
This either produces a violating disc or it simplifies Hj . In all other cases, we apply
Lemma 3.6 to create a non-separating connected orientable surface Sj with smaller
pattern complexity. We discard the rest of the hierarchy, and then proceed to Step
(14).
Proposition 10.2 (The refined algorithm works). Let M be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold, and let P be a boundary pattern. The above algorithm termi-
nates with the correct declaration either that P is essential or that P is inessential.
Moreover, the length of any of the partial hierarchies produced by the above algo-
rithm is at most 4cq (H).
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 6.1, it is clear that if the algorithm terminates,
then its output is correct.
    We start by bounding the length of the partial hierarchies that the algorithm
produces. Therefore consider one such partial hierarchy S1 , . . . , Sℓ , and let Hi be
the handle structure on for the manifold (Mi , Pi ) containing Si . We will show that
cq (Hi+4 ) < cq (Hi ) for each i. This will establish that ℓ ≤ 4cq (H).
    Certainly, cq (Hi+1 ) ≤ cq (Hi ) by Proposition 5.9 and Lemma 5.11. We must
show that at least every 4 steps, this quantity strictly decreases. To establish this,
we examine carefully how the algorithm works.
    The first thing that the algorithm does is to make the initial handle structure
admissible, using Create admissible handle structure in Proposition 5.4. It
then modifies the handle structure to ensure that the interior parallelity bundle is
just I-bundles over discs, or it finds a violating disc.
    The algorithm then proceeds by iterating the hierarchy construction loop. At
each stage through the loop, it cuts along a connected non-separating normal sur-
face, then possibly cuts along non-trivial squares to make the handle structure
admissible, then cuts along vertical boundary components of the interior parallelity
bundle and then vertical squares. After this stage, the interior parallelity bundle
again consists of I-bundles over discs.
    If at any stage, the algorithm leaves the hierarchy construction loop and does not
immediately terminate, it finds a compression disc or pattern-compression disc for
some Sj . When this Sj is a connected non-separating normal surface, a component
of the resulting surface is non-separating and it is normalised, and we work instead
with that surface. On the other hand, when Sj is a square or the vertical boundary
components of the interior parallelity bundle, then Sj is either used to produce a
further violating disc or it is used to simplify the handle structure; in both cases,
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                       38


it is discarded. Hence, in the list of surfaces S1 , . . . , Sℓ , either our given Si is
connected, normal and non-separating, or this is true for some Sj with j ≤ i + 3.
Therefore, cq (Hi+4 ) < cq (Hi ), as claimed.
    We now show that the algorithm terminates. At the ith stage, let (S1i , . . . , Sℓ(i)
                                                                                     i
                                                                                          )
be the partial hierarchy that is currently stored. As in the proof of Theorem 6.1, the
surface S1i must eventually stabilise at some surface S1 . This is because each time
that S1i is modified, either χp (S1i ) decreases (when a pattern-compression or pattern
compression is performed) or the q-complexity of the handle structure containing
S1i is reduced (as in (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary). We then
consider the next surfaces S2i . Again they eventually stabilise at some surface S2 .
This is for the same reason as above, plus the observation that when S2i is used
to create a violating disc, then either this leads to the algorithm terminating or
it is used to reduce the pattern-complexity of a previous surface. However, the
latter case does not arise because we are assuming that S1i does not change any
further. Repeating in this way, we create an infinite sequence of surfaces S1 , S2 , . . . .
However, this is impossible because we have just established an upper bound on
the length of any partial hierarchy created by the algorithm.                            □

                    11. Handle structures of uniform type
   Our algorithm starts with a handle structure H. We then decompose this handle
structure along a sequence of surfaces. Suppose that each of the 0-handles of the
initial handle structure H falls into one of finitely many ‘types’. For example, if H
had been dual to an ideal triangulation, then for each 0-handle H, its intersection
with F is a thickened version of the complete graph on 4 vertices. If H had been
dual to a triangulation, then for each 0-handle H, H ∩ F is a thickened version of
a subgraph of the complete graph on 4 vertices. We want to maintain this local
finiteness as we proceed down the hierarchy. In this section, we show how to achieve
this.
Definition 11.1. Let H and H ′ be 0-handles in handle structures H and H′ for
(M, P ) and (M ′ , P ′ ). We say that they have the same type if there is a homeo-
morphism H → H ′ sending H ∩ F 0 (H) homeomorphically to H ′ ∩ F 0 (H′ ), sending
homeomorphically H ∩F 1 (H) to H ′ ∩F 1 (H′ ), and sending H ∩P homeomorphically
to H ′ ∩ P ′ .
Definition 11.2. We say that a handle structure H has uniform type if there is a
finite list of handle types such that any 0-handle of H is one of these types.
    Of course, this definition only really makes sense if the list of handle types is
given in advance, and then the requirement that H is of uniform type forces its
0-handles to conform to this list of types. But this slightly imprecise wording is
useful, because it will be convenient occasionally to enlarge our finite list of types.
An example is given below in Theorem 11.3.
    It will be important that we only use handle structures of uniform type. This is
for many reasons. For example, if we wish to write down a normal surface, we will
typically do so using its normal vector, and it is therefore important that we can
list the different types of normal disc that can arise within a handle.
    The following result ensures that the handle structures in our partial hierarchies
have uniform type.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     39


Theorem 11.3 (Maintaining uniform type). Let H be a handle structure of uni-
form type for a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold M with boundary pattern
P . Let H′ be the handle structure of a 3-manifold M ′ with boundary pattern P ′
obtained from H by a finite sequence of the following moves:
    (1) decomposition along a normal surface that is disjoint from the interior par-
         allelity bundle, no component of which is a boundary-parallel disc, and ap-
         plied to an admissible handle structure;
    (2) application of Create admissible handle structure in Proposition
         5.4;
    (3) decomposition along vertical boundary components of the interior parallelity
         bundle;
    (4) application of (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary in Propo-
         sition 10.1.
Then H′ is of uniform type, although possibly with a larger set of handle types.
Moreover, when H′ is admissible and its interior parallelity bundle consists of I-
bundles over discs, then for each 0-handle H of H, there are only finitely many
possibilities for the following subsets:
    (1) the intersection between H and the 0-handles of H′ ;
    (2) H ∩ F 0 (H′ );
    (3) H ∩ F 1 (H′ );
    (4) H ∩ P ′ ,
up to the following operations:
    (1) isotopy of H preserving H ∩ H1 , H ∩ H2 and H ∩ P ;
    (2) removing a small collar neighbourhod of a subset of ∂M ′ ;
    (3) re-embedding H′ ∩ H in H in a way that leaves F 0 (H′ ), F 1 (H′ ) and P ′ ∩
         ∂F(H′ ) unchanged.
Remark 11.4. Note that we are only claiming fairly limited control over the
location of the 2-handles of H′ . We are specifying their attaching locus via H ∩
F 0 (H′ ) and H ∩F 1 (H′ ), but we do not specify where the remainder of the 2-handles
lie.
    The re-embedding of H′ ∩ H might require some further explanation. Suppose
that we had applied a sequence of modifications to H, giving the handle structure
H′ , and then suppose that we made some further modifications to give another
handle structure H′′ . Suppose that H′ ∩ H and H′′ ∩ H differ solely by a Dehn
twist about a disc properly embedded in M ′ and lying in H′ ∩ H. Then H′ ∩ H
and H′′ ∩ H would differ by operation (3) above, and so, for the purposes of this
proposition, would be viewed as equivalent.
Proof. We define a temporary notion of complexity for a 0-handle H of a handle
structure, called t-complexity. It will be a list of three integers. The first element of
the triple is the sum of the indices of the components of H ∩ F with positive index.
The second element is |H ∩ F 1 |. The third element is |H ∩ F 0 |. We compare two
such triples in the usual way, using lexicographical ordering. The set of triples is
then well-ordered.
   We will prove by induction on t-complexity that a 0-handle type H gives rise to
only finitely many handle types of H′ ∩ H under a sequence of the operations in (1)-
(4) above. Moreover, we will show that the union of the 0-handles of H′ ∩ H with
positive index embed in H in one of only finitely many ways, up to the equivalence
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     40


described in (1)-(3) at the end of the proposition. This will also establish the second
part of the proposition, because when H′ is admissible and its interior parallelity
bundle consists of I-bundles over discs, then all its 0-handles have positive index.
   The induction starts with H having t-complexity (0, 0, 0). Then H is an isolated
0-handle and none of the procedures in (1)-(4) affect it.
   We now prove the inductive step. We consider when one of procedures (1)-(4) is
applied to a 0-handle H. We may assume that the result is not a single 0-handle
H ′ that is the same type as H and where H ′ is obtained from H by removing a
small collar on a subset of ∂H, as in this case there is nothing to prove.
   In the procedure Create admissible handle structure, there are three
types of operation that are performed. One type is where we collapse a 1-handle
and 2-handle pair, where the 1-handle has at most two arcs of P running along
it. The effect on H ∩ F 0 is possibly to remove some components of H ∩ F 0 with
non-positive index. The effect on H ∩F 1 is to remove some components and replace
them by at most two parallel arcs of P ∩ H. This does not increase the index of
any component of H ∩ F. If H is modified, then it reduces at least one of |H ∩ F 1 |
and |H ∩ F 0 |, and it does not increase either of them. There are only finitely such
modifications that can be applied to H. Hence, the induction is proved in this case.
   The second type of operation in Create admissible handle structure is
the removal of isolated 0-handles of F with non-positive index. Each such operation
does not affect the index of the other components of F ∩ H. It leaves |H ∩ F 1 |
unchanged and it reduces |H ∩ F 0 |. Hence, again the inductive step is proved.
   The third type of operation in Create admissible handle structure is when
there is a simple closed curve C in ∂H\\F that intersects the pattern at most three
times. It is assumed that C does not bound a disc in ∂H but that it does bound a
disc in ∂M intersecting P in the empty set, an arc or a tripod. When ∂H\\(F ∪ P )
is not a union of discs, then C is chosen to be boundary parallel in a component of
∂H\\(F ∪ P ) that is not a disc. Hence, in that case, there are only finitely many
possibilities for C. On the other hand, when ∂H\\(F ∪ P ) is a union of discs, then
again there are only finitely many possibilities for C. Now C bounds a properly
embedded disc D in H, and the operation that is performed is to remove the 3-ball
separated off by D, and possibly to insert into D an arc or tripod. The effect of this
on H is to remove some components of F and to possibly insert some new pattern.
This does not increase the index of the components of H ∩ F, it does not increase
|H ∩ F 1 |, and it strictly reduces |H ∩ F 0 |. Hence again the inductive step is proved.
   The effect when we decompose along vertical boundary components of the in-
terior parallelity bundle is similar to the case of Create admissible handle
structure. The effect is to replace some components of H ∩ F 1 by two parallel
arcs of H ∩ P . This leaves index unchanged, but reduces |H ∩ F 1 |. It also removes
some components of H ∩ F 0 that are disjoint from P and that intersect F 1 in two
arcs, and replaces them by two arcs of P . Again, this leaves index unchanged, and
reduces |H ∩ F 0 |.
   In (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary, submanifolds of the man-
ifold are removed. The effect on H is either to remove it entirely (in which case
there is nothing to prove) or possibly to remove some components of F 1 and re-
place them with an arc of P , and possibly to remove some components of F 0 that
intersect F 1 in two arcs and are disjoint from P , and replace them with an arc of
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  41


P . As argued above, this does not increase the index of any component of F or
|H ∩ F 0 |, and it strictly reduces |H ∩ F 1 |.
   We now examine what happens when H is decomposed along a normal surface.
We are assuming that the handle structure is admissible in this case. Hence, every
0-handle of H ∩ F 0 has non-negative index. So, H has non-negative index. Fur-
thermore, if it has zero index, then it is an interior parallelity handle, and we are
assuming that the normal surface is disjoint from the interior parallelity bundle.
So, we may assume that the index of H is positive.
   The normal surface intersects H in discs. We can decompose along these one at
a time. So we focus on one such disc D. Note that there are only finitely normal
disc types in H. This disc D divides H into two 0-handles H0 and H1 , both of
which have non-negative index, by Proposition 5.5. The sum of these indices is
I(H). Hence, if they are both positive, then H0 and H1 have smaller index, and
so we are done by induction in this case. So suppose that one 0-handle H0 has
zero index and the other handle H1 has positive index. Since D is normal, each
component of F 1 ∩ H is either divided into two by D or lies wholly in one of the
handles H0 or H1 . If one component of F 1 ∩ H ends up wholly in H0 , then H1 has
smaller t-complexity than H, and we are again done by induction.
   If ∂D lies wholly in F ∩ H, then the component of H0 ∩ F incident to ∂D has
zero index and so must be an annulus disjoint from the pattern. Hence, in this
case, H1 is a copy of H and, given H, there are only finitely many possible types
for H0 .
   Suppose that ∂D is disjoint from F ∩ H. It is therefore properly embedded in
M . Since we are assuming that the decomposing surface has no component that
is a boundary-parallel disc, D must separate components of F ∩ H. Hence, in this
case, H1 has smaller index than H, which is contrary to assumption.
   So suppose that ∂D intersects F ∩ H in arcs. These must be boundary-parallel
in F .
   Let D′ be the component of ∂H\\∂D lying in H0 . This intersects F in n
components, say, each of which is a disc intersecting P twice. Let Γ be the graph
H0 ∩ P . This is a graph where each vertex has degree 1 or 3. The vertices with
degree 1 occur at the points of P ∩ F in H0 , and also at the points ∂D ∩ P . Let v1
and v3 be the number of vertices with degree 1 and 3 respectively.
                                                                    β
                          1
                   F0 F                                         α α2
                                                           α1

                                           α
                              D'


               P




        Figure 14. Left: the disc D′ and its intersection with P and F .
        Middle: a tree component of Γ disjoint from F. Right: A tree
        component of Γ intersecting F at a single point

   We claim that no component Γ′ of Γ is a tree disjoint from F (see Figure 14
middle). A regular neighbourhood of Γ′ in D′ is a disc, and the part of the boundary
of this disc not lying in ∂D′ is a collection of arcs. There must be at least one such
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  42


arc α that is not outermost in D′ , in the sense that it does not separate off a sub-
disc of D′ disjoint from the other arcs and from F. At its endpoints are two arcs
of ∂D\\(P ∪ F) lying in the same component of ∂H\\(P ∪ F). By the normality
of D, these are therefore the same arc of ∂D\\(P ∪ F). Hence, α was outermost
which is a contradiction.
    We now show that no component of Γ is a tree intersecting F in a single point
(see Figure 14 right). Suppose that Γ′ is such a component. Let β be the arc of
∂F\\P incident to Γ′ and that is disjoint from ∂D. Let α be an arc in D′ disjoint
from Γ running from β to ∂D that runs close to Γ′ . We may extend α along ∂F
in two ways to form arcs α1 and α2 properly embedded in D′ , each intersecting P
once. Let α1 be the arc that intersects Γ′ . The endpoints of α1 lie in components of
∂H\\(F ∪ P ) that are incident along an arc of ∂H ∩ P . So, by (6) in the definition
of normality, ∂D intersects this arc. By (4), ∂D must run straight between these
two endpoints of α1 , intersecting P and nothing else. We deduce that Γ′ is a single
edge. A similar argument applied to α2 gives that it is also parallel to a sub-arc of
∂D. So, D′ ∩ P consists of two arcs. These must emanate from the same 0-handle
of F, as otherwise ∂D violates (5) in the definition of normality. So, we deduce
that D contradicts (7) in the definition of normality.
    We deduce that each component Γ′ of Γ satisfies 2χ(Γ′ ) − |F ∩ Γ′ | ≤ 0. So,
v1 − v3 − |F ∩ Γ| = 2χ(Γ) − |F ∩ Γ| ≤ 0. Now the number of vertices of P ∩ H1 is
equal to the number of vertices of P ∩ H, plus |Γ ∩ ∂D|, minus v3 . But |Γ ∩ ∂D| =
v1 − |F ∩ Γ|. We deduce that the number of vertices of the graph P ∩ H1 is at most
the number of vertices of P ∩ H.
    To summarise, we have shown that in each of the operations (1)-(4), the t-
complexity of H strictly goes down, except possibly in the case of (1). When the
t-complexity does not go down, H is decomposed along the normal disc D, the new
handle H1 has H1 ∩ F an exact copy of H ∩ F, and the new pattern P ′ intersects
H1 ∩ F in the same location that P intersected H ∩ F. More precisely, there is
a homeomorphism H → H1 taking F 0 (H) homeomorphically to F 0 (H1 ), taking
F 1 (H) homeomorphically to F 1 (H1 ), and taking P ∩ F (H) homeomorphically to
P ′ ∩ F (H1 ). This homeomorphism need not take P ∩ H homeomorphically to
P ′ ∩ H1 , but we have shown that these graphs have the same number of vertices.
Hence, after a sequence of steps (1)-(4), the t-complexity must go down at some
stage, or the handles run through only finitely many types. In either case, the
argument is complete.                                                              □

Remark 11.5. The above proposition is crucial to the efficient certification that a
boundary pattern P for a compact orientable 3-manifold M is essential, as required
by Theorem 1.6. When M is irreducible, this is achieved by giving an essential
hierarchy for (M, P ). Now (M, P ) is given to us by means of a triangulation T ,
and so Theorem 11.3 guarantees that the resulting handle structures for all the
manifolds in the hierarchy are of uniform type. This is important at many points.
For example, in Proposition 12.1 below, a constant k depends on the type of the
handles. Hence, for all the handle structures that we consider, k is in fact bounded
above by a universal constant independent of M and the hierarchy.
   Another crucial conclusion from Theorem 11.3 is that when the handle structure
H′ for a manifold in our hierarchy is admissible and its interior parallelity bundle
consists of I-bundles over discs, then the intersection between the 0-handles of H′
and any tetrahedron of T is one of only finitely many types, where again this list of
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    43


types is universal. In particular, the number of 0-handles of H′ is bounded above
by a universal constant times the number of tetrahedra of T . This is important
because many quantities depend on |H′ |, for example again in Proposition 12.1. It
is also central to the efficiency of our algorithm. For example, when a manifold in
the hierarchy is created and all its boundary components are 2-spheres, then we
need to examine whether the boundary pattern in these 2-sphere is essential. We
can do so efficiently, since the handle structure on this manifold has uniform type
and its number of handles is bounded above by a universal constant times |T |.
   Theorem 11.3 is an analogue of results known for sutured manifold hierarchies
(see [13, Proposition 6.3] and [16, Theorem 6.1]).

                   12. Fundamental decomposing surfaces
   Our goal in this section is to control the extended weight of our decomposing
surfaces.
Proposition 12.1 (Extended weight bound). Let M be a compact orientable irre-
ducible 3-manifold, other than a 3-ball, with non-empty boundary and an essential
boundary pattern P . Let H be a handle structure of (M, P ) of uniform type. Then
there is a constant k (depending only on the handle types of H) with the following
property. There is a compact orientable connected non-separating normal surface S
properly embedded in M with smallest pattern complexity among all such surfaces
and with extended weight at most k |H| .
    Our proof of this fact relies heavily on work of Tollefson and Wang [21]. A fairly
minor complication is that they worked with triangulations rather than handle
structures. Starting from H, it is straightforward to build a triangulation T of M
in which P is simplicial, satisfying the following conditions:
   (i) the number |T | of tetrahedra is at most c1 |H|, where c1 is a constant depending
       only on the handle types of H;
  (ii) any incompressible, pattern-incompressible normal surface S in T can be iso-
       toped, leaving P invariant, to form a standard surface in H with extended
       weight at most c2 w(S), where w(S) is the weight of S in T and c2 is a con-
       stant depending only on the handle types of H.
Hence, we now work with a triangulation T satisfying these conditions.
    We now recall the projective normal solution space associated with T . There are
7|T | types of normal triangles and squares in T . We assign a variable xi to each
type. When S is a normal surface, these variables count the number of triangles
and squares of each type in S, giving a list of 7|T | non-negative integers for S
called its normal surface vector and denoted (S). Such vectors satisfy a system of
linear constraints called the matching equations. There are three such equations for
each face of T with tetrahedra on both sides. For each such face, the triangles and
squares in the tetrahedron on one side of the face must patch together correctly
with the triangles and squares in the tetrahedron on the other side. The triangles
and squares on one side intersect the face in normal arcs, which come in three
different types. The matching equations assert that for each such normal arc type,
the number of triangles and squares on one side intersecting the face in arcs of
that form is equal to the number of triangles and squares on the other side also
intersecting that face in arcs of that form. The projective normal solution space is
the subset of R7|T | subject to the matching equations, the conditions xi ≥ 0 for each
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                  44

                      P
i, and the equation      xi = 1. It is a convex compact polyhedron. Each normal
surface S determines a pointP in the projective normal solution space by scaling all
its co-ordinates xi so that     xi = 1. The unique closed face of minimal dimension
in the projective normal solution space containing this point is called the face that
carries S and is denoted CS .
    A normal surface is said to be the normal sum of two properly embedded normal
surfaces G and H if its normal vector is (G)+(H). We denote the surface by G+H.
One cannot always form the normal sum of two normal surfaces, but this is possible
if they are both carried by the same face of the projective normal solution space.
A normal surface is said to be fundamental if it cannot be written as the normal
sum of two non-empty normal surfaces.
Definition 12.2. A compact oriented incompressible pattern-incompressible sur-
face S properly embedded in (M, P ) is said to be p-taut if the following all hold:
    (1) [S, ∂S] is non-trivial in H2 (M, ∂M );
    (2) S minimises pattern-complexity in its homology class;
    (3) there is no homologically trivial union of components of S.
We say that S is lw-p-taut if it is p-taut and it has minimal weight among all p-taut
surfaces representing [S, ∂S].
   This is an analogue of a definition of Tollefson and Wang [21, Section 1]. Instead
of pattern-complexity, their surfaces minimised χ− , which is defined to be the sum,
over all components S ′ of S, of max{0, −χ(S ′ )}. Their surfaces were known as
lw-taut.
   The following is an analogue of Theorem 3.3 of [21], but with their lw-taut
surfaces replaced by lw-p-taut surfaces. The proof is essentially the same, and is
omitted.
Theorem 12.3. Let M be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with b1 (M ) >
0 and let P be an essential boundary pattern. Let T be a triangulation of M in which
P is simplicial. Let S be a compact oriented incompressible pattern-incompressible
properly embedded surface that is lw-p-taut. Let CS be the face of the projective
normal solution space that carries S. Then every surface G carried by CS inherits
an orientation and so represents an element [G] ∈ H2 (M, ∂M ). With this orienta-
tion, G is lw-p-taut. Moreover, for any two surfaces G and H carried by CS , the
normal sum G + H satisfies [G + H] = [G] + [H].
  Hence, we have the following result.
Theorem 12.4 (Fundamental surface). Let M be a compact orientable irreducible
3-manifold with b1 (M ) > 0 and let P be an essential boundary pattern. Let T be a
triangulation of M in which P is simplicial. Then there is a fundamental normal
surface S properly embedded in M satisfying the following:
    (1) S is a compact connected orientable surface that is non-separating in M ;
    (2) S has smallest pattern-complexity among all surfaces satisfying (1).
Proof. Pick a compact orientable surface S satisfying (1) and (2) above. Such a
surface exists because b1 (M ) > 0. We may assume that it is incompressible and
pattern-incompressible, by Corollary 3.7. Hence it can be isotoped, via an isotopy
preserving the pattern, to a normal surface, also called S. We may further assume
that S has least weight among all such surfaces. So it is lw-p-taut. Let CS be the
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    45


face that carries S. Suppose that S is not fundamental. Then S can be written as
a non-trivial normal sum G + H of normal surfaces G and H. We may assume that
G is connected, since if G1 is any component of G, then S = G1 + ((G − G1 ) + H).
Both G and H lie in CS . By Theorem 12.3, G and H inherit orientations which
make them lw-p-taut. In particular, G is non-separating in M . Neither G nor H
has negative pattern-complexity, since we are assuming that P is essential. Note
that pattern-complexity and weight are both additive under normal summation.
Hence, the pattern-complexity of G is at most that of S. But it has smaller weight,
contrary to our assumption.                                                      □
Proof of Proposition 12.1. We are given a handle structure H of (M, P ) of uniform
type. From this, construct a triangulation T of M in which P is simplicial and
satisfying (i) and (ii) above. By Theorem 12.4, there is a fundamental normal
surface S properly embedded in M satisfying (1) and (2) in the theorem. By a
result of Hass, Lagarias and Pippenger [5, Lemma 6.1], the weight of S in T is at
most |T |2 27|T |+7 . Hence, S is isotopic, leaving P invariant, to a standard surface
S in H with extended weight at most c2 |T |2 27|T |+7 . Then by Lemma 4.11, S
can be isotoped, leaving P invariant, to be normal in H and without increasing
its extended weight. Since, |T | ≤ c1 |H|, we obtain our required constant k and
exponential bound on the extended weight of S.                                      □

                    13. Certifying an inessential pattern
   In this section, we establish one part of Theorem 1.6, by showing that Essen-
tial boundary pattern is in co-NP. In the case where the given 3-manifold is
irreducible, this is a consequence of the following result, which we will prove in this
section.
Theorem 13.1 (Fundamental violating disc). Let M be a compact orientable ir-
reducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . Let T be a triangulation for M in
which P is simplicial. If P is inessential, then it has a violating disc that is normal
and fundamental.
  The following result provides a violating disc in an important special case.
Theorem 13.2 (Fundamental compression disc). Let M be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold with pattern P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which
P is simplicial. If ∂M \\P is compressible, then it has a compression disc that is
normal and fundamental.
   This result was proved in [18, Theorem 4.1.13]. Although that theorem does
not explicitly assert that the compression disc is fundamental, this is established
in the proof. So, in our proof of Theorem 13.1, we may assume that ∂M \\P is
incompressible. In the terminology of Matveev [18], this means that (M, P ) is
boundary-irreducible.
   We recall some of the standard terminology from normal surface theory. Let S
be a normal surface that is the normal sum of two surfaces S1 and S2 . We may
pattern-isotope one of the surfaces, preserving its normality throughout, so that
afterwards S1 and S2 intersect transversely in a collection of simple closed curves
and properly embedded arcs. Then each component of S1 \\S2 and S2 \\S1 is a
patch. It is a clean disc patch if it is a disc that is disjoint from the pattern and is
either disjoint from ∂M or intersects ∂M in a single arc.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    46


    A summation S = S1 + S2 is in reduced form if there do not exist normal
surfaces S1′ and S2′ where each Si′ is pattern-isotopic to Si , and S = S1′ + S2′ , with
|S1′ ∩ S2′ | < |S1 ∩ S2 |.
    Let S be a compact surface properly embedded in M . A clean boundary-
compression disc for S is a disc embedded in M such that ∂D is the concatenation
of two arcs α and β, where

    (1) α = D ∩ S does not separate off a disc from S that is disjoint from P ;
    (2) β = D ∩ ∂M is disjoint from P .

When S has no clean boundary-compression disc, it is said to be cleanly boundary-
incompressible.
    Note that a violating disc that intersects P as few times as possible is cleanly
boundary-incompressible.
    When S is a normal sum of two normal surfaces S1 and S2 in general position, it
is well known (see for example [18, Section 3.2.2]) that S is obtained from S1 ∪S2 by
resolving the intersections S1 ∩ S2 as follows. A regular neighbourhood of S1 ∩ S2 is
removed from S1 and S2 . This regular neighbourhood is a collection of discs, annuli
and Möbius bands. At each component of S1 ∩ S2 , a pair of discs or annuli are
inserted, lying in a regular neighbourhood of that component of S1 ∩ S2 . These are
known as trace discs and annuli. This procedure is called a switch. There are two
possible ways to perform a switch. Only one choice of switch at each component
of S1 ∩ S2 leads to the normal surface S. These are called regular switches. The
other type of switch is an irregular switch. If a switch is made at each component
of S1 ∩ S2 and at least one of these switches is irregular, then the resulting surface
S ′ admits a disc D in some face of T , such that D ∩ S ′ is an arc in ∂D, and the
remainder of ∂D lies in an edge of T . When D is disjoint from ∂M , this leads
to an isotopy that reduces the weight of S ′ . When D intersects ∂M but not P ,
then it is a potential clean boundary-compression disc for S ′ . If it is not a clean
boundary-compression disc then, assuming ∂M \\P is incompressible, there is an
isotopy of S ′ leaving P fixed, that reduces its weight. On the other hand, when D
intersects P , then a small isotopy of D pushing it off the face makes it a potential
clean boundary-compression disc. There are two possible directions in which to
push D off the face and if neither direction gives a clean boundary-compression
disc, then, again assuming ∂M \\P is incompressible, S ′ must have been a disc
parallel to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in a single arc. This observation leads to
the following result.

Proposition 13.3. Let M be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with
pattern P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which P is simplicial. Suppose that
∂M \\P is incompressible. Let S be a compact connected orientable surface that is
incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and that is not a disc parallel
to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in a single arc or the empty set. Suppose that S
is the sum of two normal surfaces S1 and S2 in general position, and that this
summation is in reduced form. Assume also that S has least weight, up to isotopy
that preserves the pattern. Then no component X of M \\(S1 ∪ S2 ) is a product
region, in the following sense: there is a homeomorphism from X to the product
of a surface and an interval, the homeomorphism taking P ∩ X, N (S1 ∩ S2 ) and
∂M ∩ X to unions of interval fibres.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                    47


Proof. Note that ∂X contains at least one component of S1 ∩ S2 , since otherwise S
is not connected. Resolve the intersections between S1 and S2 that lie in ∂X in such
a way that none of the trace discs and annuli that are inserted are vertical in X.
If all of these switches are regular switches, then the summation was not reduced,
for the following reason. We can remove S1 ∩ X from S1 , and then insert S2 ∩ X,
forming a surface S1′ . We can also form S2′ by removing S2 ∩ X from S2 , and then
inserting S1 ∩ X. Then S = S1′ + S2′ , but |S1′ ∩ S2′ | < |S1 ∩ S2 |. On the other hand,
if not all the switches are regular switches, then we can perform these switches
and then perform regular switches at the remaining components of S1 ∩ S2 . The
resulting surface S ′ is isotopic to S, via an isotopy preserving the pattern. Since
we are assuming that S is incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and
not a disc parallel to a disc in the boundary intersecting P in arc, we deduce that S ′
admits an isotopy preserving the pattern that reduces its weight. This contradicts
our minimality assumption.                                                            □

  The following is [18, Lemma 4.1.8].
Theorem 13.4. Let M be a compact orientable irreducible 3-manifold with pattern
P . Let T be a triangulation for M in which P is simplicial. Suppose that ∂M \\P
is incompressible. Let S be a compact orientable normal surface properly embedded
in M , that is incompressible and cleanly boundary-incompressible and that has no
component that is a disc parallel to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in arc or the empty
set. Suppose that S is a sum of two normal surfaces S1 and S2 in general position
and that this summation is reduced. Suppose also that S has minimal weight up
to isotopy preserving the pattern. Then no patch of the summation is a clean disc
patch.
Proof of Theorem 13.1. In the case where ∂M \\P is compressible, then Theorem
13.2 provides a fundamental compression disc. So we may assume that ∂M \\P is
incompressible.
   Let D be a violating disc that intersects the pattern as few times as possible.
Then D is cleanly boundary-incompressible and it is automatically incompressible.
So, by [18, Corollary 3.3.25], D can be isotoped, preserving the pattern, into normal
form without increasing its weight. We may assume that D has least weight among
all normal violating discs that intersect the pattern as few times as possible.
   Suppose that D is a normal sum S1 + S2 . We may assume that this summation
is in reduced form. By [18, Theorem 4.1.36], neither Si has a component that is
a sphere, projective plane, or a disc intersecting the pattern at most once. Hence,
each Si satisfies −χ(Si ) + |Si ∩ P | ≥ 0. Note that Euler characteristic and the
number of intersection points with the pattern are both additive under normal
summation. Since χ(D) > 0, then one of S1 or S2 has positive Euler characteristic,
say S1 . Then S1 has a disc component. It must intersect the pattern at least twice.
We may assume that S1 is connected, by adding any other components of S1 to S2 if
necessary. Now, S2 must therefore have zero Euler characteristic and intersect the
pattern at most once. Since no component of S2 is a disc intersecting the pattern
at most once, we deduce that every component of S2 has zero Euler characteristic.
   Our goal is to show that S1 is a violating disc. Since S1 has smaller weight
than D, this will contradict our earlier minimality assumption. Suppose that, on
the contrary, S1 is a parallel to a disc in ∂M that intersects P in a single arc or a
tripod.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     48


   Now S2 cannot have any closed components, since the intersection between such a
component and S1 would lead to a simple closed curve of S1 ∩ S2 and an innermost
such curve in S1 would create a clean disc patch. So, S2 consists of annuli and
Möbius bands.
   We claim that each arc of S1 ∩ S2 is essential in S2 . If not, there is an inessential
arc that is outermost in S2 . It therefore separates off a disc D2 in S2 . This disc
intersects P at most once, since S2 intersects P at most once. Also D2 ∩S1 separates
off a sub-disc D1 of S1 intersecting P at most once. The union of these discs creates
a properly embedded disc in M intersecting P fewer times that D did. Hence, this
disc is parallel to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in the empty set or an arc. But then
D2 ∪ (S1 \\D1 ) is a violating disc that intersects P at most as many times as D
does and that has smaller weight than D, contradicting our minimality assumption
about D.
   We claim that each arc of S1 ∩ S2 is essential in S2 . If not, there is an inessential
arc that is outermost in S2 . It therefore separates off a disc D2 in S2 . This disc
intersects P at most once, since S2 intersects P at most once. Also D2 ∩S1 separates
off a sub-disc D1 of S1 intersecting P at most once. The union of these discs creates
a properly embedded disc in M intersecting P fewer times that D did. Hence, this
disc is parallel to a disc in ∂M intersecting P in the empty set or an arc. But then
D1 and D2 cobound a product region as in Proposition 13.3, contradicting that
proposition.
   Hence, S2 \\S1 consists of squares. Each square has boundary consisting of two
arcs in S1 and two arcs in ∂M . At least one square is in the ball bounded by S1
and every such square is boundary-parallel in the ball. Consider an outermost such
square. It is parallel to a square in S1 . But the resulting product region contradicts
Proposition 13.3.
   Thus, we have shown that S1 and S2 cannot intersect, which is impossible,
because S is connected. So S must have been fundamental.                               □

    We now complete the proof of Theorem 1.6. We are given a triangulation T of
a compact orientable 3-manifold M , with boundary pattern P that is simplicial.
When P is inessential, we need to provide a certificate that confirms this and that
can be verified in polynomial time as function of t = |T |, the number of tetrahedra.
When M is irreducible, Theorem 13.1 shows that there is a violating disc D that
is fundamental. This is the required certificate. The algorithm of Agol, Hass and
Thurston [1] can be used to verify that D is indeed a disc intersecting the pattern
at most 3 times. Also, by [16, Theorem 9.4], one can check whether ∂D bounds a
disc in ∂M . If there is no such disc, then D is violating. So suppose that ∂D does
bound a disc D′ in ∂M . It may be the case ∂D bounds two discs, in which case we
consider them both in turn. Again using [16, Theorem 9.4], one can check whether
each component of D′ \\P is a disc intersecting ∂D′ in one arc and with at most
one vertex of P in its boundary. Since D is violating, at least one component of
D′ \\P is not of this form, and the algorithm provided by [16, Theorem 9.4] will
confirm this.
    We need to deal with the general case where M is reducible. Our certificate for
establishing that P is essential is:
    (1) a vector (S) of a (possibly empty) normal surface S in T with weight at
                  2
        most 2740t ; this will in fact be a collection of disjoint embedded spheres;
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   49


     (2) a triangulation T ′ for a 3-manifold M ′ with at most 1000t tetrahedra; this
         will be M \\S with a 3-ball attached to each spherical boundary component;
     (3) a certicate that M ′ has inessential boundary pattern.
    We now explain why this certificate exists. It is proved in [9, Lemma 4] that
there is a maximal collection of disjoint non-parallel normal 2-spheres S in T , none
                                                             2
of which bounds a ball in M , with weight at most 2740t . A triangulation for M \\S
with at most 1000t tetrahedra is produced using [16, Theorem 11.4]. Then a coned
3-ball is attached to each spherical boundary component, forming the triangulation
T ′ for M ′ . The copy of P in M ′ is essential if and only if P was essential in M ,
because any violating disc for P in M ′ can be chosen to avoid the attached 3-balls,
and so forms a violating disc in M , and conversely, any violating disc in M can be
chosen to avoid S and so becomes a violating disc in M ′ . Since we are assuming
that P is inessential, there is a certificate for (M ′ , P ) that establishes this.
    The verification of the certificate is straightforward. One checks that S is a col-
lection of 2-spheres, using the Agol-Hass-Thurston algorithm. Then T ′ is produced
using the algorithm in [16, Theorem 11.4]. Finally the certificate showing that P
is inessential in M ′ is checked in the way described above.

                    14. Certifying an essential hierarchy
   In this section, we complete the proof of Theorem 1.6, by showing that Essen-
tial boundary pattern is in NP. Thus, we are given a triangulation T of a
compact orientable 3-manifold M with essential pattern P that is simplicial, and
we must provide a certificate, verifiable in polynomial time, that establishes that
P is indeed essential. We may assume that ∂M is non-empty, as otherwise there
is nothing to prove. Using the techniques at the end of the previous section, it
is not hard to reduce to the case where M is irreducible. We will describe this
reduction in more detail at the end of this section, but for the moment, suppose
that M is irreducible. Then, by Theorem 2.5, we know that (M, P ) admits an
essential hierarchy. Moreover, the existence of such a hierarchy guarantees that P
is essential. So, our goal is to write down such a hierarchy and prove that it is
essential. We know by Proposition 10.2 that there is such a hierarchy with length
that is linearly bounded in terms of the number of tetrahedra in T . Furthermore,
by Theorem 11.3, the intermediate 3-manifolds have handle structures of uniform
type. However, this only controls the local complexity of each handle, not the total
number of handles. Thus, it is not immediately clear how to encode the handle
structures of these manifolds. Nevertheless, we will establish the following result.
Theorem 14.1 (Efficient encoding of a hierarchy). Let M be a compact orientable
irreducible 3-manifold with a boundary pattern P . Let H be a handle structure for
(M, P ) of uniform type. If (M, P ) admits an essential hierarchy, then there is a
hierarchy for (M, P ) that may be described by an amount of data that is at most
a polynomial function of |H| and this hierarchy can be verified as essential by a
polynomial-time algorithm. Furthermore, for each decomposition
                                        S i
                              (Mi , Pi ) −→ (Mi+1 , Pi+1 )
in this hierarchy, one of the following holds:
    (1) Si is connected, orientable and non-separating and has smallest pattern-
         complexity among all such surfaces, apart from when M is closed and i = 1,
         when S1 may be separating;
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                      50


    (2) Si is a union of non-trivial squares;
    (3) Si is a union of properly embedded incompressible pattern-incompressible
        annuli disjoint from the pattern.
   Recall that the hierarchy construction loop given in Sections 6 and 10 used the
following steps iteratively (where the numbering is as given there):
      (2) Apply Create admissible handle structure.
     (2′ ) Replace each component of the interior parallelity bundle that is an I-
           bundle over a disc by a single 2-handle.
   (2′′ ) Cut along the vertical boundary components of the remaining I-bundles and
           further decompose these using squares into 3-balls with essential boundary
           patterns.
      (6) Let S be any connected, non-separating, properly embedded, oriented nor-
           mal surface in the resulting 3-manifold.
      (8) Assuming that S is not a violating disc, then cut the handle structure along
           S.
   We can view the iterations of this loop as running in the order (6), (8), (2), (2′ ),
(2′′ ), after an initial application of (2), (2′ ), and (2′′ ). The handle structures that
are obtained by repeating this loop can be constructed using the following result.
Proposition 14.2. Let H be a handle structure of uniform type for the compact
orientable irreducible 3-manifold M with essential boundary pattern P . Let S be a
connected properly embedded normal surface in M . Then there is an algorithm that
produces an admissible handle structure that is obtained by applying steps (8), (2),
(2′ ), (2′′ ). This runs in polynomial time as a function of the number of handles of
H and the logarithm of the extended weight of S.
   It is a consequence of Theorem 11.3 that the handle structure obtained by de-
composing H along S has uniform type. However, it might have a large number of
handles, when S has very high extended weight. But most handles will be of the
following form.
Definition 14.3. Let H be a handle structure for the compact 3-manifold M with
boundary pattern P . Let S be a normal surface properly embedded in M . Let
H′ be the induced handle structure on M \\S. Then a handle of H′ is a parallelity
handle for S if it lies between parallel normal discs of S.
   Each parallelity handle for S is a copy of D2 ×I where (D2 ×I)∩S = ∂D2 ×I. We
view this product structure as an I-bundle over D2 . The I-bundle structures can
be chosen so they agree on the intersection of any collection of parallelity handles.
Hence, the union of the parallelity handles is an I-bundle, called the parallelity
bundle B for S.
   The vertical boundary ∂v B of the parallelity bundle B is a union of annuli.
However, these annuli need not be properly embedded. Instead the intersection
with ∂M is a union of fibres in the bundle. We say that ∂v B\\∂M is the inner
vertical boundary. It is a disjoint union of properly embedded annuli disjoint from
the pattern, and squares in M \\S.
   The following result is analogous to [16, Theorems 9.2 and 9.3]. It has essentially
the same proof, which is omitted. The proof relies heavily on the algorithm of Agol,
Hass and Thurston [1].
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                     51


Theorem 14.4 (Cutting along a surface). There is an algorithm that takes,
as its input,
    (1) a handle structure H of uniform type, with h handles, for a compact ori-
        entable 3-manifold M with boundary pattern P ;
    (2) a compact orientable properly embedded normal surface S;
and provides as its output, the following data. If (M ′ , P ′ ) is the manifold with
pattern obtained by decomposing along S, and B is its parallelity bundle for S,
then the algorithm produces the handle structure that M ′ \\B inherits, and for each
component B of B, it determines:
    (1) the genus and number of boundary components of its base surface;
    (2) whether B is a product or twisted I-bundle;
    (3) the way that ∂v B and M ′ \\B intersect.
The algorithm runs in time that is bounded by a polynomial in h and the logarithm
of the extended weight of S.
Proof of Proposition 14.2. Let H′ be the handle structure that M \\S inherits. This
might have too many handles to be written down efficiently. Suppose instead that
we are provided by the output of Theorem 14.4. In Proposition 14.2, the next
operation that is applied to H′ is Create admissible handle structure. If B
has any components that are incident to ∂M , then an implementation of Create
admissible handle structure will remove them, for the following reason. Let
B be such a component of B that is incident to ∂M . There must be a 0-handle H of
H′ in B that is incident to ∂M . Since H is a parallelity handle for S that is incident
to ∂M , its intersection with F(H′ ) is a line of 0-handles and 1-handles. Suppose
first that there is more than one 0-handle of F(H′ ) ∩ H. Then one such 0-handle D
intersects P ′ in two points and intersects F 1 (H′ ) in a single arc. Hence, H′ fails to
be admissible. We could perform the operation described in Create admissible
handle structure, which removes from H′ the 1-handle and 2-handle that are
incident to D and transfers arcs of P ′ incident to these handle across them. This
1-handle and 2-handle were in B, and we view the new parallelity bundle for S as
obtained from B by removing these two handles. In this way, we could continue to
shrink B until it contained no 2-handles. Then B ∩ F (H′ ) would consist of squares.
For each such square that is non-trivial, we could decompose along it. For each
square D that is trivial, it is parallel to a disc D′ in ∂M ′ that intersects P ′ as
shown in Figure 5. We can remove the 3-ball bounded by D ∪ D′ and transfer the
boundary pattern in D′ across to D. However, there is an alternative approach
which is considerably faster to implement, and which has the same end result. Let
A be a component of ∂v B that is incident to ∂M . Pick a maximal collection of
vertical squares in B with vertical boundary lying in A, none of which is parallel to
subset of A∩∂M , and no two of which are parallel. If any such square is non-trivial,
we decompose along it. If any component D is a trivial square, then we identify
the disc D′ as in Figure 5 with the same boundary, remove the ball between these
discs and then transfer the boundary pattern in D′ across to D. These operations
decompose B either to a 3-ball or to a collar on ∂v B − A. In the latter case,
we can remove this collar and transfer its boundary pattern to ∂v B − A. This
process can all be completed without knowing the precise handle structure on B,
but instead just the information provided by Theorem 14.4. We repeat this for each
component of B that is incident to ∂M . The resulting handle structure need not
      INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   52


be admissible, in which case we perform further operations in Create admissible
handle structure. Initially, this does not affect the interior parallelity bundle.
However, at some point, it may do so. This happens when the vertical boundary
of a remaining component of B fails to be properly embedded. In that case, we can
again remove this component by decomposing along its interior vertical boundary.
Each of these operations either removes a component of the parallelity bundle for
S, or removes a handle of M ′ \\B. Hence, it can be completed in polynomial
time, as a function of the number of handles of H. The resulting object is a handle
structure H′′ to which various I-bundles are attached along their vertical boundary.
The actual result of running Create admissible handle structure is obtained
from this by replacing the I-bundles by a union of parallelity handles in some way
that we do not specify. The interior parallelity bundle for this handle structure
includes these I-bundles but it may also include various other handles of H′′ . We
can compute this interior parallelity bundle, and then the steps in (2′ ) and (2′′ )
can be completed in polynomial time. Thus we have the algorithm required by
Proposition 14.2.                                                                 □

  The certificate required by Theorem 1.6 is as follows:
   (1) a sequence of handle structures H1 , . . . , Hℓ+1 , where Hi is a handle struc-
       ture for a 3-manifold Mi with boundary pattern Pi ;
   (2) for some of the i ≤ ℓ, a surface Si or Di properly embedded in Mi that is
       normal in Hi .
These handle structures and surfaces are required to have the following properties:
   (1) the initial handle structure H1 is dual to the given triangulation T ;
   (2) for each 0-handle H of H1 , the intersection between H and the 0-handles of
       Hi , F 0 (Hi ), F 1 (Hi ) and Pi is one of the possibilities from Theorem 11.3;
   (3) each Si and each Di is normal in Hi and has extended weight at most k |Hi | ,
       where k is the constant from Proposition 12.1;
   (4) when Si is provided, then Hi+1 is obtained from Hi using Proposition 14.2;
   (5) when Di is provided, then it is a compression disc or pattern-compression
       disc for the vertical boundary of the interior parallelity bundle for Hi , and
       then Hi+1 is obtained from Hi by simplifying the handle structure according
       to the procedure in (Pattern-)compressible vertical boundary;
   (6) when no Di or Si is provided, then Hi+1 is obtained from Hi by applying
       Create admissible handle structure, and furthermore the interior
       parallelity bundle for Hi+1 consists of 2-handles;
   (7) the length ℓ of this hierarchy is at most 4cq (H1 );
   (8) the final manifold is a collection of 3-balls with essential pattern and its
       handle structure is admissible with interior parallelity bundle consisting of
       2-handles.
   The existence of the certificate when M is irreducible and P is essential is es-
tablished as follows. We run the algorithm given in Section 6 with the refinements
from Section 10. In Step (6) of the algorithm in Section 6, we are free to pick
any connected non-separating properly embedded orientable normal surface in the
manifold. We pick one with smallest pattern complexity. Then Proposition 12.1
guarantees that there is such a surface with extended weight at most k |Hi | . Fur-
thermore, since the surface has smallest pattern complexity, Corollary 3.7 ensures
that it is incompressible and pattern-incompressible. Hence, if the algorithm leaves
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                   53


the hierarchy construction loop and produces a violating disc, then this must form
a compression or pattern-compression disc for some vertical boundary annulus for
the interior parallelity bundle. This is provided in (5). Note that such a violating
disc can be chosen to be fundamental in a triangulation refining Hi by Theorem
13.1, and hence have extended weight at most k |Hi | in Hi . Since M is assumed
to be irreducible and P is essential, the algorithm terminates with an essential hi-
erarchy, giving (8). Furthermore, the length of this hierarchy is at most 4cq (H1 )
by Proposition 10.2, which gives (7). Finally, condition (2) is a consequence of
Theorem 11.3.
   We now explain how to verify the certificate. There are two main aspects to
this. Firstly, we must check that each Hi+1 really is obtained from Hi in the ways
described above. This guarantees that we really do have a partial hierarchy. Sec-
ondly, we must check that the final manifold Mℓ+1 is balls with essential boundary
pattern Pℓ+1 . Since the final handle structure is admissible with interior parallelity
bundle consisting of 2-handles, Theorem 11.3 implies that its number of handles is
at most a uniform constant times |H1 |. Furthermore each of its 0-handles is of uni-
form type. Hence, it is straightforward to verify, in polynomial time, that ∂Mℓ+1
is a collection of spheres and that its pattern Pℓ+1 is essential. This implies that
each decomposing surface is incompressible by Lemma 3.2, and Mℓ+1 is irreducible
by Lemma 3.9. So Mℓ+1 is a collection of balls.
   So we now focus on verifying that each Hi+1 is obtained from Hi as above.
Suppose first that the normal surface Si is given. We simply apply Proposition 14.2
and check that the resulting handle structure is Hi+1 . Note that Si has extended
weight at most k |Hi | . Since |Hi | is bounded above by a universal constant times
|H1 | by (2) above, we deduce that the algorithm in Proposition 14.2 completes in
polynomial time.
   Suppose now that the disc Di is given in Hi . This is a compression disc or
pattern-compression disc for a vertical boundary component Ai of the interior par-
allelity bundle Bi for Hi . We may remove Bi from Hi , forming a new handle
structure Hi′ containing Di . It is of uniform type and its number of 0-handles
satisfies |Hi′ | ≤ |Hi |. So we may confirm that Di is a compression disc or pattern-
compression disc for Ai . Then the procedure in (Pattern-)compressible ver-
tical boundary may be implemented in polynomial time and the verifier may
check that the resulting handle structure is Hi+1 .
   Finally, when neither Di nor Si is given, then the procedure Create admissi-
ble handle structure may be implemented and the verifier can check that the
resulting handle structure is Hi+1 .
   Thus, the verifier can check that this does give an essential hierarchy for (M, P ).
This completes the proof of Theorem 1.6 in the case where M is irreducible and P
is essential.
   We now complete the proof of Theorem 1.6. We need to deal with the general
case where M is reducible. Our certificate for establishing that P is essential is:

                                                                                2
    (1) a vector (S) of a normal surface S in T with weight at most 2740t ; this
        will in fact be a collection of disjoint embedded spheres;
    (2) a triangulation T ′ for a 3-manifold M ′ with at most 1000t tetrahedra; this
        will be M \\S with a 3-ball attached to each spherical boundary component;
    (3) a certicate that M ′ has essential boundary pattern.
       INCOMPRESSIBLE SURFACES, HIERARCHIES AND UNKNOT RECOGNITION                             54


   Parts (1) and (2) of the certificate are verified in the same way as in Section
13. One checks that S is a collection of 2-spheres, using the Agol-Hass-Thurston
algorithm. A triangulation for M \\S is produced using [16, Theorem 11.4], and
then a coned 3-ball is attached to each spherical boundary component, forming T ′ .
The copy of P in M ′ is essential if and only if P was essential in M , because any
violating disc for P in M ′ can be chosen to avoid the attached 3-balls, and so forms
a violating disc in M , and conversely, any violating disc in M can be chosen to
avoid S and so becomes a violating disc in M ′ . Now M ′ is irreducible. So we have
a certificate, verifiable in polynomial time, that (M ′ , P ) is essential.

                                         References
 [1] I. Agol, J. Hass, and W. Thurston. The computational complexity of knot genus and spanning
     area. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 358(9):3821–3850, 2006.
 [2] I. A. Dynnikov. Arc-presentations of links: monotonic simplification. Fund. Math., 190:29–76,
     2006.
 [3] W. Haken. Theorie der Normalflächen. Acta Math., 105:245–375, 1961.
 [4] W. Haken. Über das Homöomorphieproblem der 3-Mannigfaltigkeiten. I. Math. Z., 80:89–120,
     1962.
 [5] J. Hass, J. C. Lagarias, and N. Pippenger. The computational complexity of knot and link
     problems. J. ACM, 46(2):185–211, 1999.
 [6] S. V. Ivanov. The computational complexity of basic decision problems in 3–dimensional
     topology. Geom. Dedicata, 131:1–26, 2008.
 [7] F. Jaeger, D. L. Vertigan, and D. J. A. Welsh. On the computational complexity of the Jones
     and Tutte polynomials. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 108(1):35–53, 1990.
 [8] Klaus Johannson. Homotopy equivalences of 3-manifolds with boundaries, volume 761 of
     Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, Berlin, 1979.
 [9] Simon A. King. The size of triangulations supporting a given link. Geom. Topol., 5:369–398,
     2001.
[10] P. B. Kronheimer and T. S. Mrowka. Khovanov homology is an unknot-detector. Publ. Math.
     Inst. Hautes Études Sci., 113:97–208, 2011.
[11] Greg Kuperberg. Knottedness is in NP, modulo GRH. Adv. Math., 256:493–506, 2014.
[12] Marc      Lackenby.    Three-dimensional     manifolds,   lecture     notes.  Available    at
     https://people.maths.ox.ac.uk/lackenby/, 1999.
[13] Marc Lackenby. Exceptional surgery curves in triangulated 3-manifolds. Pacific J. Math.,
     210(1):101–163, 2003.
[14] Marc Lackenby. The crossing number of composite knots. J. Topol., 2(4):747–768, 2009.
[15] Marc Lackenby. A polynomial upper bound on Reidemeister moves. Ann. of Math. (2),
     182(2):491–564, 2015.
[16] Marc Lackenby. The efficient certification of knottedness and Thurston norm. Adv. Math.,
     387:Paper No. 107796, 142, 2021.
[17] Marc Lackenby. Link hyperbolicity is in NP. In preparation, 2026.
[18] Sergei Matveev. Algorithmic topology and classification of 3-manifolds, volume 9 of Algo-
     rithms and Computation in Mathematics. Springer, Berlin, second edition, 2007.
[19] Peter Ozsváth and Zoltán Szabó. Holomorphic disks and genus bounds. Geom. Topol., 8:311–
     334, 2004.
[20] Sucharit Sarkar and Jiajun Wang. An algorithm for computing some Heegaard Floer homolo-
     gies. Ann. of Math. (2), 171(2):1213–1236, 2010.
[21] Jeffrey L. Tollefson and Ningyi Wang. Taut normal surfaces. Topology, 35(1):55–75, 1996.
[22] Friedhelm Waldhausen. On irreducible 3-manifolds which are sufficiently large. Ann. of Math.
     (2), 87:56–88, 1968.

  Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford,
Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, United Kingdom
