                                         New Complexity Classes in Locally Checkable
                                         Labeling for Local Computation Algorithms
                                         Sijin Peng # 
                                         CSAIL, MIT, Cambridge, United States

                                               Abstract
                                         Local Computation Algorithms (LCAs), introduced by Rubinfeld, Tamir, Vardi, and Xie (2011), are
                                         a special type of sublinear algorithms that, given probing access to a possibly massive input, are
                                         required to provide query access to a consistent solution, without maintaining a state between different
                                         queries. In this paper, we try to understand LCA through the lens of complexity classifications,
                                         described by the following question: Given a target complexity function f (n), is there a problem
                                         whose local computation complexity is f (n), up to polylogarithmic factors?
                                             We restrict our focus to Locally Checkable Labeling (LCL) problems, which can be seen as
                                         constant-degree constraint satisfaction problems. Possible complexity classes of this problem family
                                         have been extensively studied in various distributed computation models, including the VOLUME
                                         model proposed by Rosenbaum and Suomela (2020), which is an invariant of local computation
                                         algorithms with additional locality requirements.
                                             In this paper, we provide new LCL complexity constructions in the VOLUME model, and
arXiv:2607.09626v1 [cs.DC] 10 Jul 2026




                                         generalize the results to LCAs. Specifically, we show that there are LCLs whose probe complexities
                                         in the VOLUME and LCA models are Θ(logk n) and Θ̃(np/q ) for any positive integer k ≥ 1 and
                                         rational p/q ∈ (0, 1]. Our approach, completely different from the approach to a similar result in the
                                         distributed LOCAL model by Balliu et al. (2018), is to stack instances of complexity Θ(log n) and
                                         Θ̃(n1/k ) in the VOLUME model constructed by Rosenbaum and Suomela (2020).

                                         2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Distributed algorithms; Theory of
                                         computation → Streaming, sublinear and near linear time algorithms

                                         Keywords and phrases Local Computation Algorithms, Volume Model, Locally Checkable Labeling

                                         Acknowledgements The LCL construction, lower bound analysis, and high-level ideas for upper
                                         bound algorithms in this paper were discovered by the author. At the same time, most of the proof
                                         details in Sections 4 and 5, including Definition 40, and figures in Sections 1 and 2 were assisted by
                                         the use of OpenAI Codex. All AI outputs were reviewed and edited by the author, who takes full
                                         responsibility for the correctness, originality, and integrity of this paper.


                                          1     Introduction
                                         Local computation algorithms (LCAs), proposed in [2, 42], are a special type of sublinear
                                         algorithms typically applied to graph problems involving multiple output bits. An LCA is
                                         expected to find only a small part of the solution each time, specified by queries, through a
                                         small number of probes that give the algorithm access to the input and adjacency list of a
                                         vertex in the graph. Following most of the LCA literature, in this paper, the input graph has
                                         a constant maximum degree, so it is the same up to a constant factor for a probe to return
                                         the complete adjacency list of a vertex as to return one entry of the adjacency list.
                                             The main challenge in designing a local computation algorithm is consistency: when
                                         there are multiple feasible solutions to the instance, multiple queries to different parts of
                                         the solution should provide consistent local solutions that point to a single globally feasible
                                         solution without maintaining state across queries. For graph coloring, for example, a query
                                         may ask for the color of one vertex, and the answers to multiple queries must together form
                                         a single feasible coloring. To make this possible, if an LCA needs randomness, the same
                                         randomness must be shared across queries.
2   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


        The motivation behind LCA is to provide an efficient and parallelizable way to gain
    access to a small part of a large solution to a massive problem. This shares the spirit with
    distributed computing and property testing. See [35] for a survey on common methods in
    LCA and its connection to property testing and various distributed models. LCAs have
    also been connected to several other fields of theoretical computer science, including online
    algorithms [39], graph sparsification [3], distributed optimization [38], coding theory [36, 42],
    and algorithmic game theory [34]. However, most existing literature on LCA takes an
    algorithm-designer perspective, seeking the optimal probe complexity of concrete problems.
    In this paper, we ask the question the other way around: Given a target complexity f (n), is
    there a problem whose probe complexity is exactly or roughly f (n) up to a polylogarithmic
    factor?
        This question becomes meaningless if we take arbitrary problems into consideration. For
    example, one can take a problem with Θ(n) probe complexity and add a promise to the
    input instance that each connected component only has size f (n), likely leading to a problem
    of probe complexity Θ(f (n)). Another candidate with probe complexity Θ(f (n)) is to give
    each vertex v a radius rv ≤ log∆ f (n) and let each vertex collect the exact number of vertices
    within distance rv from v. From the examples above, it is essential to select a suitable
    family of problems that excludes trivial issues, while also striving to include a large class of
    meaningful problems.
        Our approach, as is standard in distributed graph algorithms, is to restrict ourselves to
    the family of locally checkable labeling (LCL) problems. To talk about LCL, we should first
    define the graph family these problems are defined on. In this paper, we will analyze LCLs
    on the family of all bounded-degree graphs and the family of all bounded-degree trees. We
    cannot make additional promise about the input structure, so the first example above does
    not fall into our consideration.
        In a typical LCL setting, each vertex in a constant-degree graph receives its unique ID and
    possibly an input label from a constant number of possible inputs, and each vertex should
    provide an output label from a constant number of choices. Furthermore, the feasibility
    of a solution is locally checkable. This means that each vertex can check whether its local
    constraint is satisfied with information from a constant-hop neighborhood, and a global
    solution satisfies the requirement of the problem if all vertices are locally satisfied. One
    may also think of LCLs as CSPs on constant-degree constraint graphs. The second example
    given above is not an LCL because its label sets or checkability radius are not constant.
    At the same time, LCLs still include classic problems, such as graph coloring and maximal
    independent set.
        Since the work by Naor and Stockmeyer [40], the possible complexity of LCLs has been
    extensively studied in the context of distributed graph algorithms [6, 10, 19, 26, 28, 29]. There
    is now a substantial understanding of LCL complexities in the LOCAL model on bounded-
    degree graphs (see [9] for the almost-complete complexity spectrum), trees [5, 7, 24, 25, 32],
    and other special types of graphs [4, 16, 22, 31]. This research paradigm has also extended
    to other models and settings [1, 11, 25, 43], among which the VOLUME model proposed by
    Rosenbaum and Suomela [41] has a close connection to local computation algorithms.
        The VOLUME model is motivated to provide a more fine-grained resource analysis
    compared to other common distributed models such as LOCAL and CONGEST. This model
    shares a similar spirit with LCA, using probes to measure the cost of an algorithm, but they
    are different in two aspects:
       First, any time in the execution of a VOLUME algorithm, the set of vertices probed by
       the algorithm should always be a connected component that includes the current vertex
S. Peng                                                                                                3


    being queried. In other words, VOLUME algorithms cannot perform a far probe with low
    cost.
    Another difference lies in the randomness: As mentioned above, in local computation
    algorithms, different queries share the single random string r, and the algorithm can
    freely access each bit of r. In the VOLUME model, different queries still share the same
    randomness, but the algorithm only has restricted access to it. Specifically, each vertex v
    in the graph has an independent random string rv that jointly constitutes r, and for a
    query, the algorithm can access rv only after it probes v.
In these two dimensions, the VOLUME model more closely resembles common distributed
models in which information only propagates through network channels abstracted as edges
in the graph, and the algorithm needs to use additional resources to get information from
vertices far away.


1.1    Main Results
In this paper, we consider LCLs with probe complexity Ω(log n) in both the LCA and
VOLUME models for randomized algorithms only. To the best of the author’s knowledge, no
prior work addresses the LCL complexity classification for LCAs. Several existing papers
have studied randomized VOLUME complexities of LCLs [21, 32, 41]. See Figure 1 for an
illustration of the status of the randomized VOLUME complexity landscape for bounded-degree
graphs before our work. We note here that [41] also includes results for the deterministic
VOLUME model, but current knowledge on this model is largely limited by the fact that it is
unknown whether there is either a gap theorem or an explicit LCL construction between
Ω(log⋆ n) and o(n) for the deterministic VOLUME model.

                 • known construction        × known gap theorem              ? unknown interval

                                             ?           ?                       ?          ?
                                 √                                  ···                            n
             1         log⋆ n        log n       log n       o(1)
                                                             n            1/3
                                                                          n          n1/2



    Figure 1 The LCL complexity landscape of randomized VOLUME algorithms from previous works
for bounded-degree graphs. The blue dots between no(1) and n1/3 correspond to constructions for
n1/k for any integer k ≥ 3.


    Before our work, one can construct LCLs with randomized VOLUME complexity Θ(1),
Θ(log⋆ n), Θ(log n), and Θ̃(n1/k ) for any positive integer k, where Θ̃ ignores polylogarithmic
factors. The constructions for Θ(1) and Θ(log⋆ n) complexity come from constructions in
the LOCAL model, while other constructions are given in [41]. It turns out that all LCL
constructions in Figure 1 have the same complexity in the VOLUME model when we restrict
the instance to bounded-degree trees. Two gap theorems in the randomized VOLUME model,
                                           √
ω(1) − o(log⋆ n) gap and ω(log⋆ n) − o( log n) gap, are given in [32] and [21] respectively.
Unfortunately, these constructions and gap theorems do not directly transfer to LCAs.
    At the same time, there are still regions where we do not know either a separation theorem
or an LCL construction. It is explicitly asked in [41] whether more randomized VOLUME
complexities exist in the polylogarithmic regime, and whether the set of possible complexities
in the polynomial regime is “dense”, meaning that for any two reals 0 < a < b ≤ 1, there is a
problem with complexity Ω(na ) and o(nb ).
    In this paper, we provide affirmative answers to both questions, and extend the con-
structions and analysis further to the LCA setting and bounded-degree trees, as stated in
4   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


    Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. Adding our results gives the new complexity landscape for the
    VOLUME model shown in Figure 2.

    ▶ Theorem 1. For each positive integer k, there exists an LCL whose randomized LCA and
    VOLUME complexities are both Θ(logk n) for both bounded-degree graphs and trees.

    ▶ Theorem 2. For each x ∈ Q ∩ (0, 1], there exists an LCL whose randomized LCA and
    VOLUME complexities are both Θ̃(nx ) for both bounded-degree graphs and trees.


          • known construction           dense constructions            × known gap theorem          ? unknown interval
                                                                               ···
                                         ?           ?            ?                              ?
                                 √                                                                             n
                1     log⋆ n         log n   log n       log2 n       log3 n     2ω(log log n)       no(1)

        Figure 2 The current LCL complexity landscape of randomized VOLUME algorithms for bounded-
    degree graphs. The blue dots between log3 n and 2ω(log log n) correspond to constructions for logk n
    for any integer k ≥ 3; The solid blue segment in the polynomial regime represents constructions
    with complexity Θ̃(nx ) for every rational x ∈ (0, 1].



    1.2     Comparison with Results in the LOCAL Model
    It is worth noting the difference between our results in the LCA and VOLUME model and
    similar results in the LOCAL model. In the LOCAL model proposed by Linial [37], the
    complexity is measured by the number of communication rounds, equivalently, the radius of
    the neighborhood that determines the output for each vertex.
        For bounded-degree trees, it is shown in [24, 27] that no LCL has complexity in the
    range ω(log n) − no(1) or the range ω(n1/(k+1) ) − o(n1/k ) for any integer k ≥ 1. Our results
    indicate that the complexity landscape of LCLs in bounded-degree trees is more complex
    for the VOLUME model and LCAs compared to the LOCAL model in polylogarithmic and
    polynomial regimes. This is consistent with the intuition that probe complexity looks like a
    more fine-grained complexity measure compared to distance complexity.
        Yet this intuition does not hold for general graphs, as it is shown in [8, 13] that, for
    bounded-degree graphs, the possible LCL complexity for the LOCAL model is dense in
    the interval ranging from log n to n. More specifically, for any positive rational r/s ≤ 1
                                                                                          r/s
    and p/q ≥ 1, one can construct LCLs with distance complexity Θ(logp/q n), 2Θ(log n) and
    Θ(nr/s ). Our result exhibits a similar density in the polynomial regime, but the techniques are
    completely different. The constructions in [8, 13] use a set of carefully crafted constraints to
    encode the execution of special Turing machines into the instance. Instead, our constructions
    use the constructions in [41] with VOLUME complexity Θ(log n) and Θ̃(n1/k ) and provide a
    way to stack multiple instances of these problems to create more complexity classes. We will
    briefly discuss how the stacking works in Section 2.

    1.3     Organization of the Paper
    In Section 2, we provide an overview of our approach. In Section 3, we define basic notations
    and also models and problems of our interest. In Section 4 and Section 5, we provide the
    LCL construction and analysis in the polylogarithmic complexity setting and the polynomial
    complexity setting, respectively. Finally, in Section 6, we discuss several aspects of our paper
    at a higher level and provide some future directions.
S. Peng                                                                                                 5


 2      Technical Overview

2.1     The Construction in the Polylogarithmic Regime
In the polylogarithmic regime, we use the LeafColoring LCL constructed in [41] with VOLUME
complexity Θ(log n), and stack its instances for k levels to provide an LCL whose VOLUME
and LCA complexities are Θ(logk n) for any positive integer k. We first review the LeafColoring
construction and then show how the stacking works. Finally, we briefly demonstrate how to
generalize the lower bound analysis from VOLUME to LCAs.

2.1.1     Review of the LeafColoring LCL
The main idea behind the LeafColoring LCL is that, on all possible rooted trees of size n
where each vertex has out-degree zero or two, the root needs Ω(log n) steps to reach a leaf,
while a random walk takes O(log n) steps from the root to a leaf with high probability for
any such tree.
    To make sure that any VOLUME algorithm working on the output label for the root must
discover a path from the root to a leaf, we impose the following constraints: Each leaf is
given a red-blue color as an input and required to output the same color as its input, while
each internal vertex needs to output a color appearing as the output color of one of the two
children. These locally checkable constraints together require the root to output the input
color of one of the leaves, and if an algorithm does not probe any leaf, it cannot distinguish
between cases where all leaves are red and all leaves are blue.
    Finally, to generalize the construction to all bounded-degree trees and graphs, one needs
to rule out graphs not following a rooted tree of out-degree zero or two without an explicit
promise on the input structure. To address this issue, Rosenbaum and Suomela [41] design a
special set of input labels for each vertex and constraints called binary tree labeling. The
binary tree labeling is a part of the LCL. If a vertex does not satisfy the locally checkable
constraints for the binary tree labeling, we will output a special ⊥ label for this vertex and
remove it from the rest of the computation. For vertices satisfying all constraints for the
binary tree labeling, we can show that the induced subgraph will be almost a rooted forest
of out-degree zero or two, and we require these vertices to solve the coloring problem. We
will use the same approach in Definitions 9 and 11 to generalize our construction to all
bounded-degree trees and graphs. For ease of understanding, in this section, we can just
assume that all vertices pass the binary tree labeling check.

2.1.2     The Stacking
First, we slightly generalize the LeafColoring construction by using the following set of
constraints: Instead of the red/blue color, we give for each vertex an input bit bin (v),
and each vertex needs to output two symbols. The first symbol d(v) ∈ {L, R} indicates
the path from each vertex to a leaf. Define child(v, d(v)) to be the left child of v when
d(v) = L and the right child of v when d(v) = R, then the path from some vertex u will
be p0 = u, p1 = child(p0 , d(p0 )), p2 = child(p1 , d(p1 )), · · · , all the way down to a leaf w
where d(w) should be a placeholder ⊥. The second output symbol bout (v) is to ensure
that the algorithm probes all vertices along the path, and we add the constraint that
bout (u) = ⊕i≥0 bin (pi ) for each vertex u. This constraint involves Ω(log n) labels, so it is not
local, but we notice that we can use the locally checkable constraint bout (v) = bout (p1 ) ⊕ bin (v)
on each internal vertex v in the instance to jointly make sure that bout (u) equals the xor of
input bits along the path.
6   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


        We denote the previous LCL as Π1PTL , where PTL abbreviates “path to leaf”. Compared
    to LeafColoring, the benefit of Π1PTL is that the output of the root is always related to Θ(log n)
    input bits rather than a single input color on some leaf. As a result, we would expect that
    any randomized LCA would also need Ω(log n) probes.
        We will now demonstrate the way to stack Π1PTL instances. Consider, for each vertex v in
    a Π1PTL instance of size m called the base instance, we give it a “twisted” input bit b′in (v)
    and additionally attach a fresh Π1PTL instance of size m. Different vertices receive disjoint
    instances, so the final instance includes (m + 1) independent Π1PTL instances where one of
    them is the base instance. For a vertex in the base instance, the actual input bit bin (v) will
    be the xor of the twisted input bit b′in (v) and the output bit of the root of the attached
    instance. The Π1PTL constraints for each of the (m + 1) instances are the same as before.
        Now, to get the output bit for the root of the base instance, apart from Θ(log m) input
    bits along the path, the algorithm needs to additionally get the root output label for Θ(log m)
    independent attached instances. This suggests that the LCL should provide a Θ(log2 m)
    probe complexity construction. The total instance size will blow up by a polynomial factor,
    but it does not affect the complexity since we are in the polylogarithmic regime. We call
    this problem Π2PTL , and we can recursively do the attachment to define ΠkPTL for any positive
    integer k.

    2.1.3    Upper Bound and Lower Bound
    The Θ(log2 n) VOLUME and LCA upper bound for Π2PTL follows by generalizing the random-
    walk algorithm in [41]. For the lower bound, one may first approach it using uniform random
    bits for bin , hoping that the output bit at the root of the base instance is then the xor sum
    of Θ(log2 n) uniform random bits. The issue is that the algorithm can choose d(v) based on
    the input bits. For example, an algorithm may use a few probes to find a d(v) assignment
    adaptively such that the correct bout value at the root is zero with high probability.
        To resolve this issue, we construct a special distribution over the instances, so that each
    instance I in the support is associated with a bit bI ∈ {0, 1}, and no matter how the output
    label d is chosen for each vertex, the output bit at the root of the base instance in a globally
    correct solution will always be bI . This removes the effect of d outputs, and we can use an
    induction argument to show that, conditioned on the input bit of any set of o(log2 n) vertices,
    the probability that the associated instance bit bI equals 1 will be exactly 1/2. This, along
    with Yao’s minimax principle, proves the lower bound.

    2.2     The Construction in the Polynomial Regime
    In the polynomial regime, we utilize the Hierarchical-THC LCL constructed in [41] with
    VOLUME complexity Θ̃(n1/k ) for any positive integer k, and stack its instances in a nontrivial
    way to provide an LCL of randomized LCA and VOLUME complexities Θ̃(np/q ) for any
    positive rational 0 < p/q ≤ 1. We first review the Hierarchical-THC construction and then
    show how the stacking works. Finally, we demonstrate the difficulties in the upper and lower
    bound analysis.

    2.2.1    Review of the Hierarchical-THC LCL
    Our presentation of the Hierarchical-THC LCL will be different from previous works [27, 41],
    and the purpose is to show that Hierarchical-THC is constructed by stacking path two-coloring
    instances in a different way compared to the stacking in the polylogarithmic regime. This
    allows us to integrate two different stacking strategies to provide new complexity classes.
S. Peng                                                                                                   7


head                          tail
 v1       v2           v3     v4     X        X         X       X       D        D         D        D



          p2,1         p3,1   p3,2            X         X       X                D         D        D


 p1,1     p1,2         p1,3          X        X         X               D        D         D


                 (a)                              (b)                                (c)
 X        X             X      X     X        X         X       X       R        B         R        R




          D             D      D              B         B       D                R         B        R



 D        D             D            B        D         D               B        R         B


                 (d)                              (e)                                (f)

    Figure 3 An Hierarchical-THC instance with a top path of length four and attached bottom paths
of lengths three, one, two, and zero from head to tail, respectively. Solid left-to-right arrows denote
path connections, and dotted downward arrows denote attachments. (a) shows the input color for
each vertex: all vertices in the top path have red input color, and all vertices in the bottom path
have blue input color. (b)(c)(d)(e)(f) are possible output colorings for (a) that violate constraints
1,2,3,4,5 in Hierarchical-THC, respectively.


    The Hierarchical-THC construction is parameterized by levels of stacking. To start with,
let us consider the construction with two levels, leading to an LCL with Θ̃(n1/2 ) probe
complexity in the VOLUME model. In the construction, we have a directed top path of length
ℓ, denoted by v1 , v2 , . . . , vℓ , with each vertex vi in the top path possibly having a directed
bottom path Pi attached. The total number of vertices in the top path and all bottom paths
is n. See Figure 3(a) for an illustration.
    The constraints of the Hierarchical-THC LCL will guarantee the following: The algorithm
needs to either visit all vertices in the top path to get the output for v1 , or visit all vertices in
one of the bottom paths to get the output of the head of the bottom path. This immediately
                                                                     √                 √
implies Ω(n1/2 ) lower bound from the instance where ℓ = Θ( n) and |Pi | = Θ( n) for each
1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. The matching upper bound requires additional work when bottom paths have
varying lengths, and we will discuss this after introducing our LCL construction.
    Now we show how to craft the constraints to generate the effect described above. First,
we follow the narrative of [41] and add a variant of two-coloring constraints for each top and
bottom path: Each vertex receives a red/blue input color, and the tail of a path must output
its input color. Other vertices should output a color that is the same as their out-neighbors
along the path. These constraints together require the head of a path to output the input
color of the tail.
    At the same time, we want an algorithm to be able to escape from the top path or some
bottom paths when they are too long; otherwise, the complexity will be a clear Θ(n). We
introduce two additional colors for each vertex: color D for decline, and color X for exempt.
These two colors will be used when the algorithm thinks a path is too long. To make sure that
an algorithm cannot abuse these colors, we add the following constraints to Hierarchical-THC:
1. A vertex in any bottom path cannot be colored X;
2. A vertex in the top path cannot be colored D;
3. If a top vertex is colored X, then either no bottom path is attached to it, or the head of
    its attached bottom path is not D;
4. If a vertex is not colored D, then its descendant in the directed path is not colored D.
8   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


    5. After removing vertices with colors D and X, the set of directed paths follows the
       two-coloring constraints.

        The first two constraints prevent the colorings in Figure 3(b) and (c) that color all vertices
    with X or color all vertices with D. The third constraint prevents the coloring in Figure 3(d):
    if an algorithm tries to escape from the top path by putting an X color on some top-level
    vertex vi , then the algorithm is required not to color the head of Pi with D if it exists.
    With this in mind, constraint 4 then says that, if some vertex is not colored D, so is its
    out-neighbor. This constraint propagates from the head of Pi along the directed edges, and
    finally implies that any vertex in Pi should not be colored D or X. Finally, we need to color
    the path following the two-coloring constraints to satisfy constraint 5, so the head of Pi must
    travel along the path to fetch the input color of the tail.
        The previous argument holds only when the top path uses color X, but if it does not use
    X, it cannot use D either from constraint 2, so according to constraint 5, the head of the top
    path needs to travel along the top path to fetch the input color on the tail. This gives the
    guarantee that we want: The algorithm needs to either visit all vertices in the top path to
    get the output for v1 , or visit all vertices in one of the bottom paths to get the output of the
    head of the bottom path.
        To generalize the result to larger k, instead of a bottom path, one can attach an
    Hierarchical-THC instance to each vertex in the top path. Following a similar argument, the
    algorithm is required to either solve the two-coloring along the top path or solve one of the
    attached Hierarchical-THC instances. For instance, if we replace the bottom path with a two-
    level Hierarchical-THC instance, we will end up with a three-level Hierarchical-THC instance.
    In this case, when the top path has length ℓ, the complexity will be Θ̃(min(ℓ, (n/ℓ)1/2 )), and
    the final complexity is Θ̃(n1/3 ) attained by ℓ = Θ(n1/3 ).
        As in the polylogarithmic setting, [41] additionally constructs an input labeling called
    colored tree labeling to generalize the LCL to general bounded-degree trees and graphs. We
    follow the same approach in Definitions 31 and 32.

    2.2.2    The Stacking
    From the previous review, we can see how the stacking strategy in Hierarchical-THC differs
    from that in ΠkPTL : In the Hierarchical-THC stacking, an algorithm only needs to solve one
    instance among all attached instances along the path, whereas in ΠkPTL , the algorithm is
    required to solve all attached instances for each vertex along the path.
        Same as the approach in the polylogarithmic setting, before the stacking, we first change
    the input and output format of Hierarchical-THC to make sure that the output bit on the
    head of the top path v1 must depend on inputs on nΩ(1) vertices. We provide an additional
    input bit bin (v) for each vertex in the instance, and we require any vertex with color other
    than D to output a bit bout (v) which is the xor of bin (w) for all vertices w in the following
    path starting from v: Suppose currently we are at some vertex u with color other than D.
        If u is of output color X, go to the head of its attached bottom path. If it has no bottom
        path attached, stop.
        If u is of output color red or blue, go to its out-neighbor in the directed path. If it is the
        tail, stop.
    According to constraints 3 and 4, this path will never visit vertices of color D. At the same
    time, the length of this path from v1 will be Ω(n1/2 ) for the Hierarchical-THC construction
    above, since the path either never visits vertices of color X and visits all vertices in the top
    path, or visits some vertex with color X and visits all vertices of the attached bottom path.
S. Peng                                                                                                9




                               v1         v2          v3          v4




                                          p2,1       p3,1        p3,2



                              p1,1        p1,2       p1,3


    Figure 4 Fine-grained stacking construction. The large two-level Hierarchical-THC instance is
the base instance. Each vertex in the top path has one two-level Hierarchical-THC instance attached,
shown as a small boxed copy above the vertex.


With the input bin (v), we can remove the two-coloring constraint and the red/blue color
input without changing the complexity. In Section 5 we will identify R and B as a single
color U.
     Now we try to stack Hierarchical-THC instances. A possible first approach, similar to
the stacking in the polylogarithmic setting, is to attach a Hierarchical-THC instance, say
of complexity Θ̃(m1/3 ), to every vertex in a base Hierarchical-THC instance of complexity
Θ̃(m1/2 ) of size m, and hope that it generates an LCL of probe complexity Θ(m1/2+1/3 ) =
Θ(m5/6 ). Unfortunately, since the instance has size blown up to n = m2 when each attached
instance has size m, this is not true. By balancing the size of the base instance and attached
instances, it turns out that the complexity is still Θ̃(m1/2 ).
     Our approach is to deploy a more fine-grained stacking strategy, stacking different
Hierarchical-THC instances for different levels. Next, we will give one concrete example
to show this idea. In the example, there will be a base instance, which is a two-level
Hierarchical-THC instance, to which other instances are attached. Instead of attaching an
instance for each vertex in the base instance, we only attach one instance, specifically a fresh
two-level Hierarchical-THC instance, for each vertex in the top path of the base instance.
Vertices in the bottom path of the base instances have no instance attached. See Figure 4
for an illustration. As the construction in the polylogarithmic regime, the input bit on the
vertices of the top path in the base instance will be a twisted one b′in (v), and the algorithm
needs to recover the actual input bit bin (v) by xoring b′in (v) and the output bit of the root of
the attached instance, namely the head of the top path.
     Denote ℓ as the length of the top path in the base instance, and we assume that the
algorithm knows the size of the attached two-level Hierarchical-THC instances, denoted as
s1 , s2 , . . . , sℓ , and also |Pi | for 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. Consider two possibilities for the output:

   If the top path in the base instance has no color X, then apart from ℓ input bits, the
   algorithm is required to solve ℓ two-level Hierarchical-THC instances. The total number of
                      P√
   probes will be Θ̃(    si ). By Jensen’s inequality, an adversary that wants to maximize the
   probe complexity will make si roughly equal, leading to Θ̃(ℓ(n/ℓ)1/2 ) probe complexity;
   Otherwise, the algorithm is required to solve one of the bottom paths in the base instance.
   The algorithm can choose the shortest one to solve, and an adversary will make the
   bottom paths of equal length, leading to Θ(n/ℓ) probe complexity.

   Finally, an algorithm can choose one of the above two choices, so an adversary will take ℓ
10   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     to maximize Θ̃(min(ℓ(n/ℓ)1/2 , n/ℓ)). The maximum value is Θ̃(n2/3 ) taken by ℓ = Θ(n1/3 ),
     and we would expect that the complexity of such an LCL is Θ̃(n2/3 ).
         For the general case, we can replace the bottom path in the base instance with an
     instance of complexity Θ̃(nq ), and replace the attached two-level Hierarchical-THC instance
     with an instance of complexity Θ̃(np ) for p < q. Then, following the above analysis, the
     best algorithm would use Θ̃(min(ℓ(n/ℓ)p , (n/ℓ)q )) probes, and an adversary maximizing the
     probe complexity will take ℓ = n(q−p)/(1+q−p) , leading to complexity Θ̃(nq/(1+q−p) ). This
     suffices to generate all rational powers, as we will show in Lemma 30.

     2.2.3     Upper Bound and Lower Bound
     The lower bound analysis for the polynomial setting is much closer to the preceding discussion.
     We can follow the adversarial choice in the argument above to generate the underlying graph
     for the lower bound instances. There is still the issue where an algorithm can choose output
     colors after reading several input bits to be in favor of the output distribution for the root, yet
     we can use the same approach as in the polylogarithmic setting: we construct the distribution
     where each instance in the distribution has a definite output bit at the root, no matter how
     the underlying coloring is chosen. And then we use an induction to prove that for any vertex
     set of size o(nq/(1+q−p) ), revealing the input bits on those vertices does not provide any
     advantage to predict the output bit at the root.
          The main obstacle for the upper bound proof is to remove the assumption that the
     algorithm knows the size of each attached instance and bottom path. To see why this
     is the case, we first provide a sketch of the matching Õ(n1/2 ) upper bound algorithm
     for two-level Hierarchical-THC: For each vertex vi in the top path, consider the sub-path
                                               √
     vi , vi+1 , . . . , vi+⌈2√n⌉ . When i + ⌈2 n⌉ > ℓ, we can just color it with the input color at the
                                         √
     tail of the top path with O( n) probes. For the other case, at least half of the vertices
                                                                      √
     in the sub-path have a bottom path of length at most n attached. In the algorithm,
     each vertex in the top path uses its local randomness to add itself to a sample set S with
                                √
     probability Θ(log n/ n). Define Si = {vi , vi+1 , . . . , vi+⌈2√n⌉ } ∩ S. By Chernoff bound, with
     high probability, |Si | = O(log n) and some vertex in Si has a bottom path of length at
             √
     most n attached. The algorithm finds the first vertex in Si that has an attached bottom
                                    √                                 √
     path of length at most n, which can be tested within Õ( n) probes, and colors it with X,
                                                           √
     generating the output accordingly. This uses Õ( n) probes and concludes the algorithm.
          Returning to the Θ̃(n2/3 ) example above, for the bottom paths in the base instance, we
     can use a similar approach with an alternate parameter: Each vertex in the top path of the
     base instance inspects 2n1/3 descendants, and if this does not hit the tail, use the sample set
     S to find a vertex with an attached bottom path of length at most n2/3 . For the general
     case where the bottom paths are replaced by instances of complexity Θ̃(nq ), we will run the
     algorithm for attached instances with a maximum possible size parameter set to n1/(1+q−p) ,
     and we require the algorithm to fail within Θ̃(nq/(1+q−p) ) probes when the actual instance
     size is larger than the maximum possible size.
          For the attached Hierarchical-THC instances, things become more complicated since the
     algorithm described for Θ̃(n1/2 ) upper bound depends heavily on knowing the instance size.
     We use a standard binary lifting to guess the size of each instance, and this introduces an
     additional problem: To get the output for each vertex in the attached instance, each query
     will start an independent binary lifting guessing procedure, and different vertices may become
     satisfied and stop at different size guesses, raising potential inconsistency issues. To resolve
     this issue, we will give an additional size parameter to the algorithm, called the ideal size of
     the instance, and most of the algorithm’s decisions will rely on the ideal size parameter rather
S. Peng                                                                                                 11


than the size guess in the binary lifting. This maximizes consistency between independent
queries and allows us to make additional changes to the algorithm to provide full consistency
within the desired probe complexity budget.


 3     Preliminaries
In this section, we provide basic definitions and formally define models and problems of
interest.

3.1    Graphs
In this paper, we denote a graph as G = (V, E), where V is the vertex set and E is the edge
set. We will normally use n to denote the number of vertices in a graph. Unless explicitly
stated, all graphs are undirected without self-loops and parallel edges. For each vertex v ∈ V ,
we denote its degree by degG (v), its neighborhood by ΓG (v), and its r-hop neighborhood,
defined as the set of vertices with distance at most r to v, as ΓrG (v). For a vertex set V ′ ⊆ V ,
define the induced subgraph of V ′ in G as G[V ′ ] = (V ′ , {(u, v) ∈ E : u, v ∈ V ′ }).
    For all graph problems we will consider in the rest of the paper, we assume that each
vertex v ∈ V is given a unique identifier from the range {1, 2, . . . , nα } for some arbitrary fixed
α ≥ 1, and all vertices have degree at most ∆ for some fixed constant ∆ ∈ N. Additionally,
we assume that the input graph is equipped with a port ordering. This means that, for each
vertex v and incident edge (v, w), there is an associated number p(v, w) ∈ {1, 2, . . . , deg(v)},
the port number of (v, w) for v, such that p is a bijection between edges incident to v and
{1, 2, . . . , deg(v)}. Notice that p(v, w) and p(w, v) may not be equal.

3.2    Locally Checkable Labeling
Here, we give the formal definition of a locally checkable labeling problem.

▶ Definition 3 (Locally Checkable Labeling). For a fixed ∆, a locally checkable labeling (LCL)
problem Π is a graph problem that can be specified by a tuple (Σin , Σout , r, C) such that
   Σin and Σout are finite sets of labels;
   r is an arbitrary positive integer, called the checkability radius of Π;
   C is the set of allowed local configurations, denoted by a finite set of tuples (H =
   (V H , E H ), x, φin , φout ), where:
      H is a graph of degree at most ∆, x is a vertex of H, and each vertex has distance at
      most r from x in H;
      φin is a function from V H to Σin , and φout is a function from V H to Σout .

    An instance of an LCL Π(Σin , Σout , r, C) is a graph G = (V, E) with n vertices and
maximum degree ∆, and additionally an input labeling ϕin : V → Σin . The graph G may not
be connected. A solution to the instance (G, ϕin ) is an output labeling ϕout : V → Σout such
that for every vertex v ∈ V , there exists (H = (V H , E H ), x, φin , φout ) ∈ C and a bijection f
between ΓrG (v) and V H with all the following properties:
    f specifies a graph isomorphism between G[ΓrG (v)] and H;
    ∀u ∈ ΓrG (v), ϕin (u) = φin (f (u)) and ϕout (u) = φout (f (u)).

▶ Remark 4. In the rest of the paper, instead of specifying the set of allowed local configura-
tions C for an LCL explicitly, we will demonstrate a LOCAL algorithm A that collects the
information for the r-hop neighborhood, including the graph structure, input labels, output
12   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     labels and port numbers, but excluding the unique ID on each vertex, and checks whether
     the output labeling satisfies the local constraints for the LCL. This implicitly defines C as
     the set of local configurations that pass the check in A.


     3.3    Computation Models
     In the following, we formally define the models we consider in this paper, the randomized
     LCA and VOLUME model.

     ▶ Definition 5 (Randomized LCA). A randomized local computation algorithm (LCA) A for
     an LCL is given access to a deterministic graph oracle OG for the input graph G and input
     labeling ϕin , a tape r of random bits shared across queries, and local read-write computation
     memory independent across queries. When given a query vertex v, A must assign an output
     label for v using r, OG , and the knowledge of the size n of graph G. The algorithm can
     access OG by giving the unique identifier of a vertex u, and OG (u) will return the input label
     ϕin (u) along with its adjacency list and port number labeling in G. The algorithm is said to
     solve an LCL Π if for any instance (G, ϕin ) of Π, with probability at least 1 − 1/n over the
     random tape r, the algorithm generates an output label assignment to each vertex that forms
     a solution to the instance.

     ▶ Definition 6 (Randomized VOLUME). A randomized VOLUME algorithm A for an LCL
     is given access to a deterministic graph oracle OG for the input graph G, input labeling ϕin ,
     and an independent random string rv for each vertex v. The random strings are shared
     across queries. The algorithm is also equipped with local read-write computation memory
     independent across queries. When given a query vertex v, A must assign an output label for
     v using OG and the knowledge of the size n of graph G. The algorithm can access OG by
     giving the unique identifier of a vertex u, and OG (u) will return the input label ϕin (u), the
     random string ru , along with its adjacency list and port number labeling in G, only when the
     following holds:
         Either u is the vertex being queried, or some previous oracle access OG (w) returns an
         adjacency list containing u.
     The algorithm is said to solve an LCL Π if for any instance (G, ϕin ) of Π, with probability
     at least 1 − 1/n with respect to the local randomness rv for each vertex v, the algorithm
     generates an output labeling assignment to each vertex that forms a solution to the instance.

         The complexities of randomized LCA and VOLUME algorithms can be measured in several
     different ways. In this paper, we will use only the probe complexity, the maximum number of
     oracle accesses an algorithm uses to provide the output label for a single query, to measure
     an LCA or VOLUME algorithm. One reason is that it simplifies the analysis and enables
     us to focus on the effect of limited knowledge on the input graph in the algorithm design.
     Furthermore, it turns out that all algorithms given in this paper can also be implemented with
     time and space complexities roughly a factor of O(log n) larger than the probe complexities.
         From the definition, we can see that a VOLUME algorithm is always an LCA, formalized
     by the following observation, but it is not the case in the reverse. It is still open whether
     VOLUME models and LCA are equivalent up to polynomial factors; see Section 6.2 for a
     related discussion.

     ▶ Observation 7. If a randomized VOLUME algorithm solves an LCL Π with probe complexity
     f (n) for some function f , then there is a randomized LCA that solves Π with probe complexity
     O(f (n)).
S. Peng                                                                                              13


Proof. Let A be the randomized VOLUME algorithm. We construct an LCA B that simulates
A on the same query vertex. The LCA uses its shared random tape to generate the local
random strings used by the VOLUME algorithm: for each vertex identifier u, reserve an
infinite subsequence of bits on the shared tape for ru . Since vertex identifiers come from a
polynomial range in n, this reservation can be fixed in advance as a deterministic function of
the identifier to make sure that the randomness is independent for every vertex.
    During the simulation, whenever A probes a vertex u, the LCA probes the same vertex
through its graph oracle and additionally reads the block of random bits assigned to u. The
VOLUME access rule only restricts which probes A is allowed to make; an LCA can make
all of these probes as well. Therefore, the transcript of B has the same distribution as the
transcript of A on every query and every instance. In particular, the output labels form a
feasible solution with the same success probability. The number of graph-oracle probes is
exactly the number of probes made by A, so the probe complexity is O(f (n)).                ◀

▶ Remark 8. The algorithms described in the rest of this paper will be Las Vegas, with a
guarantee of success, and the number of probes will vary with randomness. However, the
randomized VOLUME model and randomized LCA are stated in Monte Carlo form, with
a fixed probe budget and a small probability of failure. One can change the algorithm to
Monte Carlo by running the algorithm with a fixed probing budget and output arbitrarily
when the algorithm uses up its budget.

 4     Construction in Polylogarithmic Complexity Regime
In this section, we construct LCLs ΠkPTL whose randomized probe complexities in both
the LCA and VOLUME models are Θ(logk n) for every positive integer k. Here, PTL is an
abbreviation of “path to leaf”.

4.1    Description of the LCL
Before defining the LCL, we first define an input labeling called “multi-level binary tree
labeling” in Definition 9 and define its associated local constraints in Definition 11. The
purpose of this input labeling is to “escape” from the case where the input graph is irregular:
As we will show in Lemma 12, all vertices satisfying the local constraints for the multi-level
binary tree labeling, along with their outgoing edges, form a pseudo-forest in which each
vertex has out-degree zero or two.
▶ Definition 9 (Multi-level binary tree labeling). Let G = (V, E) be a graph of maximum
degree at most ∆, and let P = [∆] ∪ {⊥}, where ⊥ is a special placeholder symbol. For a
given positive integer k, a level-k binary tree labeling consists of a height labeling h : V → [k]
and the following four labels for each v ∈ V : A parent P(v) ∈ P, a left child LC(v) ∈ P, a
right child RC(v) ∈ P, and a new-instance child NC(v) ∈ P.
▶ Remark 10. To make the set of possible inputs at each vertex constant, P(v), LC(v), RC(v),
and NC(v) are given by the port number rather than the corresponding vertex ID in
Definition 9. However, to keep notation light, in the rest of this paper, we will abuse the
notation a bit and use P(v), LC(v), RC(v), NC(v) to also denote the corresponding neighbors
reached through that port. If a port is ⊥, then the corresponding vertex reached through
that port is defined as ⊥.
▶ Definition 11. For a level-k binary tree labeling of G, a vertex v is called consistent if all
the following conditions hold, and otherwise it is called inconsistent:
14   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


      1. The non-⊥ ports among P(v), LC(v), RC(v), NC(v) are pairwise distinct.
      2. For w ∈ {LC(v), RC(v), NC(v)}\{⊥}, P(w) = v.
      3. Either both LC(v) and RC(v) are ⊥, or neither of them is ⊥.
      4. For w ∈ {LC(v), RC(v)}\{⊥}, h(w) = h(v).
      5. If NC(v) ̸=⊥, then h(NC(v)) = h(v) − 1. In particular, if h(v) = 1, then NC(v) =⊥.
     We further use condition 3 to differentiate between consistent vertices: A consistent vertex is
     internal if LC(v), RC(v) ̸=⊥, and is a leaf if LC(v) = RC(v) =⊥. For a consistent internal
     vertex v, define child(v, L) = LC(v) and child(v, R) = RC(v).

     ▶ Lemma 12. For a graph G and a level-k binary tree labeling, define a directed graph G′ =
     (V, E ′ ), where (u → v) ∈ E ′ when u is a consistent internal vertex and v ∈ {LC(u), RC(u)}.
     Then, each vertex in G′ has in-degree at most one and out-degree either zero or two. As a
     result, G′ is a pseudo-forest where each weak component has at most one directed cycle.

     Proof. For each vertex v, from constraint 2 of Definition 11, its only possible in-degree in
     G′ is from P(v) if P(v) ̸=⊥. From constraint 3 of Definition 11, each consistent internal
     vertex in G′ has out-degree two, while inconsistent vertices and consistent leaves have no
     out-neighbor. This concludes the statement.                                               ◀

         With Definitions 9 and 11, we are ready to describe the LCL ΠkPTL .

     ▶ Definition 13 (ΠkPTL ). The problem ΠkPTL is defined in the following way:
        Input: A graph G, a level-k binary tree labeling, and bin (v) ∈ {0, 1} for each v ∈ V .
        Output: d(v) ∈ {L, R, ⊥} and bout (v) ∈ {0, 1} for each v ∈ V .
        Constraint: For each vertex v ∈ V , if v is inconsistent, then (d(v), bout (v)) = (⊥, 0);
     Otherwise, d(v) ∈ {L, R} for internal vertices v, d(v) =⊥ for leaves, and we have the following
     equation for bout (v):

         bout (v) = bin (v) ⊕ b′ (v) ⊕ b′′ (v).                                                  (1)

     Here
                     (
          ′              0,              NC(v) =⊥
         b (v) =                                                                                 (2)
                      bout (NC(v)),      NC(v) ̸=⊥
                     (
                       0,                         LC(v) = RC(v) =⊥
         b′′ (v) =                                                                               (3)
                         bout (child(v, d(v))),   otherwise

     ▶ Lemma 14. ΠkPTL is an LCL.

     Proof. From the definition, since the maximum degree ∆ and the parameter k are constant,
     we know that the set of possible input and output labels has a constant size. Now we show
     that there is a LOCAL algorithm of radius one to check whether the local constraint is satisfied
     for each vertex. The consistency conditions in Definition 11 inspect only v, its incident ports,
     and the labels of its neighbors. As a result, we can determine whether the current vertex
     is consistent, internal, or a leaf using input labels from the one-hop neighborhood. After
     that, constraints for the output label only involve the one-hop neighborhood. Hence, every
     constraint is checkable in radius one.                                                        ◀

        In the rest of the section, we prove the following upper and lower bound results, which
     together imply Theorem 1.
S. Peng                                                                                             15


▶ Lemma 15. There is a randomized VOLUME algorithm that solves ΠkPTL in all bounded-
degree graphs using O(logk n) probes.

▶ Lemma 16. Any randomized LCA that solves ΠkPTL uses Ω(logk n) probes even when we
restrict the instance to bounded-degree trees.

Proof of Theorem 1. From Observation 7, the upper bound result Lemma 15 can be general-
ized from VOLUME to LCA, while the lower bound result Lemma 16 can be generalized from
LCA to VOLUME. As a consequence, in both models, we have a Θ(logk n) randomized algo-
rithm for ΠkPTL on bounded-degree graphs and a matching lower bound for bounded-degree
trees.                                                                               ◀

4.2    Upper Bound
In this part, we prove Lemma 15, providing a randomized VOLUME algorithm for ΠkPTL on
bounded-degree graphs with probe complexity O(logk n).
    To begin with, we provide an equivalent formulation of the constraints in ΠkPTL . Arbitrarily
fix d(v) for each consistent internal vertex v. For some consistent vertex u, apply u ←
child(u, d(u)) multiple times to generate a path, until either reaching a leaf, an inconsistent
vertex, or returning to where it starts. The path is always a path in the graph G′ defined in
Lemma 12, so according to Lemma 12, the procedure terminates in finite steps no matter
how the d output label is assigned. This procedure generates either a path from u to some
vertex w, or a simple cycle passing u. We will demonstrate the way to get rid of cycles, so
let us focus on the other case. Applying Equation (1) for each vertex along the path, we
can conclude that the value of bout (u) is the xor of all bin values along the path and all bout
values of the new-instance children along the path.
    According to constraints 4 and 5 in Definition 11, all vertices along the path have the
same height, while their new-instance children have height h(v) − 1. If d(v) is assigned in such
a way that the path is of length O(log n), then one can recurse on all O(log n) new-instance
children to get their bout value, and the recursion decreases the vertex height by one. This
means that, when all possible paths generated by the procedure above have length O(log n),
we get a VOLUME algorithm with probe complexity O(logk n).
    This is exactly the strategy of our randomized VOLUME algorithm given in Algorithm 2,
where the output pair (d, z) of SolvePTLk (v) will be the final value of (d(v), bout (v)). We
assume that each vertex has a uniform random direction ρ(v) ∈ {L, R}, and recall that in the
VOLUME model, the local random direction ρ(v) is fixed for each vertex v and shared across
queries.
    The algorithm first assigns (⊥, 0) for inconsistent vertices. For other vertices, it calls
WalkToLeaf(v), described in Algorithm 1, to find the path from v to either an inconsistent
vertex or a leaf using only LC and RC ports. The following observation is straightforward
from the algorithm description.

▶ Observation 17. For any consistent vertex v, the path πv generated by WalkToLeaf(v)
is a path in the graph G′ defined in Lemma 12.

    Algorithm 1 treats the randomness ρ(v) as the initial assignment for d(v) and traces the
path πv by following ρ. If the path ends at a vertex for which the termination condition
holds, then we assign d(v) with ρ(v) in Algorithm 2. For the other case when ρ directs v into
a cycle, corresponding to the branch in line 3, Algorithm 1 will abandon all visited vertices
and use the direction other than ρ(v) to restart a walk. The other direction is guaranteed to
arrive at a leaf or an inconsistent vertex, as otherwise we can find some vertex with in-degree
16   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     two in the graph G′ defined in Lemma 12. In this case, we assign d(v) to that other direction.
     After getting the path πv , Algorithm 2 assigns bout (v) by what we have discussed above:
     gathers all bin values in πv , and gets all bout values by recursion.
        We first show that Algorithm 1 behaves correctly within O(log n) probes with high
     probability, which leads to the O(logk n) probe complexity of Algorithm 2.
     ▶ Lemma 18. For each consistent vertex v ∈ G, WalkToLeaf(v) generates a path πv from
     v to a leaf or an inconsistent vertex within O(log n) probes with probability 1 − 1/n3 . As a
     result, |πv | = O(log n) with probability 1 − 1/n3 .
     Proof. By Observation 17, all vertices visited by Algorithm 1 lie on a directed walk in the
     graph G′ from Lemma 12. We first record a simple consequence of the in-degree bound
     in Lemma 12. Fix a vertex s and expose a walk that starts at s and, whenever it is at
     a consistent internal vertex, follows an independently chosen random direction in {L, R}.
     Before the walk reaches a leaf, reaches an inconsistent vertex, or returns to s, two different
     direction sequences of length t must end at two different vertices. Indeed, if two such prefixes
     first meet at a vertex other than s, then that vertex has two distinct in-neighbors in G′ ,
     contradicting Lemma 12. Hence, for t steps, the number of direction sequences that keep the
     walk “alive”, meaning that all vertices traveled by the walk are consistent internal vertices,
     is at most n, and the probability that this happens is at most n2−t .
         Choose a sufficiently large constant C. Applying the previous bound with t = C log n
     shows that the walk followed by Algorithm 1 lasts more than C log n steps with probability
     at most 1/(2n3 ) before the walk arrives at a leaf, arrives at an inconsistent vertex, or finds a
     cycle and triggers the branch in line 3. If this walk reaches a leaf or an inconsistent vertex,
     the algorithm stops. Otherwise, the first walk has returned to v, so it has found the unique
     directed cycle through v. The algorithm then restarts from v using the other child of v as
     the first step. By Lemma 12, this second walk cannot return to v: the predecessor of v on
     the first cycle already accounts for the only possible in-neighbor of v in G′ . It also cannot
     enter a directed cycle not containing v, because entering such a cycle from outside would
     give the entry vertex two distinct in-neighbors in G′ . Therefore, the second walk must end
     at a leaf or an inconsistent vertex.
         The same counting argument, now with the first direction fixed and all later directions
     random, shows that this second walk has length more than C log n with probability at most
     1/(2n3 ) after increasing C if necessary. By a union bound, with probability at least 1 − 1/n3 ,
     both walks considered by the algorithm have length O(log n). The algorithm probes only
     the vertices on these walks, up to a constant number of additional oracle accesses needed to
     check consistency and read the relevant ports. Thus Algorithm 1 uses O(log n) probes and
     returns a path πv of length O(log n) with probability at least 1 − 1/n3 .                      ◀

     ▶ Corollary 19. For each v ∈ G, SolvePTLk (v) probes O(logk n) vertices with probability
     1 − 1/n2 .
     Proof. From Lemma 18 and union bound over all vertices, with probability 1 − 1/n2 , for
     any consistent vertex v in the instance, Algorithm 1 generates a path πv of length at most
     C log n using at most C log n probes for some constant C. In the following, we assume that
     the event happens.
         Let T (n, h⋆ ) be the maximum possible number of probes for Algorithm 2 to generate
     (d(v), bout (v)) for a consistent vertex v with h(v) = h⋆ in an n-vertex instance. For the base
     case T (n, 1), from constraint 5 in Definition 11, none of the vertices in πv have a new-instance
     child, so there is no recursion. In conclusion, the number of probes in Algorithm 2 is bounded
     by C log n.
S. Peng                                                                                17




   Algorithm 1 WalkToLeaf(v)
Require: A random direction ρ(u) ∈ {L, R} for each vertex u in the graph.
Ensure: A path π from v to a leaf or inconsistent vertex using only LC and RC ports.
 1: u ← v, π ← ()
 2: while u is a consistent internal vertex do
 3:   if u = v and π is nonempty then
 4:      π ← (v)
 5:      a ← the unique direction in {L, R}\{ρ(v)}
 6:   else
 7:      append u to the end of π
 8:      a ← ρ(u)
 9:   end if
10:   u ← child(u, a)
11: end while
12: append u to π
13: return π




   Algorithm 2 SolvePTLk (v)
Ensure: The output label (d(v), bout (v)) for v
 1: if v is inconsistent then
 2:    return (⊥, 0)
 3: end if
 4: π ← WalkToLeaf(v)
 5: if v is a leaf then
 6:    d ←⊥
 7: else
 8:    d ← the first direction taken by π from v
 9: end if
10: z ← 0
11: for each consistent vertex u in π do
12:    z ← z ⊕ bin (u)
13:    if NC(u) ̸=⊥ then
14:       (−, z ′ ) ← SolvePTLk (NC(u))
15:       z ← z ⊕ z′
16:    end if
17: end for
18: return (d, z)
18   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


         For h⋆ ≥ 2, apart from the call to Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2 recurses on NC(u) for each
     u ∈ πv . Constraints 4 and 5 of Definition 11 tell us that all vertices in πv have height h⋆ ,
     while all their new-instance children have height h⋆ − 1. As a consequence, we have the
     following recurrence:

        T (n, h⋆ ) ≤ C log n · T (n, h⋆ − 1) + C log n,                                            (4)

     with T (n, 1) ≤ C log n. As C is constant with respect to n, solving Equation (4) gives
                        ⋆
     T (n, h⋆ ) = O(logh n). Finally, since the maximum height of a vertex is k in ΠkPTL , the probe
     complexity of Algorithm 2 is O(logk n).                                                      ◀

        Now we show that Algorithm 2 assigns labels satisfying all constraints in ΠkPTL .

     ▶ Lemma 20. If πv = (v, w, p1 , p2 , . . . , pℓ ) is the output of WalkToLeaf(v) for a consistent
     internal vertex v for some ℓ ≥ 0 and w is consistent, then WalkToLeaf(w) outputs
     πw = (w, p1 , p2 , . . . , pℓ ).

     Proof. Let a be the first direction taken by πv , so w = child(v, a). After this first step,
     Algorithm 1 follows the random direction ρ(u) at every subsequent consistent internal vertex
     u on πv . This is true whether the first direction is a = ρ(v) or the algorithm first discovers a
     cycle through v and then restarts with the direction a ̸= ρ(v).
         If w is a leaf, then running Algorithm 1 on w immediately returns (w), which is the
     desired suffix. Otherwise, w is a consistent internal vertex. Running Algorithm 1 from w
     starts by following ρ(w), and then follows the same random directions as the run from v did
     after reaching w due to shared randomness across queries. Thus, the two executions trace the
     same directed walk unless the execution from w returns to w and triggers the branch in line
     3. This cannot happen along the suffix of πv : if some later vertex on the suffix pointed back
     to w, then w would have two distinct in-neighbors in G′ , namely v and that later vertex,
     contradicting Lemma 12. Hence, the execution from w will never enter the branch in line 3,
     and it stops exactly at the same terminal leaf or inconsistent vertex as the execution from v.
     Therefore its output is πw = (w, p1 , p2 , . . . , pℓ ).                                       ◀

     ▶ Lemma 21. SolvePTLk generates labels satisfying all constraints in ΠkPTL .

     Proof. We distinguish the different types of vertices to prove the statement. Recall the
     definition of b′ and b′′ in Equations (2) and (3).
         For inconsistent vertices, the algorithm assigns (⊥, 0) to it, satisfying the constraint.
         For a leaf v, d(v) is assigned ⊥, b′′ (v) = 0 and πv = (v). Algorithm 2 collects bin (v) and
         also bout (NC(v)) when NC(v) exists, so bout (v) = bin (v) ⊕ b′ (v), which is Equation (1)
         with b′′ (v) = 0.
         For an internal vertex v, define w = child(v, d(v)). When w is inconsistent, we know
         that πv = (v, w), and (d(w), bout (w)) = (⊥, 0), meaning that b′′ (v) = 0 and bout (v) =
         bin (v) ⊕ b′ (v); Otherwise, from Lemma 20, πw is a suffix of πv . Compare the processes
         of computing the output bit between SolvePTLk (v) and SolvePTLk (w), the only
         difference is that SolvePTLk (v) additionally collects bin (v) and bout (NC(v)) if NC(v)
         exists. As a result, bout (v) = bout (w) ⊕ bin (v) ⊕ b′ (v), which is exactly Equation (1).
                                                                                                     ◀

     Proof of Lemma 15. The Las Vegas algorithm given by Algorithm 2 can be converted to the
     required Monte Carlo guarantee by Remark 8. The algorithm succeeds with high probability
     within O(logk n) probes according to Corollary 19 and Lemma 21.                       ◀
S. Peng                                                                                                         19


4.3     Lower Bound
In this part, we prove the lower bound for ΠkPTL for LCAs via the following lemma.

▶ Lemma 22. For any positive integer k and for every sufficiently large n, there is a set
Sk,n of ΠkPTL instances of size at most n with the following properties:
  (i) All instances in Sk,n have the same underlying graph and binary tree labeling, in which
      the graph is a tree, every vertex is consistent, and there is a unique root vertex x with
      h(x) = k and P(x) =⊥;
 (ii) For any instance I in Sk,n , there exists bI ∈ {0, 1} such that any solution satisfying all
      ΠkPTL constraints for I must have bout (x) = bI . Define Sk,nB
                                                                      as the subset of Sk,n with
      bI = B;
(iii) For any set V0 of vertices of size o(logk n), there exists a bijection fV0 between Sk,n 0
            1
      and Sk,n , where for each I ∈ Sk,n and u ∈ V0 , bin (u) is the same between I and fV0 (I).

    We first show how Lemma 22 implies Lemma 16.

Proof of Lemma 16. Suppose for contradiction that there is a randomized LCA that solves
ΠkPTL with o(logk n) probes and succeeds in every instance over bounded-degree trees of size
at most n with probability larger than 1/2. According to Yao’s minimax principle, for any
distribution D over such instances, there is a deterministic LCA A with the same probe
complexity that succeeds with probability larger than 1/2 over D.
     Now set D to be the uniform distribution over Sk,n . For any instance I ∈ Sk,n , define
V0 as the set of vertices probed by A(x), we have |V0 | = o(logk n). According to condition
(iii) in Lemma 22, there exists I ′ with bI ̸= b′I , but all inputs in V0 are the same across two
instances. As A is a deterministic algorithm, the transcript of A(x) on I and I ′ will be
exactly the same, so A will label x the same in both instances, and one of the two solutions
must be wrong according to condition (ii). Since they have the same probability weight in D,
A cannot succeed with probability larger than 1/2, a contradiction.                             ◀

   To construct the set of instances, we first provide the construction for the underlying
graph and binary tree labeling. The construction consists of k layers of perfect binary trees.

▶ Definition 23. For a positive integer sequence (a1 , a2 , . . . , aℓ ), define the graph G(a1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
along with its binary tree labeling recursively in the following way:
    For the base case, G(1) consists of only one root vertex x with h(x) = 1.
    G(a1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ ) consists of a vertex x with h(x) = ℓ and the following ports for x:
       If ℓ ̸= 1, attach the graph and labeling G(a2 ,...,aℓ ) to NC(x), otherwise NC(x) =⊥;
       If a1 ̸= 1, attach two independent copies of G(a1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ ) to LC(x) and RC(x)
       respectively, otherwise LC(x) = RC(x) =⊥.
For “attaching a graph to a port”, we mean creating a copy of the graph and making the port
point to the root of the graph. Finally, we set up P ports to make every vertex consistent. It
is easy to check that there is a unique way to do so.

    The following observation can be proved by a standard induction argument.

▶ Observation 24. G(a1 ,...,aℓ ) satisfies the following property:
                                  Qℓ
  G(a1 ,...,aℓ ) is a tree with Θ( i=1 2ai ) vertices and maximum degree 4;
  With respect to the binary tree labeling, all vertices in the graph are consistent;
  The maximum height in the binary tree labeling is ℓ.
20   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


         Now we construct sets S(a        0
                                              1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                    1
                                                               and S(a 1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                       of ΠℓPTL instances for each sequence
     {a1 , . . . , aℓ }, in which all instances have G{a1 ,...,aℓ } as the underlying graph and binary tree
     labeling. The only difference between these instances lies in bin inputs for each vertex, and
     we construct the inputs also recursively, in the following way:
                                   B
         For the base case, S(1)        contains the only instance with bin (x) = B for B ∈ {0, 1};
                                         B
         For the general case, S(a           1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                              contains all instances that can be generated by the
         following procedure:
              If ℓ = ̸ 1, NC(x) has a copy of G(a2 ,...,aℓ ) attached. Arbitrarily pick b′ ∈ {0, 1} and a
                                       b′
              bin assignment in S(a       2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                        to assign bin values for the subtree rooted at NC(x). If
              ℓ = 1, set b′ to be zero.
              If a1 ̸= 1, LC(x) and RC(x) both have a copy of G(a1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ ) attached. Arbitrarily
                                                                                b′′
              pick b′′ ∈ {0, 1} and two bin assignments in S(a                    1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                                    to assign bin values for the
              subtrees rooted at LC(x) and RC(x), respectively. Notice that two copies use the same
              bit b′′ but possibly different bin assignments. If a1 = 1, set b′′ to be zero.
              Finally, assign bin (x) with B ⊕ b′ ⊕ b′′ .
                                                  0                       1
         Finally, S{a1 ,...,aℓ } is the union of S(a 1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                     and S(a1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                     0
     ▶ Lemma 25. For any positive integer sequence (a1 , a2 , . . . , aℓ ), the sets S(a                               1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                                                                       and
       1
     S(a  1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                           satisfy    the  following:
        (i) All instances in S(a1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ ) have the same underlying graph and binary tree labeling,
              in which the graph is a tree, every vertex is consistent, and there is a unique root vertex
              x with h(x) = ℓ and P(x) =⊥;
                                                                             B
       (ii) For B ∈ {0, 1} and any instance I in S(a                           1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                               , any solution satisfying all ΠℓPTL
              constraints for I satisfies bout (x) = B;
                                                                              Qℓ
      (iii) For any set V0 of vertices of size less than i=1 ai , there exists a bijection fV0 between
                 0                          1
              S(a   1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                     and S(a    1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                , where for each I ∈ S(a1 ,a2 ,...,aℓ ) and u ∈ V0 , bin (u) is the
              same between I and fV0 (I).
                                                                            Pℓ
     Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on i=1 ai . In the base case, the sequence is (1),
                                                                                                                B
     and condition (i) is trivial. The graph consists only of the root x, and S(1)                                 fixes bin (x) = B.
     Hence every legal solution has bout (x) = B by Equation (1), proving condition (ii). Finally,
     in condition (iii), the set V0 is required to have size less than one, so V0 = ∅, and the bijection
                       0              1
     between S(1)            and S(1)    is trivial.
                                                                                   Pℓ
          Now consider a sequence A = {a1 , . . . , aℓ } with i=1 ai > 1, and let x be the root of GA .
     Condition (i) follows from the construction of GA and Observation 24.
          To prove condition (ii), fix B ∈ {0, 1} and an instance I ∈ SA                                 B
                                                                                                           . Let b′ and b′′ be the
     auxiliary bits used to assign bin inputs for I. If NC(x) ̸=⊥, the bin input is assigned according
                                        b′
     to some instance in S(a               2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                       , so by the induction hypothesis applied to the subtree rooted
     at NC(x), every solution of I has bout (NC(x)) = b′ . This means that the b′ (x) value defined
     in Equation (2) always equals the auxiliary bit b′ . When ℓ = 1, we also have b′ (x) = 0 = b′ .
          Similarly, if x is internal and w = child(x, d(x)), then w is the root of either the left or
     right copy of G(a1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ ) , and both copies have bin input generated from some instance
            b′′
     in S(a    1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                   . By induction, every solution of I has bout (w) = b′′ , so the b′′ (x) value in
     Equation (3) always equals to b′′ , too. When a1 = 1, we also have b′′ (x) = 0 = b′′ .
          In sum, we have b′ (x) = b′ and b′′ (x) = b′′ . Since bin (x) = B ⊕ b′ ⊕ b′′ , Equation (1) gives
     bout (x) = B, implying (ii).
                                                                                    Qℓ
          For condition (iii), fix a set V0 of size less than i=1 ai . If x ∈                          / V0 , the bijection fV0 can
     simply flip bin (x), so we suppose x ∈ V0 . Let VNC be the intersection of V0 with the subtree
     rooted at NC(x) when it exists, and VNC = ∅ if NC(x) =⊥. Similarly define VLC and VRC .
S. Peng                                                                                                              21

                          Qℓ
     If ℓ > 1 and |VNC | < i=2 ai , applying the induction hypothesis to the subtree rooted
                                                 0                      1
at NC(x), there is a bijection fNC between S{a     2 ,a3 ,...,aℓ }
                                                                   and S{a 2 ,a3 ,...,aℓ }
                                                                                           that preserves
the input for vertices in VNC . Now we define the bijection fV0 in the following way: For
each instance I, we apply the bijection fNC to the subtree rooted at NC(x), and keep other
inputs unchanged. From the induction hypothesis, fV0 is a map that preserves inputs among
V0 . Finally, following Equation (1), applying fV0 changes b′ (x), while b′′ (x) and bin (x) are
                                                                                        0        1
unchanged, so bout (x) is flipped, showing that fV0 is a bijection between SA              and SA  .
                                                                        Qℓ
     Consider the remaining case, where either ℓ = 1, or |VNC | ≥ i=2 ai . Since x ∈ V0 and
           Qℓ
|V0 | < a1 i=2 ai , we have
                                                                 ℓ
                                                                 Y                ℓ
                                                                                  Y                     ℓ
                                                                                                        Y
     |VLC ∪ VRC | = |V0 \({x} ∪ VNC )| = |V0 | − 1 − |VNC | <          ai − 1 −         ai < (a1 − 1)         ai .
                                                                 i=1              i=2                   i=2

Apply the induction hypothesis to the subtrees rooted at LC(x) and RC(x), we know there
                                  0                         1
are bijections fLC , fRC between S(a 1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                       and S(a 1 −1,a2 ,...,aℓ )
                                                                                 which preserve the input
                                                                                 0       1
among VLC and VRC , respectively. For the bijection fV0 between SA                 and SA  , we apply fLC
to the subtree rooted at LC(x), apply fRC to the subtree rooted at RC(x), and keep other
inputs unchanged. From the induction hypothesis, fV0 preserves inputs among V0 . Finally,
from Equation (1), applying fV0 changes b′′ (x) regardless of the choice of d(x), while b′ (x)
and bin (x) remain unchanged, so bout (x) is flipped, showing that fV0 is a bijection between
  0       1
SA  and SA  .                                                                                           ◀

Proof of Lemma 22. Recall that k is a constant. Let q = Θ(log n) and set Sk,n to be
S{q,q,...,q} where the sequence has length k. According to Observation 24, the graph has size
Θ(2qk ) = nΘ(1) , and the size is less than n when the constant on q is small enough. We have
q k = Θ(logk n) and all three conditions in Lemma 22 follow from Lemma 25.                 ◀

 5      Construction in Polynomial Complexity Regime
In this section, we provide LCL constructions whose randomized VOLUME and LCA com-
plexity is Θ̃(nx ) for any x ∈ Q ∩ (0, 1].

5.1     Preliminaries
In this section, our construction is parameterized by an ordered binary tree T . For an ordered
binary tree, we mean that the tree is rooted, and we distinguish the left and right children of
a vertex. In the following, we provide basic notations around ordered binary trees.
    Define the root of an ordered binary tree T as rT and the subtree of a vertex v ∈ T as Tv .
For each vertex v, the left child of a vertex v ∈ T is denoted as LCT (v), while the right child
is denoted as RCT (v). When the vertex does not have a left child, denote LCT (v) =⊥, and
similarly for the right child. The parent of the vertex v is denoted as PT (v), while PT (rT ) is
defined as ⊥. For notation simplicity, we define LCT (⊥) = RCT (⊥) = PT (⊥) =⊥.
▶ Remark 26. To avoid confusion between LCT , RCT and PT notation in an ordered binary
tree and LC, RC, P ports in the LCL (See Definition 9 and Definition 31), we will never omit
subscript T on any notation related to ordered binary trees, such as LCT , RCT , PT and rT .
    Define TL and TR as the left and right subtrees of rT in T . Denote the unique ordered
binary tree with no vertex as ⊥, and the unique ordered binary tree with only one vertex as
•. We define r⊥ =⊥.
    Now we introduce an important definition in this section, the value of an ordered binary
tree.
22   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     ▶ Definition 27 (Value). The value of an ordered binary tree T is defined recursively as
     follow:
                 
                 0,
                 
                                   T =⊥
        val(T ) =       1,                          T = •,                                          (5)
                            val(TR )
                        1+val(TR )−val(TL ) ,       Otherwise.
                    
                    

         We say an ordered binary tree T is good, if for every vertex v ∈ T that is not a leaf, its
     left subtree has a value strictly smaller than that of its right subtree. In the following, we
     will only focus on good ordered binary trees. The following observation can be easily proved
     via induction.

     ▶ Observation 28. val(T ) is always a rational value in (0, 1] for any nonempty good ordered
     binary tree T .

        The main theorem we will prove in this section is the following. This theorem, along with
     Lemma 30, concludes Theorem 2.

                                                    T that is not ⊥, there exists an LCL
     ▶ Theorem 29. For every good ordered binary tree
     whose VOLUME and LCA complexity is Θ̃ nval(T ) .

     ▶ Lemma 30. For any rational x ∈ Q ∩ (0, 1], there exists a good ordered binary tree T with
     val(T ) = x.

     Proof. We induct on c to prove the following claim: For all 0 ≤ a ≤ b ≤ c, there is a good
     ordered binary tree T with value a/b. If a = 0, then we can set T =⊥, and we can set T = •
     when a = b, so the base case c = 1 is proved.
        Now we assume the induction hypothesis holds for c − 1 and consider the statement for
     c. We only need to consider cases where b = c and a ∈ [1, b − 1]. Let p = (a − 1)/(b − 1)
     and q = a/(b − 1). We have 0 ≤ p < q ≤ 1, and both p and q have denominators strictly
     smaller than c. By induction hypothesis, there are two good ordered binary trees TL , TR
     whose values are p and q respectively. Now we consider the tree T where the left subtree of
     the root is TL while the right subtree is TR . According to Equation (5),
                                                a                a
                      q          b−1             a
        val(T ) =         =      a    a−1 = b−1
                                             b
                                                = .
                    1+q−p   1 + b−1 − b−1   b−1
                                                 b

     It is easy to check that T is good, and this concludes the induction.                           ◀

     Proof of Theorem 2. For every rational x ∈ (0, 1], choose the good ordered binary tree T
     with val(T ) = x, whose existence is guaranteed by Lemma 30, and apply Theorem 29 to
     generate an LCL with complexity in the LCA and VOLUME model Θ̃(nval(T ) ) = Θ̃(nx ). ◀


     5.2    Description of the LCL
     In the rest of this section, we fix a good ordered binary tree T . T does not grow with the
     size of the LCL instance we will construct, so the size of T is considered a constant.
         Similar to Definitions 9 and 11 in the polylogarithmic setting, we will first provide a set
     of input labels called T -labeling and the associated local constraints to rule out irregularities
     in the instance.
S. Peng                                                                                          23


▶ Definition 31 (T -labeling). Let G be a graph of maximum degree at most ∆, and P =
[∆] ∪ {⊥}. For a given ordered binary tree T , a T -labeling consists of a type labeling
t : V (G) → V (T ) ∪ {⊥} and the following four labels for each v ∈ V (G): a parent P(v) ∈ P,
a left child LC(v) ∈ P, a right child RC(v) ∈ P, and a direct child DC(v) ∈ P. We call t(v)
the type of v.

    Same as Remark 10, we will abuse the notation and use P(v), LC(v), RC(v) and DC(v)
to also denote the vertex reached from the corresponding port.

▶ Definition 32. For a T -labeling, a vertex v is consistent if all the following constraints
hold; otherwise, it is inconsistent:
1. The non-⊥ ports among P(v), LC(v), RC(v), and DC(v) are pairwise distinct.
2. For w ∈ {LC(v), RC(v), DC(v)}\{⊥}, P(w) = v.
3. If P(v) ̸=⊥, then v ∈ {LC(P(v)), RC(P(v)), DC(P(v))}.
4. If LC(v) ̸=⊥, t(LC(v)) = LCT (t(v)). Specifically, t(LC(v)) =⊥ when LCT (t(v)) =⊥.
5. If RC(v) ̸=⊥, t(RC(v)) = RCT (t(v)). Specifically, t(RC(v)) =⊥ when RCT (t(v)) =⊥.
6. If DC(v) ̸=⊥, t(DC(v)) = t(v).

    With Definitions 31 and 32, we are ready to define our LCL ΠTHC , where HC is an
abbreviation of HierarchicalColoring. The name comes from the LCL Hierarchical 2 12 Coloring
introduced in previous works [27, 41].

▶ Definition 33 (ΠTHC ). The problem ΠTHC is defined in the following way:
   Input: A graph G, a T -labeling and a bit bin (v) ∈ {0, 1} for each v ∈ V (G).
   Output: A color cout (v) ∈ {D, X, U, Cyc, ⊥} and bout (v) ∈ {0, 1} for each v ∈ V (G).
   Constraint on cout (v): If v is inconsistent, then cout (v) =⊥. Otherwise, cout (v) ̸=⊥
and the coloring should follow the following constraints:
1. If cout (v) = Cyc, then DC(v) ̸=⊥ and cout (DC(v)) = Cyc.
2. If cout (v) = U, then DC(v) =⊥ or cout (DC(v)) ∈ {X, U, ⊥}.
3. If cout (v) = X, then all of the following hold:
   a. t(v) =⊥ or t(v) is not a leaf in T .
   b. RC(v) =⊥ or cout (RC(v)) ̸= D.
4. If cout (v) = D, then t(v) ̸= rT ;
5. If cout (v) ∈ {X, U}, then LC(v) =⊥ or cout (LC(v)) ̸= D.

   Constraint on bout (v): If cout (v) ∈ {Cyc, D, ⊥} or t(v) =⊥, then bout (v) = 0. Otherwise,
we have the following equation:

   bout (v) = bin (v) ⊕ b′ (v) ⊕ b′′ (v),                                                 (6)

where
             
             0,
                               cout (v) = U and DC(v) =⊥,
             
             
    ′
             b (DC(v)),
                out             cout (v) = U and DC(v) ̸=⊥,
   b (v) =                                                                                (7)
             
             
              0,               cout (v) = X and RC(v) =⊥,
             
               bout (RC(v)),    cout (v) = X and RC(v) ̸=⊥,
             
             (
               0,               LC(v) =⊥,
   b′′ (v) =                                                                              (8)
               bout (LC(v)),    LC(v) ̸=⊥ .
24   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     ▶ Remark 34. For readers familiar with previous works [27, 41], the Hierarchical-THC LCL
     introduced in these papers is a special case of ΠTHC , where all vertices in T only have a right
     child, a new output color Cyc is introduced, and colors R and B are identified to a single
     color U. Left and right children in Hierarchical-THC correspond to DC and RC ports in ΠTHC .
     The extra color Cyc is to avoid the possibility that none of the vertices in a cycle want to
     output X, and there may be no consistent solution for bout along the cycle.

     ▶ Observation 35. ΠTHC is an LCL.

     Proof. As |T | is a constant, the set of possible input and output labels has a constant size.
     Now we show that there is a LOCAL algorithm of radius one to check whether the local
     constraint is satisfied for each vertex. The consistency conditions in Definition 32 inspect only
     v, its incident ports, and the labels of its neighbors. As a result, we can determine whether
     a vertex is consistent within one round. After that, constraints for the output label only
     involve the one-hop neighborhood. Hence, every constraint is checkable in radius one. ◀

        In the rest of this section, we will show the following two lemmas, jointly proving
     Theorem 29.

     ▶ Lemma 36. There is a randomized VOLUME algorithm that solves ΠTHC over bounded-degree
     graphs using Õ(nval(T ) ) probes.

     ▶ Lemma 37. Any randomized LCA that solves ΠTHC uses Ω(nval(T ) ) probes even when we
     restrict the instance to bounded-degree trees.

     Proof of Theorem 29. From Observation 7, the upper bound result Lemma 36 can be
     generalized from VOLUME to LCA, while the lower bound result Lemma 37 can be generalized
     from LCA to VOLUME. As a consequence, in both models, we have a Õ(nval(T ) ) randomized
     algorithm for ΠTHC over bounded-degree graphs and a matching lower bound for bounded-
     degree trees up to a polylogarithmic factor.                                          ◀

     5.3    Upper Bound
     Throughout the rest of this section, fix a good ordered binary tree T . Set p = val(TL ) and
     q = val(TR ), and furthermore
                          q                  q−p
        α = val(T ) =         ,        β=         .
                        1+q−p               1+q−p
     We have the following equalities:

        β + p(1 − β) = q(1 − β) = α                                                                (9)
                            p−1    q − (1 + q − p)
        (p − 1)(1 − β) =         =                 = α − 1.                                       (10)
                           1+q−p      1+q−p

        As we see in Section 2, ΠTHC instances are formed by paths (corresponding to DC paths
     and cycles in which all vertices have type rT ) and some attached ΠTHC
                                                                          L
                                                                            and ΠTHC
                                                                                   R
                                                                                     instances.
     We formalize this structure by the definition of a sub-instance.

     ▶ Definition 38 (Sub-instance). For a ΠTHC instance I, define a graph GI = (VI , EI ) where
     VI contains all consistent vertices with type other than rT and ⊥ in I, and EI = {(u, P(u)) |
     u, P(u) ∈ VI }. A connected component of GI induces an instance, which we call a sub-
     instance in I. A sub-instance is a ΠTHC L
                                               (ΠTHC
                                                   R
                                                     ) sub-instance if all vertices in the sub-instance
     have type in TL (TR ).
S. Peng                                                                                            25


    For each consistent vertex u of type rT , LC(u) and RC(u) will be in a ΠTHC
                                                                              L
                                                                                and a ΠTHCR


sub-instance when these two vertices are consistent. We will call the two sub-instances the
ΠTHC
   L
     (ΠTHC
         R
           ) instance attached to u.

▶ Lemma 39. Every vertex v in a ΠTHC instance I falls in exactly one of the categories: an
inconsistent vertex, a consistent vertex of type ⊥, a consistent vertex of type rT , a vertex in
some ΠTHCL
           sub-instance, or a vertex in some ΠTHC R
                                                    sub-instance.

Proof. If v is inconsistent, or if v is consistent with t(v) =⊥ or t(v) = rT , then v falls into
exactly one of the first three categories. It remains to consider a consistent vertex v with
t(v) ∈
     / {⊥, rT }. Since T is an ordered binary tree, t(v) belongs to exactly one of TL and TR .
The vertex v is therefore included in VI and lies in a unique connected component of GI .
    We now show that this component cannot contain types from both TL and TR . Consider
an edge {x, y} of GI . By the definition of GI , x and y are consistent vertices, so up to
swapping x and y, we have y = P(x) and x ∈ {LC(y), RC(y), DC(y)}. If x = DC(y), then
t(x) = t(y). If x = LC(y) or x = RC(y), then t(x) is a child of t(y) in T . In all cases, as
x, y ∈ VI , the two types lie in the same one of the two subtrees TL and TR . Hence every
connected component of GI is contained entirely in one side, and v belongs to exactly one
ΠTHC
   L
     or ΠTHCR
              sub-instance.                                                                   ◀

    In the rest of this section, a randomized VOLUME algorithm A for ΠTHC will receive three
inputs (u, N1 , N2 ), where u is the queried vertex, and N1 , N2 are positive size parameters
with N1 ≤ N2 . The algorithm A will be used to solve both an ΠTHC instance, in which
                                                           ′
N1 = N2 = n, and a ΠTHC sub-instance inside a larger ΠTHC instance, in which N1 and N2 give
clues about the size of the current sub-instance.
    N1 denotes the ideal size of the ΠTHC sub-instance, and this parameter is to ensure the
    correct probe complexity and consistency. Most decisions in the algorithm that are related
    to the size of the instance, such as the probability of each vertex entering the sample set
    in Algorithm 5, will use N1 as the size parameter.
    N2 is the maximum possible size of the ΠTHC sub-instance. When the algorithm has a high
    confidence that the current sub-instance is even larger than N2 , then it could use (D, 0)
    to label the current vertex being queried. Otherwise, the algorithm should make the best
    effort to use a label other than (D, 0).
Within the algorithm, we will utilize binary lifting to estimate the correct size of the sub-
instance, with the estimation denoted as N . The actual size of the sub-instance is generally
unknown to the algorithm, and we denote it as n⋆ . n denotes the size of the whole instance,
which is known to the algorithm. One may think of the algorithm as solving a ΠTHC sub-
instance of unknown size n⋆ inside a large instance of known size n. Additionally, the
algorithm A may execute the algorithm for ΠTHC    L
                                                     and ΠTHCR
                                                               to deal with the ΠTHCL
                                                                                      and ΠTHC
                                                                                             R


sub-instances of the current instance I.
    The following definition provides the guarantee for the algorithm in this section.

▶ Definition 40 (Strong Algorithm). Fix a ΠTHC instance I with n⋆ vertices, a randomized
VOLUME algorithm A, a randomness setup R = {rv }v∈I , and n ≥ n⋆ . For a vertex u ∈ I
and positive integers N1 ≤ N2 , define au,N1 ,N2 as the output of A(u, N1 , N2 ) using R as the
randomness, and define bu,N1 ,N2 as the number of probes used by A(u, N1 , N2 ). A knows the
value of n but does not know n⋆ .
    The algorithm A is called strong if for all ΠTHC instances I of size n⋆ , n ≥ n⋆ and
1 ≤ N1 ≤ n, with probability 1 − n⋆ /n2 over R all the following conditions hold:
26   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


       (i) (Stability over N2 ) For every vertex u ∈ I, there exists N2⋆ (u, N1 ) ≥ N1 such that
                           (
                            (D, 0),              N2 < N2⋆ (u, N1 ),
               au,N1 ,N2 =                                                                       (11)
                            au,N1 ,N2⋆ (u,N1 ) , N2 ≥ N2⋆ (u, N1 ).

      (ii) (Correctness for small N2 ) For all N2 ≥ N1 , all constraints in ΠTHC are satisfied by the
           output labeling given by av,N1 ,N2 , except constraints of type 4 for cout (vertices of label
           (D, 0) should not have type rT ).
     (iii) (Correctness for large N2 ) For every N2 ≥ max(N1 , n⋆ ) and every consistent vertex
           u ∈ I with t(u) = rT , au,N1 ,N2 ̸= (D, 0).
     (iv) (Probe complexity) For every N2 ≥ N1 ,
                               (
                                 O(1),                    T =⊥,
               max bu,N1 ,N2 =            α−1     dT
                                                                                                    (12)
                u∈I              O(N2 N1 log n), T ̸=⊥ .

          In addition, when T ̸=⊥, then for every consistent vertex u ∈ I with t(u) = rT ,

              bu,N1 ,N2 = O(max(N1 , n⋆ )N1α−1 logdT n).                                           (13)

          Here dT is the depth of the good ordered binary tree T defined as the number of edges
          in the longest path in T from rT to some vertex in the tree.
     ▶ Remark 41. We explain here the intuition of the four requirements in Definition 40.
       (i) Condition (i) says that an algorithm can label a vertex u with output label (D, 0)
           when N2 is smaller than the actual size n⋆ . However, once N2 is large enough for the
           algorithm to make a decision, increasing N2 will not change the output. Notice that we
           allow the algorithm to always output (D, 0) no matter how large N2 is.
      (ii) Condition (ii) says that even if N2 is too small compared to n⋆ , the output labels satisfy
           all constraints in ΠTHC except that some vertices with type rT may output (D, 0).
     (iii) Condition (iii) says that once N2 is at least n⋆ , every root-type vertex is not labeled
           (D, 0) with high probability. Combining condition (ii), the output labeling in the
           sub-instance satisfies all ΠTHC constraints with probability 1 − n⋆ /n2 .
     (iv) Condition (iv) contains two complexity guarantees, Equations (12) and (13). Equa-
           tion (12) applies to the case where n⋆ ≫ N2 : in this case, we require the algorithm to
           produce the output of every vertex in the instance with a probe complexity depending on
           N2 rather than n⋆ . N1 roughly measures the proportion of vertices that the algorithm
           is going to shave. When N1 = N2 = n⋆ and T ̸=⊥,        since d⋆T αis a constant, we have
                                                        ⋆  1+α−1
           that with high probability bu,n⋆ ,n⋆ = Õ (n )         = Õ((n ) ), which is the desired
           complexity for ΠTHC . Equation (13) handles the case where n⋆ ≪ N2 . In this case, we
           require the algorithm to produce a labeling for root-type vertices faster than the bound
           claimed by Equation (12).
        We will show the following claim in the rest of this section, and it immediately implies
     Lemma 36.
     ▶ Theorem 42. For every good ordered binary tree T , there is a strong randomized VOLUME
     algorithm for ΠTHC .
     Proof of Lemma 36. Apply Theorem 42 with N1 = N2 = n⋆ = n. By conditions (ii) and
     (iii) of Definition 40, the output labeling {au,n,n }u∈I satisfies ΠTHC with probability at least
     1 − 1/n. By condition (iv), the probe complexity is Õ(nval(T ) ) with probability 1 − 1/n.
     Finally, we can use Remark 8 to translate this algorithm from Las Vegas to Monte Carlo. ◀
S. Peng                                                                                                27


   We build the algorithm for Theorem 42 inductively, and a strong algorithm for ΠTHC will
use strong algorithms for ΠTHC
                             L
                               and ΠTHC
                                      R
                                        . We first handle the base cases T =⊥ and T = •.

▶ Lemma 43. There is a strong deterministic VOLUME algorithm for Π⊥
                                                                  HC .

Proof. The algorithm checks whether the queried vertex u is consistent using Definition 32.
If u is inconsistent, it is labeled (⊥, 0); otherwise it is labeled (X, 0). The output is not (D, 0)
and is independent of the parameter N2 , so condition (i) of Definition 40 is satisfied.
     Since T =⊥, every consistent vertex has type ⊥. Thus X is allowed by item 3(a) in the
cout constraint, and item 3(b) is always satisfied since output color D does not appear in the
instance. This shows that all vertices satisfy the ΠTHC constraints on cout . The constraint on
bout enforces every vertex u in the instance to have bout (u) = 0. This means that conditions
(ii) and (iii) hold. Finally, the probe complexity is O(1), satisfying condition (iv).            ◀

▶ Lemma 44. There is a strong deterministic VOLUME algorithm for Π•HC .

Proof. The algorithm first performs the same consistency and type-⊥ checks as in Lemma 43.
Thus inconsistent vertices output (⊥, 0), type-⊥ consistent vertices output (X, 0), and
constraints on these vertices are satisfied. Now suppose u is consistent and t(u) = rT , then
colors X and D are both prohibited at u. With the input parameter N2 , the algorithm follows
the DC path from u (i.e. the path u, DC(u), DC(DC(u)) . . . ) for N2 steps and outputs the
first applicable label below:
    If the walk revisits u, u is labeled (Cyc, 0).
                  L a consistentvertex w such that DC(w) =⊥ or DC(w) is inconsistent,
    If the walk reaches
    u is labeled U, z∈Pu,w bin (z) , where Pu,w is the DC path from u to w.
    If neither event above is found within N2 steps, u is labeled (D, 0).
    Now we check the conditions for strong algorithms. For a fixed N1 , the threshold
N2⋆ (u, N1 ) is the smallest value N2 for which the walk from u sees one of the two terminating
events, hence condition (i) holds.
    Now we check conditions (ii) and (iii). Fix N2 ≥ N1 , and distinguish different possibilities
for a vertex u in the instance. Inconsistent vertices and consistent type-⊥ vertices have
already been handled. Let u be a consistent vertex with t(u) = rT . If the algorithm outputs
(D, 0), then the only possible violation is item 4 in the constraint on cout , which is precisely
the exception allowed in condition (ii).
    Suppose the algorithm outputs (Cyc, 0) at u. Then the DC walk from u returns to u
within N2 steps. For every vertex z on this directed cycle, the same walk starting from z also
returns to z within N2 steps before encountering any terminating event, so z is also labeled
(Cyc, 0). Hence item 1 in the constraint on cout is satisfied at u, and the bit constraint is
satisfied because vertices of color Cyc have output
                                                 Lbit zero.       
    Finally, suppose the algorithm outputs U, z∈Pu,w bin (z) at u, where w is the first
consistent vertex on the DC path from u such that DC(w) =⊥ or DC(w) is inconsistent. If
u = w, then item 2 in the constraint on cout is immediate. Otherwise, the vertex DC(u)
reaches the same terminating vertex w within fewer steps, so it is also labeled U. Thus item
2 is satisfied at u. Since T = •, vertices of type rT have left and right children of type ⊥
whose output bit must be zero. As a result, Equation (6) reduces to

    bout (u) = bin (u) ⊕ bout (DC(u)),

with bout (DC(u)) = 0 when DC(u) =⊥ or DC(u) is inconsistent. The bit given by the
algorithm is exactly this recurrence expanded along the path from u to w.
28   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


         To prove condition (iii), let N2 ≥ max(N1 , n⋆ ) and u be a consistent vertex with t(u) = rT .
     Along the DC walk from u, the first repeated consistent vertex must be u: if the first repeated
                   ̸ u, then z would have two different predecessors, contradicting the consistency
     vertex were z =
     definition in Definition 32. Therefore, within at most n⋆ steps, the walk either returns to u
     or reaches a vertex whose DC port is ⊥ or points to an inconsistent vertex. Since N2 ≥ n⋆ ,
     the algorithm sees one of these terminating events and does not output (D, 0).
         Finally, the walk uses O(min(n⋆ , N2 )) probes for every vertex. This is O(N2 ) for all
     vertices and O(max(N1 , n⋆ )) for root-type vertices. Since α = 1 and dT = 0, condition (iv)
     holds.                                                                                         ◀

         For the induction step, assume that there are strong VOLUME algorithms AL and AR for
     ΠTHC
        L
          and ΠTHCR
                    respectively. We also assume that T ≠ •, so rT is not a leaf and the vertices of
     type rT are not prohibited from using color X.

     5.3.1    Algorithm Description
     The description of the algorithm is given in Algorithm 6. Before explaining the algorithm, we
     first explain its subroutines, Algorithms 3–5. Inside the algorithm, we define DCj (u) as the j-
     th vertex in the DC path starting from u. Namely, DC0 (u) = u and DCj (u) = DC(DCj−1 (u))
     for j ≥ 1.
         The algorithm PrepareT described in Algorithm 3 is a subroutine that handles edge
     cases and sub-instances. For inconsistent vertices or vertices of type ⊥, we label them in
     the same way as in the algorithm for Π⊥     HC described in Lemma 43. For consistent vertices u
     where t(u) ̸= rT , according to Lemma 39, it lies in either a ΠTHC    L
                                                                             or a ΠTHC
                                                                                     R
                                                                                       sub-instance. We
     use AL and AR to solve them. Notice that parameter N2 is different between AL and AR
     calls: ΠTHC
               R
                  sub-instances will be solved in a best-effort basis, meaning that if the sub-instance
     size is larger than ⌈N N1−β ⌉, it is allowed to label (D, 0); Instead, the maximum possible size
     for ΠTHCL
               sub-instances is a conservative value N .
         The algorithm CollectT described in Algorithm 4 is used when the algorithm plans to
     color the DC path from u to DCk−1 (u) with U and color DCk (u) with U or X. When we
     follow the coloring plan, expanding bout (u) using Equation (6) along the path, we have that
                                                                         
                                     Mk
         bout (u) = b′ (DCk (u)) ⊕        bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u))  ,
                                                                        
                                    j=0
                                                    L                                         
                                                         k
     and CollectT tries to compute the term              j=0   bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u))        . This re-
     quires CollectT to get the output bit for LC(DC (u)) for each 0 ≤ j ≤ k if it exists. Each
                                                           j

     of these vertices is either handled directly by PrepareT or lies in a ΠTHCL
                                                                                  sub-instance, so we
                    T
     call Prepare with size parameters (N1 , N ) to get them.
         To avoid wasting too many probes when the total size of the attached ΠTHC    L
                                                                                        sub-instances
                                                                         α−1
     is much larger than N , we set up a probe budget of size Θ̃(N N1 ). Once those calls use
     up the probe budget, we immediately stop this process and all recursions generated by it,
     returning ⊥ to indicate a failure. Another possibility of failure is when any PrepareT call
     returns (D, 0): in this case, we cannot execute the original coloring plan for the DC path due
     to item 5 in the constraint on cout (a vertex of color X or U cannot have a left child of color
     D). In this case, CollectT also returns ⊥.
         The algorithm TraverseT described in Algorithm 5 travels along the DC path from u
     for at most ⌈2N1β ⌉ steps. For each of the vertices traveled, we include it in a sample set
     S with probability min(1, 4N1−β log n). This sampling should be consistent across different
S. Peng                                                                                        29


   Algorithm 3 PrepareT (u, N1 , N )
Ensure: Either the output label (cout (u), bout (u)), or ⊥ indicating no output.
 1: if u =⊥ then
 2:    return (X, 0)
 3: else if u is inconsistent then
 4:    return (⊥, 0)
 5: else if t(u) =⊥ then
 6:    return (X, 0)
 7: else if t(u) ∈ TL then
 8:    return AL (u, ⌈N11−β ⌉, N )
 9: else if t(u) ∈ TR then
10:    return AR (u, ⌈N11−β ⌉, ⌈N N1−β ⌉)
11: else
12:    return ⊥
13: end if


   Algorithm 4 CollectT (u, k, N1 , N )
Ensure: ⊥ when the algorithm fails, or a bit b ∈ {0, 1} when it succeeds.
 1: Set a probe budget of size Θ(N N1
                                      α−1
                                           logdT n) with a sufficiently large constant. Once
                             T
    the whole Collect procedure uses up the budget, stop all recursions and return ⊥.
 2: b ← 0
 3: for j from 0 to k do
 4:   (c′ , b′ ) ← PrepareT (LC(DCj (u)), N1 , N )
 5:   if (c′ , b′ ) = (D, 0) then
 6:      return ⊥
 7:   end if
 8:   b ← b ⊕ bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′
 9: end for
10: return b


   Algorithm 5 TraverseT (u, N1 , N )
Ensure: A sample set Su and a backup label (c0 , b0 ).
 1: S ← ∅, (c0 , b0 ) ← (D, 0)
                            β
 2: for j from 0 to ⌈2N1 ⌉ do
                  j
 3:   w ← DC (u)
 4:   if w =⊥ or w is inconsistent or (j > 0 and w = u) then
 5:      if j > 0 and w = u then
 6:         (c0 , b0 ) ← (Cyc, 0)
 7:      else if CollectT (u, j − 1, N1 , N ) ̸=⊥ then
 8:         (c0 , b0 ) ← (U, CollectT (u, j − 1, N1 , N ))
 9:      end if
10:      break
11:   end if
12:   With probability min(1, 4N1−β log n), include j in S. The same randomness is used
      between different calls when N1 is the same.
13: end for
14: return S, (c0 , b0 )
30   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


        Algorithm 6 SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 )
     Ensure: An output labeling (cout (u), bout (u)) for u.
      1: if N1 > N2 then
      2:    return (D, 0)
      3: end if
                     T
      4: if Prepare (u, N1 , 2N2 ) ̸=⊥ then
      5:    return PrepareT (u, N1 , 2N2 )
      6: end if
      7: k ← ⌈log2 (N2 /N1 )⌉
      8: for p from 0 to k do
      9:    if TryT (u, N1 , p) ̸=⊥ then
     10:       return TryT (u, N1 , p)
     11:    end if
     12: end for
     13: return (D, 0)

        Algorithm 7 TryT (u, N1 , p)
     Ensure: An output labeling (cout (u), bout (u)) other than (D, 0), or ⊥ to denote a failure
      1: N ← 2p N1
                                       T
      2: Su , (c0 , b0 ) ← Traverse (u, N1 , N )
           ′
      3: Su,p    ← {j ∈ Su | PrepareT (RC(DCj (u)), N1 , N ) ̸= (D, 0)}
               ′
      4: if Su,p    ̸= ∅ then
                                         ⋆
      5:      ⋆
             j ← min Su,p   ′
                              , w ← DCj (u)
      6:     (c⋆ , b⋆ , B) ← (D, 0, ⊥)
      7:     if j ⋆ = 0 then
      8:        c⋆ ← X
      9:        (−, b⋆ ) ← PrepareT (RC(w), N1 , N )
     10:        B ← CollectT (u, 0, N1 , N )
     11:     else
     12:        c⋆ ← U
     13:        if SolveHCT (w, N1 , N/2) ̸= (D, 0) then
     14:            (−, b⋆ ) ← SolveHCT (w, N1 , N/2)
     15:            B ← CollectT (u, j ⋆ − 1, N1 , N )
     16:        else
     17:            (−, b⋆ ) ← PrepareT (RC(w), N1 , N )
     18:            B ← CollectT (u, j ⋆ , N1 , N )
     19:        end if
     20:     end if
     21:     if B =⊥ then
     22:        return ⊥
     23:     else
     24:        return (c⋆ , b⋆ ⊕ B)
     25:     end if
     26: else if (c0 , b0 ) ̸= (D, 0) then
     27:     return (c0 , b0 )
     28: else
     29:     return ⊥
     30: end if
S. Peng                                                                                                                31


TraverseT calls with the same N1 , meaning that for two calls TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) and
TraverseT (v, N1 , N ′ ) that both visit w, w will be in both or neither of the sample sets.
Apart from the sample set S, like the algorithm in Lemma 44 for Π•HC , TraverseT produces
a label (c0 , b0 ) for u when the walk returns itself or reaches a terminating vertex.
    Finally, SolveHCT described in Algorithm 6 first calls PrepareT to deal with edge
cases and sub-instances. Vertices left are consistent vertices with type rT due to Lemma 39.
For each of them, SolveHCT uses binary lifting to guess n⋆ , the actual size of the current
ΠTHC (sub-)instance, from N1 to 2N2 . For each guess p ∈ [0, ⌈log2 (N2 /N1 )⌉], SolveHCT
calls TryT (u, N1 , p) described in Algorithm 7 to see whether the size guess N = 2p N1 can
generate for u an output label other than (D, 0). If none of them work, the algorithm then
has a high confidence that N2 is actually much smaller than n⋆ . In this case, condition (ii)
in the definition of a strong algorithm allows SolveHCT to give output label (D, 0) for u,
and it outputs (D, 0). For the other case, if any of the TryT calls succeeds, it gives the label
from the first successful TryT call to u.
    Each TryT (u, N1 , p) call tries to generate an output label other than (D, 0) for u with
size guess N = 2p N1 . It first gets the sample set Su and a backup label (c0 , b0 ) from
TraverseT . Notice that the set Su does not carry a p subscript because, for fixed u and N1 ,
the walk inspected by TraverseT and the sampling choices are independent of the size guess
N = 2p N1 . Indices in Su are candidates for an output color X. To color a candidate DCj (u)
with X, item 3(b) in cout constraints requires the algorithm to give an output label other than
(D, 0) to RC(DCj (u)). RC(DCj (u)) is either handled directly by PrepareT or lies in a ΠTHC     R

                                                                          T         j
sub-instance. As a result, for each j ∈ Su , we check whether Prepare (RC(DC (u)), N1 , N )
                                                                                      ′
returns an output label other than (D, 0). We collect all such indices to the set Su,p  in line 3.
                                                             ′
    N may be too small, or we are simply unlucky, and Su,p may then be empty. In this case,
we enter line 27 and try to output the backup label if it is not (D, 0). If the backup label is
also (D, 0), then we indicate a failure by returning ⊥.
                                                                                             ⋆
        ′
    If Su,p is not empty, we pick j ⋆ as the minimum in Su,p  ′
                                                                , and plan to color w = DCj (u)
with X and the path between P(w) and u with U when w =          ̸ u. For the case where w = u,
we use CollectT (u, 0, N1 , N ) to compute the contribution of bin (v) and b′′ (v) defined in
Equation (8), denoted by B.
    When w =   ̸ u, to ensure local consistency, we need to make sure that w, whose output label
is generated by an independent query SolveHCT (w, N1 , N2 ), agrees with this plan, thinking
that it is colored X. To address this issue, we will prove that if SolveHCT (w, N1 , N2 ) does
not follow the coloring plan, then SolveHCT (w, N1 , N2 ) must get a label from a smaller size
guess. This is why in line 13, we call SolveHCT (w, N1 , N/2) to see whether this is the case.
    If the call does not return (D, 0), then we know the output label for w; otherwise, we
know that SolveHCT (w, N1 , N2 ) will follow the same coloring plan and color w with X. In
both cases, we will color the path between P(w) and u with U and use CollectT to get
their contributions to bout (u). When the CollectT call fails, TryT will return ⊥.

5.4      Algorithm Analysis
Throughout the analysis, we assume the ΠTHC instance I of size n⋆ , N1 , and n ≥ N1 are
arbitrary but fixed. Define n0 as the number of consistent vertices of type rT , sequences
(Il,1 , Il,2 , . . . , Il,nl ) and (Ir,1 , Ir,2 , . . . , Ir,nr ) as the sequences of ΠTHCL
                                                                                            and ΠTHC
                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                      sub-instances,
and (sl,1 , sl,2 , . . . , sl,nl ), (sr,1 , sr,2 , . . . , sr,nr ) as their size sequences. According to Lemma 39,
                  Pnl             Pnr
n⋆ ≥ n0 + i=1              sl,i + i=1     sr,i .
     We apply induction hypothesis for AL and AR to each ΠTHC                         L
                                                                                        and ΠTHC
                                                                                               R
                                                                                                 sub-instance. This
means that,
32   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


       For each 1 ≤ i ≤ nl , the output labeling given by SolveHCT (⋆, N1 , N2 ) for Il,i , which
       is further the output labeling given by AL (⋆, ⌈N11−β ⌉, 2N2 ), satisfies the four conditions
       given in Definition 40 with probability 1 − sl,i /n2 ;
       For each 1 ≤ i ≤ nr , the output labeling given by SolveHCT (⋆, N1 , N2 ) for Ir,i , which
       is further the output labeling given by AR (⋆, ⌈N11−β ⌉, ⌈2N2 N1−β ⌉), satisfies the four
       conditions given in Definition 40 with probability 1 − sr,i /n2 ;
     We additionally require the following event to occur for every consistent vertex of type rT :
     ▶ Lemma 45. For every consistent vertex u of type rT , the following event happens with
     probability 1 − 1/n2 : For every N ≥ N1 , if the call TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) never enters the
     if-block at line 4 (i.e. within ⌈2N1β ⌉ steps, the walk never returns to itself or visits a vertex
     w =⊥ or an inconsistent vertex w), then the call returns a sample set S of size O(log n) in
     which there exists j such that the ΠTHC R
                                               instance attached to DCj (u) has size at most n⋆ /N1β .
     For fixed u and N1 , this sample set is the same for all values of N .
     Proof. The behavior of TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) before entering the if-block in line 4 is inde-
     pendent of N , and the sampling probability is also independent of N . Hence it is enough to
     analyze the single random sample set on the first ⌈2N1β ⌉ + 1 positions of the DC walk from
     u, and all TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) calls will give the same sampling set.
         Let δ = min(1, 4N1−β log n) be the sampling probability. If δ = 1, then N1β = O(log n),
     so the sample set has size O(log n). Suppose now that δ < 1. We have E[|S|] = (⌈2N1β ⌉ +
     1)(4N1−β log n) = Θ(log n), and a Chernoff bound implies that the sample size is O(log n)
     with probability at least 1 − 1/(2n2 ).
         Now assume that TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) never enters the if-block. Then the vertices
     DC (u) for 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌈2N1β ⌉ are distinct consistent vertices of type rT . Consider the ΠTHC
         j                                                                                      R
                                                                                                   sub-
     instances attached to them. Since these sub-instances are vertex-disjoint and all contained in
     I, their total size is at most n⋆ . This means that at least N1β of them have a ΠTHC
                                                                                        R
                                                                                          sub-instance
                        ⋆    β
     of size at most n /N1 attached. The probability that none of these vertices is sampled is at
                      β
     most (1 − δ)N1 ≤ exp(−4 log n) ≤ 2n1 2 for all sufficiently large n. A union bound over two
     events proves the lemma.                                                                        ◀

         A union bound shows that with probability at least 1 − n⋆ /n2 , all sub-instances have an
     output label satisfying Definition 40, and for every consistent vertex u of type rT , the event
     in Lemma 45 occurs. In the rest of the upper bound analysis, all lemmas assume that these
     events happen.
         Now we verify that SolveHCT follows all conditions in Definition 40. We first verify
     stability.
     ▶ Lemma 46. SolveHCT satisfies condition (i) in Definition 40.
     Proof. Fix a vertex u and the first size parameter N1 . If u =⊥, if u is inconsistent, or if u is
     consistent with t(u) =⊥, then PrepareT (u, N1 , 2N2 ) returns an output independent of N2 .
     Thus we may take N2⋆ (u, N1 ) = N1 .
        Suppose next that u lies in a ΠTHC  L
                                              sub-instance. Then SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) returns
                               1−β
     the output of AL (u, ⌈N1 ⌉, 2N2 ). By condition (i) for AL , there is a threshold M ⋆ for
     the third parameter of AL . Taking N2⋆ (u, N1 ) to be the smallest integer N2 ≥ N1 with
     2N2 ≥ M ⋆ gives the desired statement. The argument for u in a ΠTHC  R
                                                                            sub-instance is identical,
                             ⋆               1−β
     using the threshold M for AR (u, ⌈N1 ⌉, ⋆) and taking the smallest N2 ≥ N1 such that
     ⌈2N2 N1−β ⌉ ≥ M ⋆ .
        It remains to consider a consistent vertex u with t(u) = rT . For every integer p ≥ 0, the
     output of TryT (u, N1 , p) depends only on u, N1 , p and the fixed randomness, and not on the
S. Peng                                                                                           33


value of N2 . If there exists p such that TryT (u, N1 , p) ̸=⊥, take the minimum of them, de-
noted as p⋆ , and take N2⋆ (u, N1 ) to be the smallest N2 ≥ N1 such that SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 )
calls TryT (u, N1 , p⋆ ); Otherwise the output label will be (D, 0) whatever the value of N2 .
Both cases satisfy condition (i).                                                           ◀


   For condition (ii), we need the following lemma showing that CollectT behaves correctly
when the parameter N is large enough.

▶ Lemma 47. Fix N2 , so the output labeling for u is generated from SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ).
During the execution of SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) for some consistent vertex u of type rT , if a
call CollectT (u, k, N1 , N ) returns a bit B, then

        k
        M
              bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u)) ,
                                           
   B=
        j=0


where b′′ is defined in Equation (8). Moreover, if the total size of the ΠTHC
                                                                            L
                                                                              sub-instances
                j                                               T
attached to DC (u) for 0 ≤ j ≤ k is at most N , then Collect (u, k, N1 , N ) returns a bit
rather than ⊥.

Proof. For each call CollectT (u, k, N1 , N ) in SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ), we first have N1 ≤
N ≤ 2N2 . Additionally, k ≤ ⌈2N1β ⌉ and DCj (u) is consistent for each 0 ≤ j ≤ k: whenever
CollectT is called from TraverseT , all these vertices were visited before the first termi-
nating event, and whenever CollectT is called from TryT , j ⋆ ∈ Su already indicates that
j ⋆ ≤ ⌈2N1β ⌉ and all indices between zero and j ⋆ passes the termination check in line 4 of
TraverseT .
    For the first claim, CollectT uses PrepareT with size parameter (N1 , N ) to obtain
the output bit of each LC(DCj (u)), while the output label of LC(DCj (u)) is generated by
PrepareT (LC(DCj (u)), N1 , 2N2 ) inside SolveHCT (LC(DCj (u)), N1 , N2 ). If LC(DCj (u))
falls into an edge case handled directly by PrepareT , its output is independent of the size
parameter. Otherwise, condition (i) for AL implies that, if PrepareT (LC(DCj (u)), N1 , N )
returns an output label other than (D, 0), this label must be the final output label for
LC(DCj (u)). When LC(DCj (u)) =⊥, PrepareT outputs (X, 0). In sum, no matter when
CollectT returns a bit, every PrepareT call has returned an output label other than
(D, 0), and the output bit is indeed b′′ (DCj (u)) defined in Equation (8). If a call returns
(D, 0), then CollectT fails and returns ⊥ instead of a bit. This concludes the first claim.
   For the second claim, for each 0 ≤ j ≤ k, CollectT (u, N1 , N ) generates a call
AL (LC(DCj (u)), ⌈N11−β ⌉, N ) when LC(DCj (u)) does not fall into the edge cases. For each
0 ≤ j ≤ k, we define mj to be the size of the ΠTHC
                                                 L
                                                   sub-instance attached to DCj (u), and mj = 0
                                                                                 Pk
when it does not exist. These sub-instances are vertex-disjoint, so we have j=0 mj ≤ N .
This means that mj ≤ N for each 0 ≤ j ≤ k, and additionally ⌈N11−β ⌉ ≤ N1 ≤ N , so we can
apply condition (iii) for AL to show that all of the AL calls return labels other than (D, 0).
   We need to show further that the probe budget will not be used up by these AL calls. If
TL =⊥, then each call uses O(1) probes, and the total cost is O(N1β ) = O(N N1α−1 ) because
N ≥ N1 and α = β when p = 0. The case TL = • is impossible since then p = 1 ≥ q,
contradicting the goodness of T . In all remaining cases, the vertices queried are consistent
vertices of type rTL in ΠTHC
                           L
                             sub-instances, so we apply Equation (13) in condition (iv), and
34   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     the total number of probes is
          k
          X                                              
                 O max(⌈N11−β ⌉, mj )⌈N11−β ⌉p−1 logdTL n
           j=0
                                                                   
                        (1−β)(p−1)         (1−β)(p−1)
        =O        N1 · N1            + N N1                 logdT n
                                                                                        Pk
                                               (⌈N11−β ⌉ = Θ(N11−β ), k = O(N1β ) and     j=0 mj ≤ N )
                                      
                    (p−1)(1−β)
        =O N N1          logdT n                                                             (N ≥ N1 )
                          
        =O N N1α−1 logdT n                                                              (Equation (10))

     This is within the probe budget when we set the probe budget constant in CollectT to be
     sufficiently large.                                                                  ◀

         We will prove condition (ii) for SolveHCT by considering each constraint in ΠTHC one
     by one. During the analysis of condition (ii), we will fix the value N2 . According to the
     induction hypothesis, constraints are satisfied on inconsistent vertices, vertices of type ⊥, and
     vertices in a sub-instance, so it remains to consider constraints touching consistent vertices of
     type rT . If the output label for such a vertex u is (D, 0), then it only violates item 4 in cout
     constraints, which is allowed for condition (ii). So we will focus on cases where u receives a
     label other than (D, 0).
         For each consistent vertex u of type rT that does not receive output label (D, 0), define
     p⋆u as the minimum nonnegative integer p such that TryT (u, N1 , p) does not return ⊥ and
                      ⋆
     define Nu = 2pu N1 . According to the algorithm description, p⋆u exists and is bounded by
     ⌈log2 (N2 /N1 )⌉, and SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) returns the output label from TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ).
     Now we distinguish different possibilities in TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) that generate an output label
     for u, and show that in all these cases, constraints on u are satisfied. We start with an
     observation around Su,p′
                               in TryT .
                                                                        ′      ′
     ▶ Observation 48. For a consistent vertex u of type rT and p ≥ 0, Su,p ⊆ Su,p+1 , where
      ′                              T
     Su,p is defined in line 3 of Try (u, N1 , p).

     Proof. Let N = 2p N1 . The sample set Su is the same between TryT (u, N1 , p) and
     TryT (u, N1 , p + 1) according to Lemma 45, so it is enough to prove that every j ∈ Su,p   ′

                    ′                       j                                      T
     belongs to Su,p+1 . Write x = RC(DC (u)), and compare the calls Prepare (x, N1 , N ) and
     PrepareT (x, N1 , 2N ).
         If x lies in edge cases handled directly by PrepareT , then the output is independent
     of the size parameter. This covers the cases x =⊥, x is inconsistent, and t(x) =⊥. The
     case where PrepareT returns ⊥ is impossible here: if x is consistent, then x is the right
     child of a consistent type-rT vertex and therefore has type RCT (rT ), or type ⊥ when
     RCT (rT ) =⊥. Hence PrepareT (x, N1 , 2N ) is an output label other than (D, 0) whenever
     PrepareT (x, N1 , N ) is one, and j ∈ Su,p+1
                                              ′
                                                   .
         It remains to consider the case where x lies in a sub-instance. If x lies in a ΠTHC L
                                                                                               sub-
                               T                           1−β
     instance, then Prepare (x, N1 , N ) calls AL (x, ⌈N1 ⌉, N ). Since this value is not (D, 0),
     condition (i) for AL implies that PrepareT (x, N1 , 2N ) would give the same output. The
     argument for a ΠTHC R                                      ′
                           sub-instance is identical. Thus j ∈ Su,p+1 , completing the proof.     ◀

       We first consider the case where TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) returns the backup label (c0 , b0 ) from
     TraverseT .
S. Peng                                                                                                 35


▶ Lemma 49. For a consistent vertex u of type rT , if TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) returns the backup
label (c0 , b0 ) from TraverseT , then ΠTHC constraints on u are satisfied.
                                                                         ′
Proof. Let v = DC(u). The backup label is returned only when Su,p           ⋆ = ∅ and the backup
                                                                            u
                                    T
label produced by Traverse (u, N1 , Nu ) is not (D, 0). According to Observation 48, we
                   ′
also know that Su,p   = ∅ for every 0 ≤ p < p⋆u .
    First suppose this label is (Cyc, 0). Then for some ℓ ∈ [1, ⌈2N1β ⌉], DCℓ (u) = u, and
all vertices on this directed cycle are consistent vertices of type rT . Additionally, every
TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) call will see this cycle and produce backup label (Cyc, 0) whatever the
value of N is, so p⋆u = 0. We claim that p⋆v is also zero and the output label for v will be
(Cyc, 0), then the ΠTHC constraints on u are satisfied.
    To see this, consider the call TryT (v, N1 , 0). It calls TraverseT (v, N1 , N1 ), which will
see the cycle and prepare (Cyc, 0) for the backup label. Additionally, this call will visit
exactly the same set of vertices as in TraverseT (u, N1 , N1 ), and the sampling is consistent
across calls of the same N1 value, this means that Sv will point to the same set of vertices as
             ′
Su . Since Su,0         ′
                 = ∅, Sv,0    will also be empty and TryT (v, N1 , 0) will output the backup label
(Cyc, 0).
    Now suppose the backup label is (U, b0 ). This means TraverseT reaches a vertex DCj (u)
that is either ⊥ or inconsistent, u, DC(u), DC2 (u), . . . , DCj−1 (u) are all consistent vertices of
type rT , and CollectT (u, j − 1, N1 , Nu ) returns b0 . If j = 1, DC(u) is ⊥ or colored (⊥, 0),
satisfying item 2 in the cout constraints for u, and from Lemma 47, bout (u) = bin (u) ⊕ b′′ (u),
which is just Equation (6) with b′ (u) = 0.
    Next, we consider the case where j > 1, then TraverseT (v, N1 , Nu ) will see the same
terminating event by traveling along a suffix of the DC path traveled by u, and the corre-
sponding CollectT call collects a subset of bits from CollectT (u, j − 1, N1 , Nu ). This
means that TraverseT (v, N1 , Nu ) successfully generates a backup label (U, b′0 ). It is possible
that the backup label can be produced with a smaller guess: Define p′v as the smallest guess
p such that TraverseT (v, N1 , 2p N1 ) produces a backup label other than (D, 0). From the
argument above, we know p′v ≤ p⋆u . In the remaining, we show that p⋆v = p′v and the output
label for v makes u satisfy its ΠTHC constraints.
                                                                            ′
    We have Sv ⊆ Su , so similar to the argument in the cycle case, Sv,p        = ∅ for 0 ≤ p ≤ p⋆u .
                                             T
This means that for each such p, Try will check whether the backup label is not (D, 0).
As p′v is the smallest possible p value that generates a backup label other than (D, 0) and
p′v ≤ p⋆u , TryT (v, N1 , p′v ) will output the backup label while smaller p outputs ⊥. This
proves p′v = p⋆v . Since the backup label colors v with U, item 2 in the cout constraint is
satisfied on u. For the bout constraint, according to Lemma 47, we have
                 j−1
                 M
    bout (u) =         (bin (DCr (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCr (u))) ,
                 r=0
                 j−1
                 M
    bout (v) =         (bin (DCr (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCr (u))) .
                 r=1

As a result, we have bout (u) = bout (v) ⊕ bin (u) ⊕ b′′ (u), which is Equation (6).
    In both cases, it remains to consider item 5 in the cout constraints that LC(u) should not
be labeled (D, 0). This comes from the fact that the CollectT call, which would fail when
one of the left children is labeled (D, 0), outputs a bit rather than a failure.            ◀

    The other possibility that TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) generates an output label is when Su,p
                                                                                      ′
                                                                                         ⋆ is
                                                                                         u
                                                                                               ⋆
                                                                   ′                   j
nonempty. The algorithm will then pick j ⋆ as the minimum item in Su,p⋆ and set w = DC
                                                                      u
                                                                                         (u).
36   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     We first consider the case where j ⋆ = 0, so w = u.
                                                                ′
     ▶ Lemma 50. For a consistent vertex u of type rT , if 0 ∈ Su,p⋆ , then u is colored X and the
                                                                   u
      T
     ΠHC constraints on u are satisfied.
                           ′                             ⋆
     Proof. Since 0 ∈ Su,p     ⋆ , the minimum index j
                               u
                                                           chosen is zero. Thus, the branch for j ⋆ = 0
     sets c⋆ = X. As Try (u, N1 , p⋆u ) succeeds, CollectT (u, 0, N1 , Nu ) returns a bit, and the
                               T

     algorithm returns a label of color X.
                                                                                                ′
         The color X is allowed at u because u has type rT and rT is not a leaf. As 0 ∈ Su,p      ⋆ , the
                                                                                                  u
                     T                  ⋆                                               ⋆
                                       pu                                              pu
     call Prepare (RC(u), N1 , 2 N1 ) returns a label other than (D, 0). Since 2 N1 ≤ 2N2 , by
     condition (i) of SolveHCT , this will be the output label for RC(u). This proves item 3(b)
     in the constraint on cout . Similarly, the successful CollectT call implies, by Lemma 47,
     that the output label of LC(u) is not (D, 0), proving item 5. In sum, cout constraints on u
     are satisfied.
                                                                     ⋆
         Let b⋆ be the output bit of PrepareT (RC(u), N1 , 2pu N1 ), then b⋆ equals bout (RC(u))
     when RC(u) exists, and equals zero if RC(u) =⊥. This is exactly the definition of b′ (u) in
                                                               ⋆
     Equation (7). By Lemma 47, CollectT (u, 0, N1 , 2pu N1 ) returns bin (u) ⊕ b′′ (u). Therefore
     bout (u) = bin (u) ⊕ b′′ (u) ⊕ b⋆ , which is exactly Equation (6) for a vertex of color X.        ◀
                             ′
         When j ⋆ = min Su,p    ⋆ ≥ 1, we have w ̸= u and DC(u) is not ⊥. In this case, the call
                                u
          T
     Try (u, N1 , p⋆u ) will always color u with U. We define v = DC(u). Since j ⋆ is sampled only
     after the termination check in line 4, all vertices DCj (u) with 0 ≤ j ≤ j ⋆ are consistent
     vertices of type rT , so p⋆DCj (u) is well-defined. We begin with the following lemma that all
     vertices between P(w) and u will agree on the coloring plan and color itself with U.
                                                                 ′                  ′
     ▶ Lemma 51. For a consistent vertex u of type rT , suppose Su,p⋆ ̸= ∅ and 0 ∈
                                                                                 / Su,p⋆ . Define
                                                                    u                  u
      ⋆                             ′                              ⋆          j
     j as the minimum element in Su,p⋆u , then for every 0 ≤ j < j , cout (DC (u)) = U.

     Proof. Define y = DCj (u). When cout (y) = Cyc, the cycle containing y must contain u as
     otherwise the consistency will be violated. Then from the argument in Lemma 49, cout (u)
     should also be Cyc, a contradiction.
                                                                                        ′
         Another possibility is that cout (y) = X. This happens only when 0 ∈ Sy,p          ⋆ , which by
                                                                                            y
                                                     ′
     consistent sampling would imply j ∈ Su,p⋆y . According to Observation 48, to make sure
                                          ′
     j ⋆ > j is the minimum among Su,p             ⋆    ⋆
                                              ⋆ , py > pu must hold.
                                              u
         However, we will prove next that p⋆y ≤ p⋆u , leading to a contradiction. Notice that
       ⋆                                ′                    ⋆                                   ′
     j is the minimum value in Su,p         ⋆ implies that j
                                            u
                                                               − j is the minimum value in Sy,p    ⋆ . As
                                                                                                   u
                    T           ⋆                                               T         ⋆
     a result, Try (y, N1 , pu ) will agree on the same vertex w as Try (u, N1 , pu ), the check
     SolveHCT (w, N1 , Nu /2) ≥ 0 has the same result, and the corresponding CollectT call
     in TryT (y, N1 , p⋆u ) collects a subset of bits compared to the successful CollectT call in
     TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ). This means that TryT (y, N1 , p⋆u ) returns a label rather than a failure and
     p⋆y ≤ p⋆u .
         Since we have proved p⋆y ≤ p⋆u , cout (y) cannot be D either. So the only possible color for
     y is U, concluding the statement.                                                                  ◀

        Now we will prove the following lemma, which is sufficient to prove that u is locally
     consistent:
                                                                            ′                     ′
      ▶ Lemma 52. For a consistent vertex u of type rT , suppose Su,p         ⋆ ̸= ∅ and 0 ∈  / Su,p ⋆.
                                                                              u                      u
              ⋆                                                i                          i
     Define iu to be the minimum value i such that DC (u) is inconsistent, DC (u) =⊥ or
      cout (DCi (u)) = X. Then:
     1) i⋆u exists, and for every 0 ≤ i < i⋆u , DCi (u) is a consistent vertex of type rT colored U;
S. Peng                                                                                                 37


2) The cout constraint on u is satisfied, meaning that DC(u) is either ⊥ or colored using one
   of the colors in {X, U, ⊥}, and LC(u) is not colored D if exists.
          ⋆
3) If DCiu (u) is colored X, then
                                   ⋆                                 
                                    iu
                         ⋆         M
       bout (u) = b′ (DCiu (u)) ⊕     (bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u))) ,                 (14)
                                          j=0

                                                                               ⋆
   where b′ and b′′ are defined in Equations (7) and (8); otherwise, if DCiu (u) is inconsistent
          ⋆
   or DCiu (u) =⊥, then
                    i⋆
                     u −1
                    M
       bout (u) =           (bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u))).                                    (15)
                    j=0

Proof. We prove the statement by induction on p⋆u . This means that, to show the statement
for a vertex u, we assume that the induction hypothesis holds for every consistent vertex
                                                                         j⋆
u′ of type rT with p⋆u′ < p⋆u . Let j ⋆ = min Su,p   ′
                                                         ⋆ and w = DC
                                                         u
                                                                            (u), then j ⋆ ≥ 1. TryT
then checks whether SolveHCT (w, N1 , Nu /2) ̸= (D, 0), and enters one of the two branches
                                             ⋆
starting at lines 13 and 16. As Nu = 2pu N1 , this is equivalent to checking whether p⋆w < p⋆u .
    Consider first the branch where SolveHCT (w, N1 , Nu /2) ̸= (D, 0). Then, according to
condition (i) for SolveHCT , the label returned by this call is the output label of w, and we
know p⋆w < p⋆u . The case where cout (w) = Cyc cannot exist: as otherwise the DC cycle from
w should pass u, and cout (u) should also be Cyc according to Lemma 49, a contradiction.
p⋆w < p⋆u implies that cout (w) ̸= D, thus w is colored X or U.
    If w is colored X, we set i⋆u = j ⋆ . Lemma 51 shows that for all 0 ≤ j < j ⋆ , cout (DCj (u)) =
U, so j ⋆ is the correct value for i⋆u . If w is colored U, w receives this label from two possible
places: one is from the backup label produced by TraverseT , in which, according to the
                                                                  ⋆
proof in Lemma 49, there exists a value i⋆w such that DCiw (w) is inconsistent or ⊥ and all
                                ⋆
vertices between w and DCiw −1 (w) are colored U. As a result, i⋆u exists and equals j ⋆ + i⋆w .
                          ′                       ′                            ⋆     ⋆
The final case is that Sw,p  ⋆ =
                             w
                                 ̸ ∅ and 0 ̸∈ Sw,p   ⋆ . In this case, since pw < pu , we can apply
                                                     w
                                      ⋆                 ⋆    ⋆     ⋆
the induction hypothesis to get iw , and assign iu = iw + j . The arguments above in sum
prove item 1).
    The item 2 in the cout constraint on u follows because DC(u) is either ⊥, inconsistent,
or colored X when i⋆u = 1, and colored U when i⋆u > 1; also, the successful CollectT call
implies that LC(u) is not colored D if it exists, so item 5 in the cout constraint is also satisfied.
This proves item 2).
    For items 3), notice that the CollectT call in this branch uses parameter (u, j ⋆ −
1, N1 , Nu ), and it returns a bit B because TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) succeeds. By Lemma 47, the
algorithm returns bout (u) = bout (w) ⊕ B with
          ⋆
         jM −1
                 bin (DCi (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCi (u)) .
                                              
    B=
          i=0

    If w is colored X, then substituting Equation (6) for w proved in Lemma 50 gives
Equation (14). If w is colored U and receives the backup label from TryT (w, N1 , p⋆w ), the
                                             Li⋆w −1
proof of Lemma 49 implies that bout (w) = i=0        (bin (DCi (w)) ⊕ b′′ (DCi (w))), and this gives
                                                                          ′                     ′
Equation (15). Finally, the case where w receives a label since Sw,p        ⋆ ̸= ∅ and 0 ̸∈ Sw,p⋆
                                                                            w                     w
follows from the induction hypothesis.
    It remains to consider the branch where SolveHCT (w, N1 , Nu /2) = (D, 0). In this
                                       ′                                                        ′
case, we know p⋆w ≥ p⋆u . Since j ⋆ ∈ Su,p ⋆ , the consistent sampling implies that 0 ∈ Sw,p⋆ .
                                           u                                                      u
38   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     Moreover, CollectT (w, 0, N1 , Nu ) will succeed since it collects a subset of bits compared
     to the successful call CollectT (u, j ⋆ , N1 , Nu ). As a result, from Lemma 50, we know that
     p⋆w = p⋆u , the output color for w will be X, and its local constraints are satisfied.
         We set i⋆u = j ⋆ , then Lemma 51 immediately implies item 1). Also, the successful
     CollectT (u, j ⋆ , N1 , Nu ) call implies that LC(u) is not colored D if it exists, so the cout
     constraint on u is satisfied, implying item 2).
         For item 3), notice that the successful CollectT (u, j ⋆ , N1 , Nu ) call returns a bit B with
                ⋆
              j
              M
                    bin (DCj (u)) ⊕ b′′ (DCj (u))
                                                 
        B=
              j=0


     according to Lemma 47. At the same time, condition (i) for SolveHCT implies that the bit
     b⋆ obtained from PrepareT (RC(w), N1 , N ) is exactly b′ (w). Since TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) returns
     b⋆ ⊕ B, this gives Equation (14).                                                            ◀

        Wrapping up, we are finally able to show condition (ii) for SolveHCT .

     ▶ Lemma 53. SolveHCT satisfies condition (ii) in Definition 40.

     Proof. Fix N2 ≥ N1 and consider the output labeling generated by SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ).
     Inconsistent vertices, vertices of type ⊥, and vertices in ΠTHC  L
                                                                        or ΠTHC
                                                                              R
                                                                                sub-instances satisfy all
                                                            T
     relevant constraints by the definition of Prepare and the induction hypothesis. Hence it
     remains to consider a consistent vertex u with t(u) = rT .
         If SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) returns (D, 0), then the only possible violation is item 4 in the
     constraint on cout , which is explicitly allowed in condition (ii). Otherwise p⋆u is defined. If
     TryT (u, N1 , p⋆u ) returns the backup label from TraverseT , the constraints on u are satisfied
                                                      ′
     by Lemma 49. Otherwise Su,p⋆u ̸= ∅. If 0 ∈ Su,p    ⋆ , constraints on u are satisfied by Lemma 50.
                                                        u
                                     ′                    ′
     The remaining case is that Su,p    ⋆
                                        u
                                          ̸ = ∅ and 0 ∈
                                                      / Su,p⋆u
                                                               , which is handled by Lemma 52. These
     lemmas cover every possible cases, so condition (ii) follows.                                     ◀

        Now we proceed to conditions (iii) and (iv).

     ▶ Lemma 54. SolveHCT satisfies condition (iii) in Definition 40.

     Proof. Let N2 ≥ max(N1 , n⋆ ), and let u be a consistent vertex with t(u) = rT . Set
     p = ⌈log2 (N2 /N1 )⌉ and N = 2p N1 , then N2 ≤ N ≤ 2N2 , and in particular N ≥ n⋆ . Consider
     the call TryT (u, N1 , p), we will show that this call must return a label rather than a failure,
     so the output label for u is not (D, 0).
         First of all, for every CollectT call during TryT (u, N1 , p), all ΠTHC L
                                                                                   sub-instances are
                                                         ⋆
     vertex-disjoint, so their total size is at most n ≤ N . According to Lemma 47, every
     CollectT call will succeed.
         Now consider every possibility that u gets a label. If TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) reaches a
     terminating event (i.e. reaching ⊥, an inconsistent vertex, or returning to itself) and produces
     a backup label, the corresponding CollectT call always succeed, so a backup label other
     than (D, 0) is produced. This means that, when Su,p     ′
                                                                = ∅, TryT (u, N1 , p) still output a
     label other than (D, 0). When Su,p ′
                                           ̸= ∅, TryT always outputs a label other than (D, 0) no
                                      T
     matter the result of SolveHC (w, N1 , N/2) is.
         For the other case that TraverseT (u, N1 , N ) does not produce a backup label, according
     to Lemma 45, there is an index j ∈ Su whose attached ΠTHC      R
                                                                      sub-instance has size at most
     n /N1 . Prepare (RC(DC (u)), N1 , N ) will invoke AR (RC(DCj (u)), ⌈N11−β ⌉, ⌈N N1−β ⌉).
       ⋆   β              T         j

     As ⌈N11−β ⌉ ≤ ⌈N N1−β ⌉ and n⋆ /N1β ≤ ⌈N N1−β ⌉, condition (iii) for AR implies that this AR
      S. Peng                                                                                           39


                                                     ′
      call returns a label other than (D, 0). Hence Su,p is nonempty, and TryT outputs a label
      other than (D, 0) following the same argument as above.                               ◀

      ▶ Lemma 55. SolveHCT satisfies condition (iv) in Definition 40.

     Proof. Apart from the induction hypothesis for AL and AR , we apply an induction on d to
     prove the following three claims simultaneously for the current instance of size n⋆ :
   A(d) For every 0 ≤ r ≤ d,

             TryT (u, N1 , r) uses O(2r N1α logdT n) probes.

 Ball (d) For every N1 ≤ N2 ≤ N1 2d and every vertex u,

             SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) uses O(N2 N1α−1 logdT n) probes.

Broot (d) For every N1 ≤ N2 ≤ N1 2d and every consistent vertex u with t(u) = rT ,

             SolveHCT (u, N1 , N2 ) uses O(max(N1 , n⋆ )N1α−1 logdT n) probes.

      The claims Ball (d) and Broot (d) for all d ≥ 0 are exactly the two bounds in condition (iv).
      The base case for d = −1 is trivial. We show Ball (d − 1) ⇒ A(d), and then A(d) ⇒ Ball (d)
      and Broot (d), concluding the induction.
         We first show Ball (d − 1) ⇒ A(d). Fix 0 ≤ r ≤ d and set N = 2r N1 . Consider the
      subroutines that TryT (u, N1 , r) calls. It makes only constantly many CollectT calls, each
      with budget

         O(N N1α−1 logdT n) = O(2r N1α logdT n).

      The TraverseT call uses O(N1β ) ≤ O(N1α ) ≤ O(N1α ) probes. For each sampled index
      j ∈ Su , the call to PrepareT (RC(DCj (u)), N1 , N ) is either handled directly in O(1) probes,
      or invokes AR (RC(DCj (u)), ⌈N11−β ⌉, ⌈N N1−β ⌉). By induction hypothesis, applying (12) for
      AR , we know that each of these calls costs
                                                 
            O N N1−β · N1
                            (1−β)(q−1)
                                       logdT −1 n                                     (dTR ≤ dT − 1)
                                  
          = O N N1α−1 logdT −1 n .        (−β + (1 − β)(q − 1) = −(q−p)      q−1       p−1
                                                                   1+q−p + 1+q−p = 1+q−p = α − 1)


      Since |Su | = O(log n) by Lemma 45, all calls together cost O(N N1α−1 logdT n). Finally, TryT
      may call SolveHCT (w, N1 , N/2). If r = 0, this call returns immediately because N/2 < N1 .
      Otherwise, Ball (d − 1) applies and gives cost

         O((N/2)N1α−1 logdT n) = O(N N1α−1 logdT n).

      In sum, TryT (u, N1 , r) has a cost of O(2r N1α logdT n). This proves A(d).
          We now prove Ball (d) from A(d). The initial PrepareT (u, N1 , 2N2 ) may call one of AL
      and AR . By Equation (12) applied to both AL and AR , the call AL (u, ⌈N11−β ⌉, 2N2 ) costs
                 (1−β)(p−1)
         O(N2 N1              logdTL n) = O(N2 N1α−1 logdT n),                      (Equation (10))

      and the call AR (u, ⌈N11−β ⌉, ⌈2N2 N1−β ⌉) costs

         O(N2 N1−β N1
                      (1−β)(q−1)
                                   logdTR n) = O(N2 N1α−1 logdT n).
40   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     If PrepareT returns a label, this proves Ball (d). Otherwise, u is a consistent vertex of type
     rT , and SolveHCT runs TryT (u, N1 , r) over a geometric sequence of size guesses all the
     way up to 2N2 . By A(d), the total cost of all these calls is O(N2 N1α−1 logdT n). This proves
     Ball (d).
         It remains to prove Broot (d) from A(d). Let u be a consistent vertex with t(u) = rT .
     Then PrepareT (u, N1 , 2N2 ) returns ⊥ with O(1) probes. When N2 < n⋆ , Ball (d) already
     implies Broot (d), so we consider the other case where N2 ≥ n⋆ . The proof of Lemma 54 shows
     that TryT (u, N1 , r) succeeds as soon as 2r N1 ≥ n⋆ . Therefore the largest size guess used
     by SolveHCT is O(max(N1 , n⋆ )), and the probe complexity forms a geometric sequence
     according to A(d). As a result, they sum up to

        O(max(N1 , n⋆ )N1α−1 logdT n),

     which is the desired bound. This proves Broot (d) and completes the proof of condition
     (iv).                                                                                ◀

     Proof of Theorem 42. The proof is by induction on the size of T . The base cases are
     Lemmas 43 and 44. For the induction part, assume that for some tree T there is a strong
     algorithm for ΠTHC
                      L
                        and ΠTHC
                               R
                                 , then the algorithm is given by SolveHCT . For the conditions,
     when all the events described in the start of the analysis section happens, which is of
     probability at least 1 − n⋆ /n2 , all four conditions in Definition 40 are satisfied shown in
     Lemmas 46 and 53–55.                                                                       ◀

     5.5    Lower bound
     We will show the lower bound via induction on a stronger claim that one specific output bit
     in a dedicated distribution is indistinguishable for any deterministic LCA with o(nval(T ) )
     probes.

     ▶ Lemma 56. Let T ̸=⊥ be a good ordered binary tree. For every sufficiently large n, there
     is a set ST,n of ΠTHC instances of size at most n with the following properties:
        (i) All instances in ST,n have the same underlying graph and T -labeling, in which the
            underlying graph is a degree-4 tree, every vertex is consistent, and there is a unique
            root vertex x with t(x) = rT and P(x) =⊥;
       (ii) For any instance I in ST,n , there exists bI ∈ {0, 1} such that any solution satisfying all
            ΠTHC constraints for I must have bout (x) = bI . Define ST,nB
                                                                            as the set of instances I in
            ST,n with bI = B;
      (iii) For any set V0 of vertices of size o(nval(T ) ), there exists a bijection fV0 between ST,n
                                                                                                     0
                  1
            and ST,n , where for each I ∈ ST,n and u ∈ V0 , bin (u) is the same between I and fV0 (I).

     Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on the size of T .
         First, consider the base case T = •. S•,n contains all instances with the following property:
     The underlying graph is a directed DC path u1 , u2 , . . . , un , where u1 = x; in the T -labeling,
     all vertices have type rT , all LC and RC ports are ⊥. There is no constraint on bin inputs
     on each vertex, so S•,n contains 2n instances, one different bin assignment per instance.
         Condition (i) is satisfied by definition. Since rT is a leaf and a root, X and D are prohibited.
     Moreover, no vertex can output Cyc. Thus, every legal solution colors each vertex with U,
                                                Ln
     and Equation (6) gives bI = bout (x) = i=1 bin (ui ). This proves condition (ii). Finally, for
     any V0 of size o(n), choose w ∈  / V0 and map an instance to the instance obtained by flipping
                                                                 0         1
     only bin (w). This map is clearly a bijection between S•,n      and S•,n , and it preserves all input
     bits on V0 . Hence condition (iii) holds.
S. Peng                                                                                                41


   Now assume that T ̸= •, and write
                                                                    q−p
   p = val(TL ),         q = val(TR ),     α = val(T ),       β=         .
                                                                   1+q−p

Since T is good, we have p < q. Let ℓ = Θ(nβ ) and m = Θ(n1−β ), and we define ST,n as all
instances that can be generated by the following procedure:
    Create a directed DC path x = u1 , u2 , . . . , uℓ of length ℓ, all of which have type rT .
    Generate (A1 , . . . , Aℓ ) ∈ {0, 1}ℓ and define Si = Ai+1 ⊕ Ai+2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Aℓ for 0 ≤ i < ℓ and
    Sℓ = 0.
    If TL =⊥, then for every vertex ui (1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ), set LC(ui ) =⊥ and bin (ui ) = Ai . Otherwise,
    we set bin (ui ) = 0 and attach to LC(ui ) an arbitrary instance drawn from STALi ,m .
    For every i ∈ [1, ℓ], attach to RC(ui ) an arbitrary instance drawn from STSRi ,m .
For “attaching an instance to a port”, we mean creating a copy of the instance, making the
port point to the root of the copy, and setting the parent port of that copied root back to
the vertex ui . The constants hidden in Θ(·) are chosen so that the final instance has at most
n and Θ(n) vertices. This completes the definition of ST,n .
    According to the induction hypothesis, the structure and T -labeling of the attached
instance is fixed, while the structure and T -labeling of the top-level DC path is also fixed.
Hence all instances in ST,n have the same underlying graph and T -labeling, in which it is
easy to prove that the graph is a tree, every vertex is consistent, and the only type-rT vertex
with parent ⊥ is x = u1 . Thus condition (i) holds.
    Now we consider condition (ii). Define the contribution of a vertex ui , denoted as c(ui ),
as b′′ (ui ) ⊕ bin (ui ), where b′′ is defined in Equation (8). According to the construction,
c(ui ) = Ai for each 1 ≤ i ≤ ℓ. Now, for any legal output, define k = min{i | cout (ui ) = X},
and k = ∞ when there is no such i. Notice that Cyc is prohibited since there is no cycle in
the instance. When k ̸= ∞, expanding Equation (6) gives

   bout (x) = c(u1 ) ⊕ · · · ⊕ c(uk ) ⊕ Sk = A1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Ak ⊕ Sk = ⊕ℓi=1 Ai .

If k = ∞, then we have

   bout (x) = c(u1 ) ⊕ · · · ⊕ c(uℓ ) = A1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Aℓ = ⊕ℓi=1 Ai .

In all, condition (ii) is satisfied by bI = ⊕ℓi=1 Ai .
    It remains to prove condition (iii). Define Li and Ri as the ΠTHC  L
                                                                          and ΠTHCR
                                                                                      instance
                                                                                    val(T )
attached to ui , with Li = ∅ when TL =⊥. For a fixed set of vertices V0 of size o(n         ), let
ViL = V0 ∩ Li and ViR = V0 ∩ Ri . We have

   |ViR | = o(nα ) = o(nq(1−β) ) = o(mq ),

so according to the induction hypothesis, for each i ∈ [1, ℓ] there exists a bijection fiR between
ST0R ,m and ST1R ,m satisfying condition (iii) for ViR . Additionally, when TL ̸=⊥, we have

                     ℓ
                  1X L          o(nα )
   min |ViL | ≤         |Vi | ≤        = o(nα−β ) = o(np(1−β) ) = o(mp ).
     i            ℓ i=1           ℓ

Take i⋆ = arg mini |ViL |, then according to the induction hypothesis, there exists a bijection
fiL⋆ between ST0L ,m and ST1L ,m satisfying condition (iii) for ViL⋆ . For the case where TL =⊥,
α = q/(1 + q) = β, so |V0 | = o(nβ ) and there exists some i⋆ where ui⋆ ̸∈ V0 . We let fiL⋆
denote the operation that flips bin (ui⋆ ).
42   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


                                                               0         1
         Now we construct the bijection fV0 between ST,n           and ST,n . For each instance I in ST,n
                                                                     TL
     with bits A1 , A2 , . . . , Aℓ , we flip Ai⋆ by replacing the ΠHC instance attached to ui⋆ with its
     image in fiL⋆ if TL =  ̸ ⊥, or by flipping bin (ui⋆ ) if TL =⊥. For every 1 ≤ i < i⋆ , the value Si
     also flips, so we replace the ΠTHC     R
                                              instance attached to ui with its image under fiR . All other
     inputs are unchanged. This completes the construction.
         Since fiL⋆ and all fiR are bijections, and the same components are changed when we apply
     the map again, fV0 is an bijection. It remains to check that fV0 flips bI . According to the
     induction hypothesis, the map changes exactly Ai⋆ and S1 , S2 , . . . , Si⋆ −1 . By following the
     same analysis for condition (ii), we know that all solutions for fV0 (I) must have bout (x) = bI ⊕1,
                                                   0         1
     so fV0 is indeed a bijection between ST,n         and ST,n .
         Finally, we show that I and fV0 (I) have the same input labels on V0 . For replaced ΠTHC        L

             TR                                                                         L
     and ΠHC copies, this follows from the induction hypothesis applied to Vi⋆ and to the sets
     ViR . All other attached instances are identical. Vertices in the top DC chain keep the same
     input when TL ̸=⊥, and when TL =⊥, the only input bit that changes is at ui⋆ ∈            / V0 . This
     concludes condition (iii).                                                                         ◀

     Proof of Lemma 37. Suppose for contradiction that there is a randomized LCA that solves
     ΠTHC with o(nval(T ) ) probes and succeeds in every ΠTHC instance of size at most n with
     probability larger than 1/2. Pick any distribution D over instances of size at most n.
     According to Yao’s minimax principle, there is a deterministic LCA A with the same probe
     bound that succeeds with probability larger than 1/2 over D.
         Now set D to be a uniform distribution over ST,n . Since all instances in the support have
     the same graph and T -labeling, the transcript of A(x) is determined by the set of probed
     vertices and their bin values. Fix any possible transcript τ , and let V (τ ) be the set of vertices
     probed in this transcript. We have |V (τ )| = o(nval(T ) ). Applying condition (iii) of Lemma 56
                                          0         1
     to V (τ ) gives a bijection between ST,n and ST,n  that preserves all input bits seen in τ . Since
     all instances have the same probability of being chosen, and by condition (ii), a correct
     output must have root bit bI , we have Pr[bI = 0 | τ ] = Pr[bI = 1 | τ ] = 1/2, and the success
     probability of A over D is at most 1/2, a contradiction.                                          ◀


      6     Discussion and Future Directions

     In this section, we provide discussions and propose several possible future directions.


     6.1    Unifying Constructions Between LOCAL and VOLUME
     As we have mentioned in the introduction, our construction is completely different from the
     previous approach to provide a similar result in the distributed LOCAL model [13].
         The LOCAL constructions in [8, 13] encode the execution of some special Turing machines
     into the graph, and the time complexity of such Turing machines will determine the round
     complexity of the problem. The current realization of such encodings crucially relies on the
     fact that each vertex reads all vertices in its local neighborhood and checks whether the
     input graph follows certain nice structure locally, so the LCLs require Ω(n) probes in the
     VOLUME and LCA model.
         Conversely, our construction does not yield dense round complexities in the LOCAL model
     for the polynomial regime. For the problem ΠTHC , follow the same argument in Section 2,
     if the left and right children have complexity Θ̃(np ) and Θ̃(nq ), then the round complexity
     for a top path of length ℓ will be Õ(min(ℓ + (n/ℓ)p , (n/ℓ)q )). The term balancing always
S. Peng                                                                                             43


gives Θ̃(n1/(p+1) ) round complexity for p < q, so the construction only gives Θ̃(n1/k ) round
complexity for some positive integer k.
    As a consequence, we raise the following open question to find a possible way to integrate
density results in the LOCAL and VOLUME model.

▶ Question 57. For any pair of rationals 0 < r/s < p/q < 1, construct a LCL Πr/s,p/q
with round complexity Θ̃(nr/s ) in the LOCAL model and probe complexity Θ̃(np/q ) in the
VOLUME or LCA model.


6.2    LCAs and VOLUME Model
From Observation 7, the VOLUME model is an LCA with additional locality restrictions.
However, are these additional restrictions necessary? Can we find a problem that separates
LCAs and VOLUME algorithms? This question is trivial if we allow arbitrary problems to be
under consideration (for example, consider the problem that each vertex in a graph needs to
output the input label on vertex 1). But for LCLs, this question is still open.

▶ Question 58. Provide an LCL that separates the LCA and VOLUME model more than
polynomially, or prove that such an LCL does not exist.

    The constraint of connectivity for the probe region is shown to be not important in [30]:
Any randomized LCA A for an LCL can be transformed into another randomized LCA A′
with polynomial probe complexity blowup, with the additional property that A′ always keeps
its probed region a connected component in the graph. So the remaining question is to show
whether the difference in randomness is important.
    The question about different randomness models is also explicitly mentioned as an open
question in [41]. There is work discussing the benefit of shared randomness in the distributed
setting [12, 33], and it has been shown that in the LOCAL model, shared randomness helps
exponentially for certain LCLs. Yet it is currently unknown whether this is also the case in
the VOLUME model and LCAs.


6.3    LCLs and CSPs
The definition of LCLs is almost the same as that of finite-domain CSPs, except that LCLs
are defined on bounded-degree constraint graphs. A natural question is whether it is possible
to utilize existing tools in CSP complexity classification for LCL complexity classification.
From decades of research, it turns out that the complexity of a CSP is largely related to its
polymorphism, an important definition in universal algebra. See [15] for an introduction to
the application of polymorphism in complexity theory and [14] for a literature review.
    Previous work suggests indirect connections between universal algebra tools and dis-
tributed graph algorithms: [23] applies universal algebra techniques to distributed CSPs [45],
but the distributed model is not a standard one. An emergent line of research, connecting
distributed graph algorithms with descriptive combinatorics [17, 18, 20, 31], may also have
implicit connections to a universal algebraic approach [44]. Yet, we are not aware of a
directly application of universal algebra to the classification of LCL complexities in standard
distributed models. As a result, we raise the following question.

▶ Question 59. Provide a way to apply a universal algebraic approach to LCL complexity
classification in distributed settings, or provide evidence that these algebraic tools may not be
suitable to classify LCLs.
44   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


          References
      1   Amirreza Akbari, Navid Eslami, Henrik Lievonen, Darya Melnyk, Joona Särkijärvi, and Jukka
          Suomela. Locality in online, dynamic, sequential, and distributed graph algorithms. arXiv
          preprint arXiv:2109.06593, 2021.
      2   Noga Alon, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Space-efficient local computation
          algorithms. In Proceedings of the twenty-third annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms, pages 1132–1139. SIAM, 2012.
      3   Amir Azarmehr, Soheil Behnezhad, Alma Ghafari, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. Stochastic matching
          via in-n-out local computation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium
          on Theory of Computing, pages 1055–1066, 2025.
      4   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël Rabie, and Jukka
          Suomela. The distributed complexity of locally checkable problems on paths is decidable.
          In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages
          262–271, 2019.
      5   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Dennis Olivetti, Jan Studenỳ, and Jukka
          Suomela. Efficient classification of locally checkable problems in regular trees. arXiv preprint
          arXiv:2202.08544, 2022.
      6   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Fabian Kuhn, Dennis Olivetti, Timothé Picavet, and Gustav
          Schmid. The distributed complexity landscape on trees depends on the knowledge about the
          network size. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12787, 2026.
      7   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, Jan Studenỳ, Jukka Suomela, and Aleksandr
          Tereshchenko. Locally checkable problems in rooted trees. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
          Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 263–272, 2021.
      8   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. Almost global problems
          in the local model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04776, 2018.
      9   Alkida Balliu, Sebastian Brandt, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. How much does
          randomness help with locally checkable problems? In Proceedings of the 39th Symposium on
          Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 299–308, 2020.
     10   Alkida Balliu, Filippo Casagrande, Francesco d’Amore, Massimo Equi, Barbara Keller, Henrik
          Lievonen, Dennis Olivetti, Gustav Schmid, and Jukka Suomela. Distributed quantum advantage
          in locally checkable labeling problems. In Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM
          Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1268–1308. SIAM, 2026.
     11   Alkida Balliu, Keren Censor-Hillel, Yannic Maus, Dennis Olivetti, and Jukka Suomela. Locally
          checkable labelings with small messages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05574, 2021.
     12   Alkida Balliu, Mohsen Ghaffari, Fabian Kuhn, Augusto Modanese, Dennis Olivetti, Mikaël
          Rabie, Jukka Suomela, Jara Uitto, et al. Shared randomness helps with local distributed
          problems. In Proceedings of the 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
          Programming (ICALP) 2025, 2025.
     13   Alkida Balliu, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Dennis Olivetti, and
          Jukka Suomela. New classes of distributed time complexity. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual
          ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1307–1318, 2018.
     14   Libor Barto. The constraint satisfaction problem and universal algebra. Bulletin of Symbolic
          Logic, 21(3):319–337, 2015.
     15   Libor Barto, Andrei Krokhin, and Ross Willard. Polymorphisms, and how to use them, 2017.
     16   Katalin Berlow, Anton Bernshteyn, Clark Lyons, and Felix Weilacher. Separating complexity
          classes of lcl problems on grids. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17445, 2025.
     17   Anton Bernshteyn. Distributed algorithms, the lovász local lemma, and descriptive combina-
          torics. Inventiones mathematicae, 233(2):495–542, 2023.
     18   Anton Bernshteyn and Felix Weilacher. Borel versions of the local lemma and local algorithms
          for graphs of finite asymptotic separation index. Transactions of the American Mathematical
          Society, 378(11):8183–8221, 2025.
S. Peng                                                                                                45


19   Nicolas Bousquet, Laurent Feuilloley, and Théo Pierron. How local constraints influence
     network diameter and applications to lcl generalizations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01305,
     2024.
20   Sebastian Brandt, Yi-Jun Chang, Jan Grebík, Christoph Grunau, Václav Rozhoň, and Zoltán
     Vidnyánszky. Local problems on trees from the perspectives of distributed algorithms, finitary
     factors, and descriptive combinatorics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02066, 2021.
21   Sebastian Brandt, Christoph Grunau, and Václav Rozhoň. The randomized local computation
     complexity of the lovász local lemma. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Principles
     of Distributed Computing, pages 307–317, 2021.
22   Sebastian Brandt, Juho Hirvonen, Janne H Korhonen, Tuomo Lempiäinen, Patric RJ Östergård,
     Christopher Purcell, Joel Rybicki, Jukka Suomela, and Przemysław Uznański. Lcl problems on
     grids. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages
     101–110, 2017.
23   Silvia Butti and Victor Dalmau. The complexity of the distributed constraint satisfaction
     problem. Theory of Computing Systems, 68(4):838–867, 2024.
24   Yi-Jun Chang. The complexity landscape of distributed locally checkable problems on trees.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09645, 2020.
25   Yi-Jun Chang. The distributed complexity of locally checkable labeling problems beyond
     paths and trees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.06726, 2023.
26   Yi-Jun Chang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, and Seth Pettie. An exponential separation between ran-
     domized and deterministic complexity in the local model. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     48(1):122–143, 2019.
27   Yi-Jun Chang and Seth Pettie. A time hierarchy theorem for the local model. SIAM Journal
     on Computing, 48(1):33–69, 2019.
28   Yi-Jun Chang, Jan Studenỳ, and Jukka Suomela. Distributed graph problems through an
     automata-theoretic lens. Theoretical Computer Science, 951:113710, 2023.
29   Anubhav Dhar, Eli Kujawa, Henrik Lievonen, Augusto Modanese, Mikail Muftuoglu, Jan
     Studenỳ, and Jukka Suomela. Local problems in trees across a wide range of distributed
     models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.13795, 2024.
30   Mika Göös, Juho Hirvonen, Reut Levi, Moti Medina, and Jukka Suomela. Non-local probes
     do not help with graph problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.05411, 2015.
31   Jan Grebík and Václav Rozhoň. Local problems on grids from the perspective of distributed al-
     gorithms, finitary factors, and descriptive combinatorics. Advances in Mathematics, 431:109241,
     2023.
32   Christoph Grunau, Václav Rozhoň, and Sebastian Brandt. The landscape of distributed
     complexities on trees and beyond. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Symposium on Principles
     of Distributed Computing, pages 37–47, 2022.
33   Adar Hadad and Moni Naor. Shared randomness in locally checkable problems: The role of
     computational assumptions. In 28th International Conference on Approximation Algorithms for
     Combinatorial Optimization Problems, APPROX 2025 and the 29th International Conference
     on Randomization and Computation, RANDOM 2025, page 50. Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-
     Zentrum für Informatik GmbH, Dagstuhl Publishing, 2025.
34   Avinatan Hassidim, Yishay Mansour, and Shai Vardi. Local computation mechanism design.
     ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 4(4):1–24, 2016.
35   Reut Levi, Moti Medina, et al. A (centralized) local guide. Bulletin of EATCS, 2(122), 2017.
36   Yuting Li, Ryan Gabrys, and Farzad Farnoud. Constructing low-redundancy codes via
     distributed graph coloring. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.04197, 2025.
37   Nathan Linial. Locality in distributed graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on computing,
     21(1):193–201, 1992.
38   Palma London, Niangjun Chen, Shai Vardi, and Adam Wierman. Distributed optimization
     via local computation algorithms. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review,
     45(2):30–32, 2017.
46   New LCL Complexity Classes for LCAs


     39   Yishay Mansour, Aviad Rubinstein, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Converting online algorithms
          to local computation algorithms. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and
          Programming, pages 653–664. Springer, 2012.
     40   Moni Naor and Larry Stockmeyer. What can be computed locally? In Proceedings of the
          twenty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 184–193, 1993.
     41   Will Rosenbaum and Jukka Suomela. Seeing far vs. seeing wide: Volume complexity of local
          graph problems. In Proceedings of the 39th Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
          pages 89–98, 2020.
     42   Ronitt Rubinfeld, Gil Tamir, Shai Vardi, and Ning Xie. Fast local computation algorithms.
          arXiv preprint arXiv:1104.1377, 2011.
     43   Gustav Schmid. Lcls beyond bounded degrees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02340, 2026.
     44   Riley Thornton. An algebraic approach to borel csps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16712, 2022.
     45   Makoto Yokoo, Toru Ishida, Edmund H Durfee, and Kazuhiro Kuwabara. Distributed constraint
          satisfaction for formalizing distributed problem solving. In [1992] Proceedings of the 12th
          International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, pages 614–621. IEEE, 1992.
