Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for
Bounded Degeneracy Graphs
Daniel Paul-Pena #
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA

C. Seshadhri #
University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
      Abstract
We study the classic problem of subgraph counting, where we wish to determine the number of
occurrences of a fixed pattern graph H in an input graph G of n vertices. Our focus is on bounded
degeneracy inputs, a rich family of graph classes that also characterizes real-world massive networks.
Building on the seminal techniques introduced by Chiba-Nishizeki (SICOMP 1985), a recent line of
work has built subgraph counting algorithms for bounded degeneracy graphs. Assuming fine-grained
complexity conjectures, there is a complete characterization of patterns H for which linear time
subgraph counting is possible. For every r ≥ 6, there exists an H with r vertices that cannot be
counted in linear time.
    In this paper, we initiate a study of subquadratic algorithms for subgraph counting on bounded
degeneracy graphs. We prove that when H has at most 9 vertices, subgraph counting can be done
in Õ(n5/3 ) time. As a secondary result, we give improved algorithms for counting cycles of length at
most 10. Previously, no subquadratic algorithms were known for the above problems on bounded
degeneracy graphs.
    Our main conceptual contribution is a framework that reduces subgraph counting in bounded
degeneracy graphs to counting smaller hypergraphs in arbitrary graphs. We believe that our results
will help build a general theory of subgraph counting for bounded degeneracy graphs.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Mathematics of computing → Graph algorithms

Keywords and phrases Homomorphism counting, Bounded degeneracy graphs, Fine-grained com-
plexity, Subgraph counting

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.124

Category Track A: Algorithms, Complexity and Games

Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.08376

Funding Both authors are supported by NSF CCF-1740850, CCF-1839317, CCF-2402572, and
DMS-2023495.


 1      Introduction

The fundamental algorithmic problem of subgraph counting in a large input graph has a
long and rich history [37, 23, 28, 21, 38, 1, 19, 42, 49]. There are applications in logic,
properties of graph products, partition functions in statistical physics, database theory,
machine learning, and network science [17, 15, 25, 10, 42, 22, 41]. We are given a pattern
graph H = (V (H), E(H)), and an input graph G = (V (G), E(G)). All graphs are assumed
to be simple. We use SubH (G) to denote the problem of computing the number of (not
necessarily induced) subgraphs of H in G, that is, the number of subgraphs of G isomorphic
to H.
   If the pattern is part of the input, this problem becomes NP-hard, as it subsumes
subgraph isomorphism. Often, one thinks of the pattern H as fixed, and running times are
parameterized in terms of the properties (like the size) of H. Let us set n = |V (G)| and
             © Daniel Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri;
                                                                                                      EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                      TC S




52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2025).
Editors: Keren Censor-Hillel, Fabrizio Grandoni, Joël Ouaknine, and Gabriele Puppis
Article No. 124; pp. 124:1–124:18
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
124:2   Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


        k = |V (H)|. There is a trivial brute-force O(nk ) algorithm, but we do not expect O(nk−ε )
        algorithms for general H for some constant ε > 0 [21].
            The rich field of subgraph counting focuses on restrictions on the pattern or the input,
        under which non-trivial algorithms and running times are possible [33, 3, 15, 24, 23, 21, 10,
        19, 11, 47]. Given the practical importance of subgraph counting, there is a special focus on
        linear time (or small polynomial running times).
            Inspired by seminal work of Chiba-Nishizeki [18], a recent line of work has focused
        on building a theory of subgraph counting for bounded degeneracy graphs [11, 6, 7, 14, 5].
        These are classes of graphs where all subgraphs have a constant average degree. This
        work culminated in results of Bera-Pashanasangi-Seshadhri and Bera-Gishboliner-Levanzov-
        Seshadhri-Shapira [7, 5]. We now have precise dichotomy theorems characterizing linear
        time subgraph counting in bounded degeneracy graph. When H has at most 5 vertices,
        then SubH (G) can be determined in linear time (if G has bounded degeneracy). For all
        k ≥ 6, there is a pattern H on k vertices that cannot be counted in linear time, assuming
        fine-grained complexity conjectures. The following question is the next step from this line of
        work.
           When can we get subquadratic algorithms for subgraph counting (when G has bounded
        degeneracy)? Are there non-trivial algorithms that work for all H with 6 (or more) vertices?
           Before stating our main results, we offer some justification for this problem.


        Bounded degeneracy graphs. This is an extremely rich family of graph classes, containing
        all non-trivial minor-closed families, bounded expansion families, and preferential attachment
        graphs [48]. Most massive real-world graphs, like social networks, the Internet, communication
        networks, etc., have low degeneracy ([30, 34, 51, 4, 8], also Table 2 in [4]). The degeneracy
        has a special significance in the analysis of real-world graphs, since it is intimately tied to
        the technique of “core decompositions” [48]. Most of the state-of-the-art practical subgraph
        counting algorithms use algorithmic techniques for bounded degeneracy graphs [1, 35, 42, 40,
        34, 41].


        Subquadratic time. From a theoretical perspective, the orientation techniques of Chiba-
        Nishizeki and further results [18, 6, 7, 5] are designed for linear time algorithms. The primary
        technical tool is the use of DAG-Tree decompositions, introduced in a landmark result of
        Bressan [11, 12]. Bressan’s algorithm yields running times of the form nr , where r ∈ N
        and is the DAG-treewidth of H. It is known that linear time algorithms are possible iff the
        DAG-treewidth is one [5]. It is natural to ask if the DAG-treewidth being two is a natural
        barrier. Subquadratic algorithms would necessarily require a new technique, other than
        DAG-treewidth. It would also show situations where the DAG-treewidth can be beaten.
           From a practical standpoint, the best exact subgraph counting codes (the ESCAPE
        package [27]) use methods similar to the above results. Algorithms for bounded degeneracy
        graphs have been remarkably successful in dealing with modern large networks. Subquadratic
        algorithms could provide new practical tools for subgraph counting.


        The focus on 6 vertices and the importance of cycle patterns. The problem of counting
        all patterns of a fixed size is called graphlet analysis in bioinformatics and machine learning
        [43, 50]. Current scalable exact counting codes go to 5 vertex patterns [27], which is precisely
        the theoretical barrier seen in [6]. Part of our motivation is to understand the complexity of
        counting all 6 vertex patterns (in bounded degeneracy graphs).
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                               124:3


    The seminal cycle detection work of Alon-Yuster-Zwick also gave algorithms parameterized
by the graph degeneracy [3]. But most of their results are for cycle detection, whereas counting
is arguably the more relevant problem. It is natural to ask if counting is also feasible with
similar running times.


1.1     Main Results
Our main result shows that patterns with at most 9 vertices can be counted in subquadratic
time. Let n be the number of vertices and κ be the degeneracy of the input graph G. The
degeneracy κ is the maximum value, over all subgraphs of G, of the minimum degree of the
subgraph. In what follows, f : N → N denote some explicit function.

▶ Theorem 1.1 (Main Theorem). There is an algorithm that computes1 SubH (G) for all
patterns H with at most 9 vertices in time f (κ)Õ(n5/3 ).2

   Recall that previous works gave (near) linear time algorithms when H had at most
5 vertices [6]. The best subgraph counting algorithm for bounded degeneracy graphs is
Bressan’s algorithm, which runs in at least quadratic (if not cubic) time for many patterns
with 6 to 9 vertices.
   Additionally, we construct an explicit 10-vertex pattern that we conjecture cannot be
counted in subquadratic time in the bounded degeneracy setting. We are able to relate the
complexity of counting that pattern to counting a specific hypergraph in general graphs,
which we believe can not be done in subquadratic time. (More in §1.2.6)


1.1.1     Counting cycles
As a secondary result, we are able to show that cycle counting in bounded degeneracy graphs
can be done even faster. These results are tight, in the sense that any improvement will
imply beating long standing cycle detection algorithms for sparse graphs. Let Ck denote
the k-cycle and dk be the exponent (in terms of edges) of the current fastest algorithm
for k-cycle detection in general graphs (see (3) and [29]). Gishboliner-Levanzov-Shapira-
Yuster (henceforth GLSY) recently showed that homomorphism counting of C2k in bounded
degeneracy graphs can be done in time O(ndk ) [29]. We prove that this complexity can be
matched for the problem of subgraph counting. Cycle counting is more challenging, since
it involves compute linear combinations of homomorphisms of non-cyclic patterns (which
requires other techniques).

▶ Theorem 1.2. Let κ denote the degeneracy of the input graph G.
  There is an algorithm that computes SubC6 (G) and SubC7 (G) in time f (κ)Õ(nd3 ), where
                                                      ′
   d3 < 1.41. Moreover, unless there is an O(md3 −ε )-time algorithm for counting triangles
   for some ε′ > 0, there is no f (κ)O(nd3 −ε )-time algorithm for any ε > 0.
  There is an algorithm that computes SubC8 (G) and SubC9 (G) in time f (κ)Õ(nd4 ), where
                                                       ′
   d4 < 1.48. Moreover, unless there is an O(md4 −ε )-time algorithm for counting 4-cycles
   for some ε′ > 0, there is no f (κ)O(nd4 −ε )-time algorithm for any ε > 0.


1
  We can obtain a similar result for the problem of counting only induced subgraphs IndSubH (G), as it
  can be expressed as a linear combination of SubH ′ (G) for some patterns H ′ with V (H ′ ) = V (H).
2
  We express our results parameterizing by the degeneracy of the input graph G. Note that if G is from a
  class with bounded degeneracy, then f (κ) is constant and we can ignore that term.




                                                                                                           ICALP 2025
124:4   Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


           There is an algorithm that computes SubC10 (G) in time f (κ)Õ(nd5 ), where d5 < 1.63.
                                                    ′
           Moreover, unless there is an O(md5 −ε )-time algorithm for counting 5-cycles for some
           ε′ > 0, there is no f (κ)O(nd5 −ε )-time algorithm for any ε > 0.

            Previously, for bounded degeneracy graphs, subquadratic results were only known for
        detecting cycles, by a result of Alon, Yuster and Zwick [3]. Theorem 1.2 improves or matches
        their bounds in all cases, despite solving the harder problem of counting. The lower bounds
        relating to cycle counting in general graphs follow directly from the techniques of GLSY [29].
        We note that the exponents dk have not been improved for twenty years [3, 53]. As a side
        corollary of our methods, we also get a better algorithm for counting 5-cycles in arbitrary
        graphs (Corollary 1.7).

        1.2     Main Ideas
        The theorems above are obtained from a new reduction technique that converts homomorph-
        ism counting in bounded degeneracy graphs to subgraph counting in arbitrary graphs for
        some specific patterns.
            The starting point for most subgraph counting algorithms for bounded degeneracy graphs
        is to use graph orientations [48]. A graph G has bounded degeneracy iff there exists an
        acyclic orientation G⃗ such that all vertices have bounded outdegree. (An acyclic orientation
        is obtained by directing the edges of G into a DAG.) Moreover, this orientation can be found
                                                                                              ⃗ of H
        in linear time [39]. To count H-subgraphs in G, we consider all possible orientations H
        and compute (the sum of) all Sub ⃗ (G).⃗
                                          H
           The approach formalized by Bressan [12] and Bera-Pashanasangi-Seshadhri [6] is to break
         ⃗                                                                  ⃗ The copies of each tree
        H into a collection of (out)directed trees rooted at the sources of H.
           ⃗
        in G can be enumerated in linear time, since outdegrees are bounded. We need to figure out
        how to “assemble” these trees into copies of H.⃗
           Bressan’s DAG-tree decomposition gives a systematic method to perform this assembly,
        and the running time is O(nτ ), where τ is the “DAG-treewidth” of H.   ⃗ The definition is
        technical, so we do not give details here. Also, this method only gives the homomorphism
        count (edge-preserving maps from H to G), and we require further techniques to get subgraph
        counts [19]. The main contribution of the linear time dichotomy theorems is to completely
        characterize patterns H such that all orientations H⃗ have DAG-treewidth one [7, 5].
           Since τ is a natural number, to get subquadratic time algorithms, we need new ideas.

        1.2.1    The 6-cycle
        It is well-known (from [3]) that linear-time orientation based methods hit an obstruction
        at 6-cycles. Consider the oriented 6-cycle in the left of Fig. 1. It is basically a “triangle”
        of out-out wedges (as given by the red lines); indeed, one can show that 6-cycle counting
        in bounded degeneracy graphs is essentially equivalent to triangle counting in arbitrary
        graphs [6, 7, 5]. This observation can be converted into an algorithm, as was shown by
        GLSY [29]. Starting with G,⃗ we create a new graph with edges (the red lines) corresponding
        to the endpoints of out-out wedges. Since G⃗ has bounded outdegree, the number of edges in
        the new graph is O(n). Every triangle in the new graph corresponds to a (directed) 6-cycle
        homomorphism in G.  ⃗ Triangle counting in the new graph can be done in O(n1.41 ) time (or
          3/2
        n     time using a combinatorial algorithm) [3]. Getting the subgraph count is more involved,
        but we can use existing methods that reduce to homomorphism counting [19].
            One can extend this idea more generally as follows. Let H⃗ be a directed pattern, a source
        is any vertex with no incoming arcs, and we define an intersection vertex as any vertex that
        can be “reached” by two different sources.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                             124:5




    Figure 1 (a) The 6-cycle obstruction, this orientation has three sources intersecting with each
other, this oriented pattern can not be counted in linear time in bounded degeneracy graphs. Adding
an edge connecting the end-points of every out-out wedge gives a triangle. (b) An example of how
the oriented C8 reduces to a C4 , the four sources become edges connecting the intersection vertices.


    Suppose there are k sources and k intersection vertices. Suppose further that there is
                                                                                                ⃗ such
an ordering of the sources {s0 , ..., sk−1 } and the intersection vertices {i0 , ..., ik−1 } of H
that, for all j, only the sources sj and sj+1 (taking modulo k in the indexes) can both reach
the vertex ij . This is the case of the oriented C6 and C8 in Fig. 1 or of any acyclic orientation
of any cycle. One can then construct a new graph G′ such that SubCk (G′ ) is the same as
HomH     ⃗
     ⃗ (G) (where HomH
                             ⃗
                          ⃗ (G) denotes the homomorphism count).



1.2.2     Generalizing to non-cyclic patterns
So far, the algorithmic approach only makes sense for cycle patterns. Our main contribution
is a framework that generalizes this approach to count homomorphisms and subgraphs of
more complex patterns.
    The first part of our framework is the concept of P -reducible patterns. Let P be a
hypergraph, a directed pattern is P -reducible if we can reduce counting homomorphisms of
it to counting P subgraphs in a sparse hypergraph. The formal definition is technical and
can be seen in §3. We provide a simplified exposition in this section.
    Consider a directed pattern H,⃗ for example the left image in Fig. 2. We can replace every
source with a hyperedge connecting the intersection vertices reachable from the source. The
result is a graph (or hypergraph) P such that H  ⃗ is P -reducible.
    However, our framework allows for even more freedom: instead of looking at individual
sources, we partition sources into sets of sources Se . See the rightmost figure in Fig. 2 for an
example, where the 6 sources are divided into 4 sets of sources. The sub-patterns induced by
the vertices reachable from every set of sources are “easy” to count using existing techniques.
We can also arrange the intersection vertices into sets Iv such that every set of sources will
reach some sets of intersection vertices. We can obtain P by replacing every set of intersection
vertices with a vertex and every set of sources Se with a hyperedge e that contains the
vertices corresponding to the sets of intersection vertices that can be reached by Se .
    In the second example of Fig. 2, the intersection of the vertices reachable from source sets
forms a “cyclic arrangement”. The intersection vertices reachable from S1 are also reachable
from S2 and S4 , and similarly for the other sets of sources, giving that the pattern will be
C4 -reducible.


1.2.3     The reduced graph
The second part of our framework is the reduced graph. If a pattern is P -reducible, then
                              ⃗ we can construct a colored weighted graph GP with the
for any directed input graph G,
following property. The number of homomorphisms of the original pattern relates to the
number of colorful copies of P in GP .


                                                                                                         ICALP 2025
124:6   Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs




             Figure 2 Two more complex examples of P -reducibility.


            The reduced graph consists of |V (P )| layers of vertices, where each layer is related to
        one intersection set of H.⃗ Specifically, there is a vertex in the j-th layer for every possible
        image of the corresponding intersection set Ij in G,     ⃗ that is, every set of vertices in G
                                                                                                     ⃗ such
        that Ij can be mapped to it. Moreover, the vertices of every layer will have the same color.
        For example, for every intersection set Ij in H     ⃗ and any map ϕ : Ij → G    ⃗ there is a vertex
                                       3
        (ϕ(Ij )-j) in GP with color j.
            The edges have weights that represent the number of homomorphisms mapping the
        intersection sets to the corresponding images. For example, let S be a source set reaching two
                                                                        ⃗ An edge e connecting (u-j) and
        intersection sets Ij = {ij } and Ij ′ = {ij ′ }, and let u, v ∈ G.
            ′
        (v-j ) with weight w = w(e) indicates that there are w different homomorphisms mapping
         ⃗
        H(S)    (the subgraph of H ⃗ induced by the vertices reachable from S) to G       ⃗ that map j to
                  ′                                              ⃗
        u and j to v. Additionally we can show that if G has bounded outdegree, then the new
        reduced graph will have O(n) edges.
            We give an example in Fig. 3. For simplicity of exposition, the graph G       ⃗ is smaller than
                                       ⃗
        the pattern. Each vertex of G has three copies (each with a different color) in the reduced
        graph, denoted GC3 . Since the vertex a cannot be the image of any intersection vertex (it has
        zero indegree), copies of this vertex do not appear in GC3 . Observe that there is no mapping
        of an out-out wedge where b is one endpoint and d is the other endpoint. Hence, there is no
        edge from a copy of b to a copy of d.
            Every colorful copy of P in GP correspond to fixing the positions of the intersection sets
           ⃗ and the weight of each hyperedge will correspond to the number of homomorphisms
        in G,
        mapping that portion of the graph. Hence the product of the weights of all hyperedges in
        each copy will give the total number of homomorphisms mapping all the intersection sets
        to the corresponding vertices in G. ⃗ Therefore, the total number of homomorphisms will be
        equal to the quantity Col-WSubP (GP ), which corresponds to the sum of products of weights
        of colorful copies of P . That is:
                                           X             Y
             Col-WSubP (GP ) =                                     w(e)                                           (1)
                                     P ′ ∈Col-S(P,GP ) e∈E(P ′ )


        Here, Col-S(P, GP ) denotes the set of distinct colorful copies of P in GP . We are able to
        show that solving Col-WSubP (GP ) is equivalent to counting the number of homomorphisms
           ⃗ in G.
        of H    ⃗


        3
            There could be O(n|Ij | ) such vertices, however, as we will note later, there will be at most O(n) edges,
            so we can ignore vertices with degree 0 and we do not need to even create them.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                          124:7




    Figure 3 An example of the construction of GC3 , for pattern H  ⃗ and input graph G.  ⃗ The red
                                ⃗ the green ones with i2 and the blue ones with i3 . The weight of
vertices correspond with i1 in H,
the edges is 1 except when indicated. For example there are two homomorphisms ϕ : H(s     ⃗ 2) → G⃗
that map i1 and i2 to c, hence the edge {c-1, c-2} has weight 2. One can verify that the number of
homomorphisms from H   ⃗ to G⃗ is equal to the sum of products of (colorful) triangles in GC3 .


   Therefore, we can count homomorphisms of P -reducible patterns in the same time as
counting colorful copies of P in the reduced graph.
▶ Lemma 1.3. Let c > 1. If there exists a Õ(mc )-time algorithm that for any graph G′
                                                            ⃗ and directed input graph G,
computes Col-WSubP (G′ ), then for any P -reducible pattern H                          ⃗
we can compute HomH   ⃗                    c
                   ⃗ (G) in time f (d)Õ(n ), where d is the maximum outdegree of G.
                                                                                    ⃗

1.2.4     From directed to undirected: getting homomorphisms counts
To extend our reduction framework to undirected graphs we introduce the concept of P-
computable patterns. Note that different acyclic orientations of the same pattern might
reduce to different graphs. Let P be a set of graphs, we say that a pattern H is P-computable
if all the acyclic orientations of H can be computed in linear time or are P -reducible for
some P ∈ P. If for all the patterns in P we can compute Col-WSubP in time O(mc ) then
we can use Lemma 1.3 to get a bound on the complexity of HomH (G).
    For each k ≥ 6, we find a set of hypergraphs Pk such that all patterns with k vertices are
Pk -computable. These sets grow with k and we have Pk ⊆ Pk+1 . We give a definition of
these sets in Section §5 and prove the following lemma.
▶ Lemma 1.4. Let k ≥ 6, every connected pattern H with k vertices is Pk -computable.
   For k = 9 we are able to show that there exists a subset P9∗ of P9 such that every 9-vertex
pattern is also P9∗ -computable and for every pattern P ∈ P9∗ we can compute Col-WSubP in
Õ(m5/3 ) time. Allowing us to show that for all patterns with 9 vertices or less we can count
the number of homomorphisms in subquadratic time.
   We can also show similar results for cycles. All orientations of cycle patterns can be
reduced to cycles of half their length. This means that any 2k-cycle and 2k + 1-cycle are
{Ck ∪ ... ∪ C3 }-computable (in these cases we will simply write Ck -computable).
   We can also show that for all cycles we can compute Col-WSubCk (G) in Õ(mdk ) time,
the fastest time for detecting k-cycles in general graphs.
▶ Lemma 1.5. For all k ≥ 3, there is an algorithm that computes Col-WSubCk (G) in time
Õ(mdk ).
   This means that we can compute the number of homomorphisms of C2k and C2k+1 in
time Õ(mdk ), similar result to the one obtained in GLSY [29].



                                                                                                      ICALP 2025
124:8   Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


        1.2.5    Getting subgraph counts
        At this point, we have algorithms for computing various pattern homomorphisms. To get
        subgraph counts, we need the inclusion-exclusion techniques of [19]. One can express the H-
        subgraph count as a linear combination of H ′ -homomorphism counts, where H ′ is a pattern
        in Spasm(H). The Spasm(H) consists of all patterns H ′ such that H has a surjective
        homomorphism to H ′ . Thus, every pattern in the spasm has at most as many vertices as H.
           Hence for any pattern H with k vertices, all the patterns in Spasm(H) will have at most
        k vertices and hence they will also be Pk -computable, giving Theorem 1.1.
           In the case of the cycles, to be able to extend the results from last section to the Sub
        problem, we analyze the spasm of the different cycles. For k ≤ 10 we are able to show that
        the patterns in the spasms of Ck are also C⌊k/2⌋ -computable. That combined with Lemma 1.5
        implies the upper bound of Theorem 1.2.

        1.2.6    Inverting the reduction for conditional hardness
        We show that in some cases our reduction procedure is optimal. For example, counting small
        cycles in general graphs can be reduced to counting cycles of twice the length in graphs of
        degeneracy κ = 2. The reduction is quite simple and just involves subdividing the edges.
        With a slight modification, the subdivision approach can be used to show lower bounds for
        odd cycles too, which gives the lower bound of Theorem 1.2. We note that an analogous
        result for counting homomorphisms was shown in GLSY [29].

        ▶ Lemma 1.6. Let 6 ≤ k ≤ 10. For any ε > 0, the existence of an f (κ)O(nd⌊k/2⌋ −ε )-
                                                                    ′
        time algorithm for counting k-cycles implies an O(md⌊k/2⌋ −ε )-time algorithm for counting
        ⌊k/2⌋-cycles in general graphs, for some ε′ > 0.

           This inversion of the reduction procedure also gives us an algorithm for counting undirected
        5-cycles in general graphs which improves on the current state of the art, and matches the
        complexity for 5-cycle detection.

        ▶ Corollary
                   1.7. There
                           is an algorithm that, for any graph G, computes SubC5 (G) in time
        O md5 < O m1.63 .

            The approach of subdividing edges can be used to prove a relation between other patterns
        too. In the case of hypergraphs, we can replace hyperedges of arity r by r-stars. We are able
        to show a strong relation between the hypergraph H△ depicted in Fig. 4, and a 10-vertex
        pattern. We conjecture that for this pattern we can not count the number of subgraphs in
        subquadratic time.

        ▶ Conjecture 1.8. For any ε > 0, there is no O(m2−ε )-time algorithm for computing
        SubH△ (G).

        This conjecture implies that there are no subquadratic algorithms for computing the number
        of subgraphs of all 10-vertex patterns.

        ▶ Lemma 1.9. If Conjecture 1.8 holds, then for any ε > 0 there is no algorithm that computes
        SubH (G) in time f (κ)O(n2−ε ) for all patterns H with 10 vertices.

        We consider it an interesting open problem to relate our conjecture with existing fine-grained
        complexity assumptions. Some previous works prove barriers for subquadratic listing in
        general graphs [16], but no similar results exist for counting hypergraphs.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                   124:9




   Figure 4 The hypergraph H△ .


1.3    Related Work
Subgraph counting is closely tied to homomorphism counting; in some cases, it is more
convenient to talk about the latter. Seminal work of Curticepean-Dell-Marx showed that the
optimal algorithms for subgraph counting can be designed from homomorphism counting
algorithms and vice versa [19].
    Much of the study of subgraph/homomorphism counting comes from paramterized
complexity theory. Díaz et al [23] gave a O(2k ntw(H)+1 ) algorithm for determining the
H-homomorphism count, where tw(H) is the treewidth of H. Dalmau and Jonsson [21]
proved that HomH (G) is polynomial time solvable iff H has bounded treewidth. Otherwise
it is #W [1]-complete. Roth and Wellnitz [47] consider restrictions of both H and G, and
focus of #W [1]-completeness.
    Tree decompositions have played an important role in subgraph counting. We give a brief
review of the graph parameters treewidth and degeneracy. The notion of tree decomposition
and treewidth were introduced in a seminal work by Robertson and Seymour [44, 45, 46],
although the concept was known earlier [9, 31].
    Degeneracy is a measure of sparsity and has been known since the early work of Szekeres-
Wilf [52]. We refer the reader to the short survey of Seshadhri [48] about degeneracy and
algorithms. The degeneracy has been exploited for subgraph counting problems in many
algorithmic results [18, 26, 1, 35, 42, 40, 34, 41].
    Bressan connected degeneracy to treewidth-like notation and introduced the concept
of DAG treewidth [11, 12]. The main result is the following. For a pattern H with
|V (H)| = k and an input graph G with |E(G)| = m and degeneracy κ, one can count
HomH (G) in f (κ, k)O(mτ (H) log m) time, where τ (H) is the DAG treewidth of H. Assuming
the exponential time hypothesis [32], the subgraph counting problem does not admit any
f (κ, k)mo(τ (H)/ ln τ (H)) -time algorithm, for any positive function f : N × N → N.
    Bera-Pashanasangi-Seshadhri introduced the first theory of linear time homomorphism
counting [6], showing that all patterns with at most 5 vertices could be counted in linear
time. It was later shown that for every pattern with no induced cycles of length 6 or more,
the number of homomorphisms could also be counted in linear time [7, 5].
    A recent work of Komarath et al. [36] gave quadratic and cubic algorithms for counting
cycles in sparse graphs. Gishboliner et al. gave subquadratic algorithms for homomorphism
counting of cycles in bounded degeneracy graphs [29]. Bressan, Lanziger and Roth have also
studied counting algorithms for directed patterns [13].


1.4    Paper Organization
In Section 3, we define our reduction framework formally and prove the equivalence between
the bounded degeneracy and the general setting. In Section 4, we prove that many patterns
are cycle-reducible. In Section 5, we define the sets Pk and complete the proof of the main


                                                                                               ICALP 2025
124:10 Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


       theorem. Finally, in Section 6, we show how to compute Col-WSub for cycle patterns. Due
       to space limitations most proofs have been deferred to the Full Version, including the proofs
       of Lemma 1.6 and Lemma 1.9.


        2     Preliminaries

       Graphs, subgraphs and homomorphisms
       We use H = (V (H), E(H)) to denote the pattern graph and G = (V (G), E(G)) to denote
       the input graph. We will use n = |V (G)| and m = |E(G)| for the number of vertices and
       edges of G respectively.
           A homomorphism from H to G is a mapping ϕ : V (H) → V (G) such that ∀{u, v} ∈ E(H)
       we have {ϕ(u), ϕ(v)} ∈ E(G). We use Φ(H, G) to denote the set of all homomorphisms from
       H to G. We use HomH (G) to denote the problem of counting the number of homomorphisms
       from H to G, that is, computing |Φ(H, G)|. Similarly we use SubH (G) to denote the problem
       of counting the number of subgraphs (not necessarily induced) of G isomorphic to H.
           We say that two homomorphisms ϕ : V → G and ϕ′ : V ′ → G agree if for any vertex
       v ∈ V ∩ V ′ we have ϕ(v) = ϕ′ (v).
           The spasm of a graph is the set of all possible graphs obtained by recursively combining
       two vertices that are not connected by an edge, removing any duplicated edge. Using
       inclusion-exclusion arguments one can express the value of SubH (G) as a weighted sum
       of homomorphism counts of the graphs in the spasm of H. Hence, computing HomH ′ (G)
       for all H ′ ∈ Spasm(H), allows to compute SubH (G), as given by the following equation:
       SubH (G) = H ′ ∈Spasm(H) f (H ′ )HomH ′ (G).
                    P

           Here f (H ′ ) are a series of non-zero coefficients that can be computed for each H. See
       [10] for more details. Curticapean, Dell and Marx showed that this process is optimal [19],
       that is, the complexity of SubH (G) is exactly the hardest complexity of HomH ′ (G) for the
       graphs in Spasm(H).


       Degeneracy and directed graphs
       A graph G is κ-degenerate if every subgraph has a minimum degree of at most κ. The
       degeneracy κ(G) of a graph is the minimum nonnegative value κ such that G is κ-degenerate.
       There exists an acyclic orientation of a graph, called the degeneracy orientation, which has
       the property that the maximum outdegree of the graph is at most κ [39]. Additionally, this
       orientation can be computed in O(n + m) time. We will use G    ⃗ to denote the directed input
       graph. For a pattern H, we use Σ(H) to denote the set of acyclic orientations of H. When
       orienting the input graph, every occurrence of H will now appear as exactly one of its acyclic
                                          P
       orientations, that is, HomH (G) = H∈Σ(H)
                                             ⃗        HomH   ⃗
                                                          ⃗ (G).
                               ⃗ is a source if its in-degree is 0. We use S(H)
           We say that v ∈ V (H)                                             ⃗ to denote the set of
                   ⃗
       sources of H. We say a vertex u is reachable from v if there is a directed path connecting v
       to u and use ReachH  ⃗ (s) to denote the set of vertices reachable from the source s. Abusing
       notation, for a set S ′ ⊆ S(H) ⃗ we use Reach ⃗ (S ′ ) (or Reach(S ′ ) if H
                                                                                 ⃗ is clear from the
                                                        H
                                                                                                  ⃗
       context) to denote the set of vertices reachable from at least one vertex in S ′ . We use H(S)
            ⃗
       and H(s)   for the subgraphs of H ⃗ induced by Reach ⃗ (S) and Reach ⃗ (s).
                                                              H               H
                                        ⃗
          We say that a vertex v of H is an intersection vertex if there are at least two distinct
                          ⃗ such that v is reachable from both of them, that is, v ∈ H(s)
       sources s, s′ ∈ S(H)                                                               ⃗      ⃗ ′ ).
                                                                                              ∩ H(s
       We use I(H)⃗ to denote the set of intersection vertices. Note that S(H)⃗ ∩ I(H) ⃗ = ∅.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                   124:11


The DAG-treewidth
Bressan introduced the concept of DAG-tree decomposition of a directed acyclic graph [11]:
▶ Definition 2.1 (DAG-tree decomposition [11]). For a given directed acyclic graph H   ⃗ =
    ⃗ E(H)),
(V (H),    ⃗   a DAG-tree decomposition of H  ⃗ is a rooted tree T = (B, E) such that:
    Each node B ∈ B, is a subset of the sources of H,⃗ B ⊆ S(H).
                                                               ⃗
                    ⃗
    Every source of H is in at least one node of T ,
                                                     S            ⃗
                                                          B = S(H).
                                                      B∈B
   ∀B, B1 , B2 ∈ B, if B is in the unique path between B1 and B2 in T , then ReachH
                                                                                  ⃗ (B1 ) ∩
   ReachH⃗  (B 2 ) ⊆ ReachH⃗ (B).
    The DAG-treewidth of a DAG-tree decomposition T , τ (T ), is the maximum size of all
the bags in T . The DAG-treewidth of a directed acyclic graph H⃗ is the minimum value of
                                                    ⃗
τ (T ) across all valid DAG-tree decomposition T of H. For an undirected graph H, we will
have that τ (H) = max ⃗            ⃗
                                τ (H).
                       H∈Σ(H)


Using DAG-tree decomposition to compute homomorphisms
Bressan gave an algorithm that computes HomH (G) making use of the DAG-tree decom-
position of a directed pattern [11, 12]. The algorithm decomposes the pattern into smaller
subgraphs, computes the number of homomorphisms of every subgraph and then combines
the counts using dynamic programming.
▶ Theorem 2.2 ([11]). For any pattern H with k vertices there is an algorithm that computes
HomH (G) in time f (k, κ)Õ(nτ (H) ).
For the patterns with τ (H) = 1 we obtain an algorithm that runs in near-linear time for
graphs of constant degeneracy. Bera et al. showed an exact characterization of which patterns
have τ (H) = 1, which depends only on the length of the largest induced cycle of the pattern
(LICL(H)).
▶ Lemma 2.3 ([7]). LICL(H) < 6 ⇔ τ (H) = 1.
    If we analyze the algorithm from Bressan in more detail, we can see that it can be used
as a black box to obtain some more fine-grained counts. In order to understand this we need
to introduce the following definition:
    A homomorphism ϕ′ extends ϕ if for every vertex u mapped by ϕ we have              ′
                                                                            ϕ(u) = ϕ (u).
Let ϕ be a homomorphism from a subgraph H    ⃗ ′ of H
                                                    ⃗ to G.
                                                         ⃗ We define ext H, ⃗ G;⃗ ϕ as the
                                ⃗ to G
number of homomorphisms ϕ′ from H    ⃗ that extend ϕ.

▶ Lemma 2.4 (Lemma 5 in [12] (restated)). There exists an algorithm that, given a directed
pattern H⃗ with k vertices and a DAG-tree decomposition T rooted in s with τ (T ) = 1, and a
               ⃗ with n vertices and maximum outdegree d; returns, for every homomorphism
directed graph G                       
    ⃗
ϕ : H(s)     ⃗ the quantity ext H,
          → G,                     ⃗ G;
                                     ⃗ ϕ . The algorithm runs in time f (k, d)Õ(n).


Hypergraphs
A hypergraph is a generalization of a graph where each edge (or hyperedge) is a subset of
the vertex set. The arity of a hyperedge is the number of vertices that it contains. We will
only consider hypergraphs where every hyperedge has arity at least 2. We use E(G) for the
set of hyperedges of G, where for each e ∈ E(G) we have e ⊆ V (G). We will also consider
weighted hypergraphs, for a hypergraph G, the function w : E(G) → N gives the weight of
each hyperedge e in G. We use Sk to denote the simplex hypergraph of arity k, that is, the
hypergraph on k + 1 vertices with all possible hyperedges of arity k.



                                                                                                ICALP 2025
124:12 Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


        3      The reduction procedure
       In this section, we explain the reduction procedure underlying the notion of P -reducibility.
       The idea is to organize the structure of the directed pattern H  ⃗ based on the hypergraph P .
           First, we partition the set of sources of the directed pattern H   ⃗ into |E(P )| disjoint
       subsets Se , one for each hyperedge e in E(P ). Every source belongs to exactly one subset Se .
       This partition allows us to decompose H    ⃗ into smaller subgraphs, each corresponding to a
       hyperedge, where the subgraphs can be efficiently counted using Bressan’s algorithm.
                                                                                                   ⃗
           Second, we associate to each vertex v ∈ V (P ) a subset of intersection vertices Iv ⊆ I(H).
                                                                                         ∗
       Not all the intersection vertices need to belong to one of the subsets; we let I denote the
       set of intersection vertices that appear in at least one Iv . A given intersection vertex may
       belong to multiple subsets, but we require that the vertices of P corresponding to all subsets
       containing a common intersection vertex induce a connected subgraph.
           To connect the sources to the intersection vertices, we define, for each hyperedge e, the
       set I(e) as the subset of I ∗ reachable from the sources in Se . We require that the sources in
       Se reach all the intersection vertices assigned to the vertices v incident to e. Moreover, for
       each vertex v ∈ V (P ), the sources associated with any hyperedge containing v must reach
       all the vertices in Iv .
           These conditions ensure that we can correctly combine the homomorphism counts for
       each subgraph H(S⃗ e ) to compute the homomorphism counts of H.    ⃗ We now present the full
       formal definition.

       ▶ Definition 3.1 (P -reducible). A connected DAG H        ⃗ is P -reducible if there exist subsets
       Iv ⊆ I(H)⃗ for every vertex v ∈ V (P ), and subsets Se ⊆ S(H)    ⃗ for every hyperedge e ∈ E(P ),
       satisfying the following conditions:
           Let I ∗ = v Iv . For every intersection vertex i ∈ I ∗ , the set of vertices {v : i ∈ Iv } ⊆ V (P )
                    S

           induces a connected hypergraph in P .
          The subsets Se are disjoint, i.e., Se ∩ Se′ = ∅ for all e ̸= e′ , and they cover all sources,
                S                 ⃗
           i.e., e∈E(P ) Se = S(H).
           For every hyperedge e ∈ E(P ), the subset Se contains a source se such that H(s      ⃗ e) ∩ I ∗ =
            ⃗         ∗                              ⃗
           H(Se ) ∩ I = I(e), and the subgraph H(Se ) admits a τ = 1 DAG-tree decomposition
            rooted at se .
            For every vertex v ∈ V (P ) and every hyperedge e containing v, we have Iv ⊆ I(e).
                                                    S
            For every hyperedge e ∈ E(P ), we have v∈e Iv = I(e).

            We now define the reduced graph GP .

       ▶ Definition 3.2 (Reduced graph GP ). Given a P -reducible directed pattern on source sets
       {Se : e ∈ E(P )} and intersection sets {Iv : v ∈ V (P )}, we define the reduced graph GP of
       the directed input graph G   ⃗ as follows:
           For every vertex v ∈ V (P ) and every homomorphism ϕ : Iv → G      ⃗ we have the vertex
          (ϕ(Iv )-v) with color v. The vertices with the same color form the “layers” of GP .
           For every hyperedge e ∈ E(P ) and for every homomorphism ϕ : I(e) → G,       ⃗ let ϕv be
           the restriction of ϕ to Iv for each vertex v ∈e, we will have
                                                                        a hyperedge connecting the
                                                           ⃗       ⃗
           vertices {(ϕv (Iv )-v) : v ∈ e} with weight ext H(Se ), G; ϕ .

           We use V (v) (GP ) to refer to the vertices of GP in the v-th layer. The number of vertices
       in every layer v can be up to O(n|Iv | ), however we will only consider vertices that are not
       isolated, that is, have degree at least 1. We can show that we can construct GP efficiently
       when only considering such vertices.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                   124:13


▶ Lemma 3.3. Given a P -reducible pattern H      ⃗ and a directed graph G ⃗ with maximum
outdegree d, we can construct GP in f (d)Õ(n) time. Additionally, the number of non-isolated
vertices and the total number of hyperedges are bounded by f (d)O(n).

   We can now prove the equivalence between homomorphisms of the original pattern and
weighted colorful copies of the reduced hypergraph. This lemma relates the counts between
the original and the reduced graph.

▶ Lemma 3.4. HomH  ⃗
                ⃗ (G) = Col-WSubP (GP )

     Finally, we have all the tools to complete our reduction framework, giving us Lemma 1.3.

▶ Lemma 1.3. Let c > 1. If there exists a Õ(mc )-time algorithm that for any graph G′
                                                            ⃗ and directed input graph G,
computes Col-WSubP (G′ ), then for any P -reducible pattern H                          ⃗
we can compute HomH   ⃗                    c
                   ⃗ (G) in time f (d)Õ(n ), where d is the maximum outdegree of G.
                                                                                    ⃗

Proof. For any P -reducible pattern we can use Lemma 3.3 to construct the reduced GP
                                             ⃗ This graph will have f (d)O(n) edges. We
graph in time f (d)Õ(n) for any input graph G.
can then use the Õ(mc ) algorithm to compute Col-WSubP (GP ) in time f (d)Õ(nc ). From
Lemma 3.4 we have that Col-WSubP (GP ) will be equal to HomH     ⃗
                                                              ⃗ (G).                   ◀

3.1     From directed to undirected
We introduce the concept of P-computable, which will help us give upper bounds in the
complexity of undirected patterns.

▶ Definition 3.5 (P-computable). Let P be a set of hypergraphs. We say that a pattern H is
                                          ⃗ ∈ Σ(H) has either DAG-treewidth of 1 or there
P-computable if every acyclic orientation H
exists a hypergraph P ∈ P such that H⃗ is P -reducible.

   If a pattern H is P-computable and P is only formed by cyclic patterns we will instead
write Cl -computable, where l is the length of the largest cycle in P. The complexity of
computing homomorphisms of P-computable patterns will be dominated by the hardest
complexity for computing Col-WSubP .

▶ Lemma 3.6. Let P be a set of hypergraphs, if for every hypergraph P ∈ P there is
an algorithm that computes Col-WSubP in time Õ(mc ), then for any input graph G with
degeneracy κ and any P-computable pattern H, there is an algorithm that computes HomH (G)
in time f (κ)Õ(nc ).

 4      Reducing to cycles
We first focus on patterns that can be reduced to counting cycles. We start by introducing
the following two lemmas, showing that directed patterns with either few sources or few
intersection vertices are C3 -reducible.
                                            ⃗ with at most 3 sources is either C3 -reducible
▶ Lemma 4.1. Every directed acyclic pattern H
      ⃗
or τ (H) = 1.

                                            ⃗ with at most 3 intersection vertices is either
▶ Lemma 4.2. Every directed acyclic pattern H
                    ⃗ = 1.
C3 -reducible or τ (H)

     Using this two lemmas we can prove that all 6 and 7-vertex patterns are C3 -computable.



                                                                                                ICALP 2025
124:14 Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


       ▶ Lemma 4.3. Every 6 and 7-vertex undirected pattern H is C3 -computable.

          Additionally, the patterns in the spasm will always have less vertices, and hence all
       patterns in the spasms of all 6 and 7-vertex patterns will also be C3 -computable. This fact,
       together with Lemma 1.5 gives the following.

       ▶ Corollary 4.4. Let H be a pattern with 6 or 7 vertices. For any input graph G, we can
       compute HomH (G) and SubH (G) in time f (κ)Õ(nd3 ) < f (κ)O(n1.41 ).

           We can also show that the acyclic orientations of cycle patterns are always Ck -reducible
       for some k at most half of the length of the cycle. This is equivalent to the result in [29], but
       expressed using our reducibility framework.

       ▶ Lemma 4.5. For all k ≥ 3, C2k and C2k+1 are Ck -computable.

           Moreover, we can also show that all patterns in the spasms of cycles up to length 10 are
       also cycle-computable.

       ▶ Lemma 4.6.
          All the patterns in Spasm(C6 ) and Spasm(C7 ) are C3 -computable.
          All the patterns in Spasm(C8 ) and Spasm(C9 ) are C4 -computable.
          All the patterns in Spasm(C10 ) are C5 -computable.

            This lemma allows us to prove the upper bound of Theorem 1.2.

       ▶ Lemma 4.7. For all 6 ≤ k ≤ 10, there is an algorithm that computes SubCk (G) in time
       f (κ)O(nd⌊k/2⌋ ).

        5      Reducing to other patterns
       Consider the set of directed patterns with 8 vertices. Using the results of the previous section
       we can show that most of the orientations will either admit a DAG-tree decomposition with
       τ = 1 or will be C3 -reducible. However, if a pattern H    ⃗ has 4 sources and 4 intersection
       vertices then it might not be cycle-reducible. Instead we might need to reduce to some
       hypergraphs, like in Fig. 2. The following definitions will help us determining which patterns
       we will need to reduce to for patterns with at least 8 vertices.

       ▶ Definition 5.1 (Pi,s , Pk ). We define Pi,s as the set of hypergraphs P with i vertices and s
       hyperedges such that:
       1. Every vertex has degree at least 2.
       2. Every hyperedge contains at least 2 vertices.
       3. No hyperedge is a subset of any other hyperedge.
       4. For every pair of distinct vertices u, v ∈ V (P ) the set of hyperedges containing u can not
          be equal or a subset of the set of hyperedges containing v.
       For any k ≥ 7, we define Pk recursively as the union of Pk−1 and all sets Pi,s , with i + s = k
       and i, s ≥ 4, with P6 = {C3 }.

          We can prove that for any k, patterns with k vertices will reduce to some pattern in Pk .
       This was stated earlier as Lemma 1.4.

       ▶ Lemma 1.4. Let k ≥ 6, every connected pattern H with k vertices is Pk -computable.

            In order to prove Theorem 1.1, we show exactly which patterns form P9 .
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                    124:15




     Figure 5 The diamond graph D, the hypergraph H1 and the hypergraph H2 .


▶ Lemma 5.2. P9 = {C3 , C4 , D, S3 , H1 , H2 }

Where, D is the diamond pattern, S3 the 3-simplex, H1 and H2 are the two hypergraphs
shown in Fig. 5. It turns out that simplex-reducible patterns are also cycle-reducible. Hence
we can set P9∗ = P9 \ S3 and show that every P9 -computable pattern is also P9∗ -computable.

▶ Lemma 5.3. If a pattern H is P9 -computable, then it is also P9∗ -computable

     We can show that all the hypergraphs in P9∗ can be counted in subquadratic time.

▶ Lemma 5.4. For any weighted colored hypergraph G with m edges, there is an algorithm
that computes Col-WSubP (G) for all patterns P ∈ P9∗ in time Õ(m5/3 ).

     Finally we can prove the main theorem.

▶ Theorem 1.1 (Main Theorem). There is an algorithm that computes SubH (G) for all
patterns H with at most 9 vertices in time f (κ)Õ(n5/3 ).

Proof. Let H be a pattern with 9 or less vertices. From Lemma 1.4 we have that H is
P9 -computable, using Lemma 5.3 we will have that it is also P9∗ -computable. Additionally,
from Lemma 5.4 we have that for all hypergraphs P ∈ P9∗ we can compute Col-WSubP (G) in
Õ(m5/3 ) time. This together with Lemma 3.6 gives that we compute HomH (G) in f (κ)Õ(n5/3 )
time.
    All the graphs H ′ in the Spasm of H have also at most 9 vertices, hence we can compute
HomH ′ (G) for them and use inclusion-exclusion to obtain the value of SubH (G) in total time
f (κ)Õ(n5/3 ).                                                                             ◀


 6      Counting cycles
We adapt the two algorithms for counting weighted homomorphisms of cycles shown in [29] for
computing Col-WSubCk . The first is a combinatorial algorithm that matches the complexity
of detecting directed cycles combinatorially [3]. The second is a matrix multiplication based
algorithm which adapts the algorithm from [53]. The complexity of this algorithm for
counting Ck is given by the value ck , the exact values of ck for k ≥ 6 are not known, but the
following upper bound holds [20]:

             ω(k + 1)                                 ωk − 4/k
     ck ≤                if k is odd        ck ≤                      if k is even         (2)
            2ω + k − 1                             2ω + k − 2 − 4/k

Where ω is the matrix multiplication exponent.

▶ Lemma 6.1. Let G be a colored weighted graph with m edges. For all k > 3:
  There is a combinatorial algorithm that computes Col-WSubCk (G) in time Õ(m2−1/⌈k/2⌉ ).
  There is an algorithm that computes Col-WSubCk (G) in time Õ(mck ).



                                                                                                 ICALP 2025
124:16 Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


           For any k we use dk for the fastest of the two algorithms, similar to [29]. Lemma 1.5
       follows directly from Lemma 6.1 and the following equation:

            dk = min(2 − 1/⌈k/2⌉, ck )                                                               (3)

           Note that dk < 2 for all k, hence we have subquadratic algorithms for all cycles. For
       k < 6 and using the best known upper bound ω ≤ 2.371339 on the matrix multiplication
       exponent [2], we have that the matrix multiplication algorithm is faster and we get the
       following bounds on dk : d3 < 1.41, d4 < 1.48 and d5 < 1.63.

              References
        1    Nesreen K. Ahmed, Jennifer Neville, Ryan A. Rossi, and Nick Duffield. Efficient graphlet
             counting for large networks. In Proceedings, SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
             (ICDM), 2015. doi:10.1109/ICDM.2015.141.
        2    Josh Alman, Ran Duan, Virginia Vassilevska Williams, Yinzhan Xu, Zixuan Xu, and Renfei
             Zhou. More asymmetry yields faster matrix multiplication. In Proceedings of the 2025
             Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2005–2039, 2025.
             doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.63.
        3    Noga Alon, Raphael Yuster, and Uri Zwick. Finding and counting given length cycles.
             Algorithmica, 17(3):209–223, 1997. doi:10.1007/BF02523189.
        4    Suman K Bera, Amit Chakrabarti, and Prantar Ghosh. Graph coloring via degeneracy in
             streaming and other space-conscious models. In International Colloquium on Automata,
             Languages and Programming, 2020. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2020.11.
        5    Suman K. Bera, Lior Gishboliner, Yevgeny Levanzov, C. Seshadhri, and Asaf Shapira. Counting
             subgraphs in degenerate graphs. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 69(3), 2022. doi:10.1145/
             3520240.
        6    Suman K Bera, Noujan Pashanasangi, and C Seshadhri. Linear time subgraph counting,
             graph degeneracy, and the chasm at size six. In Proc. 11th Conference on Innovations in
             Theoretical Computer Science. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2020.
             doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2020.38.
        7    Suman K. Bera, Noujan Pashanasangi, and C. Seshadhri. Near-linear time homomorphism
             counting in bounded degeneracy graphs: The barrier of long induced cycles. In Proceedings of
             the Thirty-Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 2315–2332,
             2021. doi:10.1137/1.9781611976465.138.
        8    Suman K Bera and C Seshadhri. How the degeneracy helps for triangle counting in graph
             streams. In Principles of Database Systems, pages 457–467, 2020. doi:10.1145/3375395.
             3387665.
        9    Umberto Bertele and Francesco Brioschi. On non-serial dynamic programming. J. Comb.
             Theory, Ser. A, 14(2):137–148, 1973. doi:10.1016/0097-3165(73)90016-2.
       10    Christian Borgs, Jennifer Chayes, László Lovász, Vera T. Sós, and Katalin Vesztergombi.
             Counting graph homomorphisms. In Topics in discrete mathematics, pages 315–371. Springer,
             2006. doi:10.1007/3-540-33700-8_18.
       11    Marco Bressan. Faster subgraph counting in sparse graphs. In 14th International Symposium
             on Parameterized and Exact Computation (IPEC 2019). Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
             für Informatik, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.IPEC.2019.6.
       12    Marco Bressan. Faster algorithms for counting subgraphs in sparse graphs. Algorithmica,
             83:2578–2605, 2021. doi:10.1007/s00453-021-00811-0.
       13    Marco Bressan, Matthias Lanzinger, and Marc Roth. The complexity of pattern counting in
             directed graphs, parameterised by the outdegree. In Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory
             of Computing, pages 542–552, 2023. doi:10.1145/3564246.3585204.
       14    Marco Bressan and Marc Roth. Exact and approximate pattern counting in degenerate
             graphs: New algorithms, hardness results, and complexity dichotomies. In 2021 IEEE
             62nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 276–285, 2022.
             doi:10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00036.
D. Paul-Pena and C. Seshadhri                                                                        124:17


15   Graham R Brightwell and Peter Winkler. Graph homomorphisms and phase transitions.
     Journal of combinatorial theory, series B, 77(2):221–262, 1999. doi:10.1006/jctb.1999.1899.
16   Karl Bringmann and Egor Gorbachev. A fine-grained classification of subquadratic patterns
     for subgraph listing and friends, 2024. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2404.04369.
17   Ashok K Chandra and Philip M Merlin. Optimal implementation of conjunctive queries in
     relational data bases. In Proc. 9th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing,
     pages 77–90, 1977. doi:10.1145/800105.803397.
18   Norishige Chiba and Takao Nishizeki. Arboricity and subgraph listing algorithms. SIAM
     Journal on Computing (SICOMP), 14(1):210–223, 1985. doi:10.1137/0214017.
19   Radu Curticapean, Holger Dell, and Dániel Marx. Homomorphisms are a good basis for
     counting small subgraphs. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on
     Theory of Computing, pages 210–223, 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055502.
20   Mina Dalirrooyfard, Thuy Duong Vuong, and Virginia Vassilevska Williams. Graph pattern
     detection: hardness for all induced patterns and faster non-induced cycles. In Proceedings of
     the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2019, Phoenix,
     AZ, USA, June 23-26, 2019, pages 1167–1178, 2019. doi:10.1145/3313276.3316329.
21   Víctor Dalmau and Peter Jonsson. The complexity of counting homomorphisms seen from the
     other side. Theoretical Computer Science, 329(1-3):315–323, 2004. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2004.
     08.008.
22   Holger Dell, Marc Roth, and Philip Wellnitz. Counting answers to existential questions.
     In Proc. 46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming. Schloss
     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.113.
23   Josep Díaz, Maria Serna, and Dimitrios M Thilikos. Counting h-colorings of partial k-trees.
     Theoretical Computer Science, 281(1-2):291–309, 2002. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(02)00017-8.
24   Martin Dyer and Catherine Greenhill. The complexity of counting graph homomorphisms.
     Random Structures & Algorithms, 17(3-4):260–289, 2000. doi:10.1002/1098-2418(200010/
     12)17:3/4\%3C260::AID-RSA5\%3E3.0.CO;2-W.
25   Martin E Dyer and David M Richerby. On the complexity of# csp. In Proc. 42nd Annual ACM
     Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 725–734, 2010. doi:10.1145/1806689.1806789.
26   David Eppstein. Arboricity and bipartite subgraph listing algorithms. Information processing
     letters, 51(4):207–211, 1994. doi:10.1016/0020-0190(94)90121-X.
27   Escape. https://bitbucket.org/seshadhri/escape.
28   Jörg Flum and Martin Grohe. The parameterized complexity of counting problems. SIAM
     Journal on Computing (SICOMP), 33(4):892–922, 2004. doi:10.1137/S0097539703427203.
29   Lior Gishboliner, Yevgeny Levanzov, Asaf Shapira, and Raphael Yuster. Counting homomorphic
     cycles in degenerate graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 19(1), February 2023. doi:10.1145/
     3560820.
30   G. Goel and J. Gustedt. Bounded arboricity to determine the local structure of sparse graphs.
     In International Workshop on Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science, pages 159–167.
     Springer, 2006. doi:10.1007/11917496_15.
31   Rudolf Halin. S-functions for graphs. Journal of geometry, 8(1-2):171–186, 1976. doi:
     10.1007/BF01917434.
32   Russell Impagliazzo, Ramamohan Paturi, and Francis Zane. Which problems have strongly
     exponential complexity? In Proc. 39th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science, pages 653–662, 1998. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1998.743516.
33   Alon Itai and Michael Rodeh. Finding a minimum circuit in a graph. SIAM Journal on
     Computing, 7(4):413–423, 1978. doi:10.1137/0207033.
34   Shweta Jain and C Seshadhri. A fast and provable method for estimating clique counts using
     Turán’s theorem. In Proceedings, International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), pages
     441–449, 2017. doi:10.1145/3038912.3052636.
35   Madhav Jha, C Seshadhri, and Ali Pinar. Path sampling: A fast and provable method for
     estimating 4-vertex subgraph counts. In Proc. 24th Proceedings, International World Wide




                                                                                                     ICALP 2025
124:18 Subgraph Counting in Subquadratic Time for Bounded Degeneracy Graphs


            Web Conference (WWW), pages 495–505. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering
            Committee, 2015. doi:10.1145/2736277.2741101.
       36   Balagopal Komarath, Anant Kumar, Suchismita Mishra, and Aditi Sethia. Finding and
            Counting Patterns in Sparse Graphs. In 40th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects
            of Computer Science (STACS 2023), pages 40:1–40:20, 2023. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.
            2023.40.
       37   László Lovász. Operations with structures. Acta Mathematica Academiae Scientiarum
            Hungarica, 18(3-4):321–328, 1967. doi:10.1007/BF02280291.
       38   László Lovász. Large networks and graph limits, volume 60. American Mathematical Soc.,
            2012. URL: http://www.ams.org/bookstore-getitem/item=COLL-60.
       39   David W Matula and Leland L Beck. Smallest-last ordering and clustering and graph coloring
            algorithms. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 30(3):417–427, 1983. doi:10.1145/2402.322385.
       40   Mark Ortmann and Ulrik Brandes. Efficient orbit-aware triad and quad census in directed and
            undirected graphs. Applied network science, 2(1), 2017. doi:10.1007/s41109-017-0027-2.
       41   Noujan Pashanasangi and C Seshadhri. Efficiently counting vertex orbits of all 5-vertex
            subgraphs, by evoke. In Proc. 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
            (WSDM), pages 447–455, 2020. doi:10.1145/3336191.3371773.
       42   Ali Pinar, C Seshadhri, and Vaidyanathan Vishal. Escape: Efficiently counting all 5-vertex
            subgraphs. In Proceedings, International World Wide Web Conference (WWW), pages 1431–
            1440, 2017. doi:10.1145/3038912.3052597.
       43   Natasa Przulj. Biological network comparison using graphlet degree distribution. Bioinform-
            atics, 23(2):177–183, 2007. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btl301.
       44   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. i. excluding a forest. Journal of
            Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 35(1):39–61, 1983. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(83)90079-5.
       45   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. iii. planar tree-width. Journal of
            Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 36(1):49–64, 1984. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(84)90013-3.
       46   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. ii. algorithmic aspects of tree-width.
            Journal of algorithms, 7(3):309–322, 1986. doi:10.1016/0196-6774(86)90023-4.
       47   Marc Roth and Philip Wellnitz. Counting and finding homomorphisms is universal for
            parameterized complexity theory. In Proc. 31st Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
            Algorithms, pages 2161–2180, 2020. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975994.133.
       48   C. Seshadhri. Some vignettes on subgraph counting using graph orientations. In Proceedings
            of the International Conference on Database Theory (ICDT), pages 3:1–3:10, 2023. doi:
            10.4230/LIPIcs.ICDT.2023.3.
       49   C. Seshadhri and Srikanta Tirthapura. Scalable subgraph counting: The methods behind the
            madness: WWW 2019 tutorial. In Proceedings, International World Wide Web Conference
            (WWW), 2019. doi:10.1145/3308560.3320092.
       50   Nino Shervashidze, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, Tobias Petri, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Karsten M.
            Borgwardt. Efficient graphlet kernels for large graph comparison. In AISTATS, pages 488–495,
            2009. URL: http://proceedings.mlr.press/v5/shervashidze09a.html.
       51   K. Shin, T. Eliassi-Rad, and C. Faloutsos. Patterns and anomalies in k-cores of real-world
            graphs with applications. Knowledge and Information Systems, 54(3):677–710, 2018. doi:
            10.1007/s10115-017-1077-6.
       52   George Szekeres and Herbert S Wilf. An inequality for the chromatic number of a graph.
            Journal of Combinatorial Theory, 4(1):1–3, 1968. doi:10.1016/S0021-9800(68)80081-X.
       53   Raphael Yuster and Uri Zwick. Detecting short directed cycles using rectangular matrix
            multiplication and dynamic programming. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual ACM-
            SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’04, pages 254–260, 2004. URL: http:
            //dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=982792.982828.
