Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 291:1–60, 2025                                   38th Annual Conference on Learning Theory




      Optimization, Isoperimetric Inequalities, and Sampling via Lyapunov
                                   Potentials
August Y. Chen                                                                                             AYC 74@ CORNELL . EDU
Cornell University, Department of Computer Science

Karthik Sridharan                                                                                          KS 999@ CORNELL . EDU
Cornell University, Department of Computer Science



Editors: Nika Haghtalab and Ankur Moitra



                                                              Abstract
     In this paper, we prove that optimizability of any function F using Gradient Flow from all initializations
     implies a Poincaré Inequality for Gibbs measures µβ ∝ e−βF at low temperature. In particular, under
     mild regularity assumptions on the convergence rate of Gradient Flow, we establish that µβ satisfies a
     Poincaré Inequality with constant O(CPI , LOCAL ) for β ≥ Ω(d), where CPI , LOCAL is the Poincaré constant of
     µβ restricted to a neighborhood of the global minimizers of F . Under an additional mild condition on F , we
     show that µβ satisfies a Log-Sobolev Inequality with constant O(SβCPI , LOCAL ) where S denotes the second
     moment of µβ . Here asymptotic notation hides F -dependent parameters. At a high level, this establishes that
     optimizability via Gradient Flow from every initialization implies a Poincaré and Log-Sobolev Inequality for
     the low-temperature Gibbs measure, which in turn imply sampling from all initializations.
     Analogously, we establish that under the same assumptions, if F can be initialized from everywhere except
     some set S, then µβ satisfies a Weak Poincaré Inequality with parameters (O(CPI , LOCAL ), O(µβ (S))) for
     β ≥ Ω(d). At a high level, this shows while optimizability from ‘most’ initializations implies a Weak Poincaré
     Inequality, which in turn implies sampling from suitable warm starts. Our regularity assumptions are mild
     and as a consequence, we show we can efficiently sample from several new natural and interesting classes of
     non-log-concave densities, an important setting with relatively few examples. As another corollary, we obtain
     efficient discrete-time sampling results for log-concave measures satisfying milder regularity conditions than
     smoothness, similar to Lehec (2023).

     Keywords: Isoperimetric Inequalities, Non-log-concave sampling, Non-convex optimization, Langevin
     Dynamics, Markov Chain mixing time


1. Introduction
Sampling from a high-dimensional distribution is a fundamental algorithmic problem in Machine Learning
(ML) and statistics, with several applications such as Bayesian inference (Gilks et al., 1995; Gamerman and
Lopes, 2006; Stuart, 2010; Kroese et al., 2013; Chewi, 2024). Moreover, with the recent rise of generative
AI methods such as diffusion models, this perspective on ML has become increasingly popular in practice;
see e.g. Song and Ermon (2019); Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2021b,a). Recently, significant theoretical
progress has been made in sampling from ‘nice enough’ – but still fairly general – distributions in Rd via the
gradient-based Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) method, which can be viewed as a natural variant of Gradient
Flow (GF) and Gradient Descent (GD). It has recently been shown LMC can sample from the Gibbs measure
µβ = e−βF /Z, where Z denotes the partition function, F denotes the log-density or the energy function, and
β > 0 is the inverse temperature, given access to a gradient oracle ∇F 1 , if µβ satisfies certain nice properties.2
 1. Similar but weaker guarantees hold given access to a stochastic gradient oracle, which is not the focus of our work.
 2. As with the rest of the literature on this topic, for the rest of the paper we assume the existence of µβ for all β ≥ Ω(1). Moreover,
    for the rest of the paper, we work in Rd .


© 2025 A.Y. Chen & K. Sridharan.
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




In continuous time, LMC is the Langevin Diffusion, the following Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE):
                                                             √
                                 dw(t) = −β∇F (w(t))dt + 2dB(t).                                      (1)

Here B(t) denotes a standard Brownian motion in Rd . This is a natural method to sample from µβ : the
continuous-time Langevin Diffusion with inverse temperature β, the SDE (1), converges to µβ (Chiang
et al., 1987). In discrete time, there are several discretizations of (1). One natural discretization is Gradient
Langevin Dynamics, defined as follows:
                                                                    √
                                       wt+1 ← wt − ηβ∇F (wt ) + 2ηεεt .                                       (2)

Here η > 0 is the step size, ε t ∼ N (0, I d ) is a d-dimensional standard Gaussian, and β > 0 is the inverse
temperature parameter (when larger, noise is weighted less). Another is the Proximal Sampler which we
elaborate on in Subsection B.2 (Lee et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Liang and Chen, 2022a,b; Fan et al., 2023;
Altschuler and Chewi, 2024). Yet another discrete-time sampler is the Weakly Dissipative Tamed Unadjusted
Langevin Algorithm and the Regularized Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm, which we elaborate on
in Subsection B.3 (Lytras and Mertikopoulos, 2024). Broadly, these algorithms are known as Langevin
Dynamics and aim to discrete (1). Note as β → ∞, reparametrizing (1) in terms of tnew = βt, (1) becomes GF
with time tnew , and reparametrizing (2) in terms of ηnew = ηβ, (2) becomes GD with step size ηnew .
It is now established that continuous and discrete time LMC can sample from µβ beyond log-concavity (when
F is convex), to when µβ satisfies an isoperimetric inequality, which correspond to geometric properties of
F allowing the Markov process (1) to mix efficiently (Villani, 2009, 2021; Bakry et al., 2014).
    • The most general such inequality under which discrete-time LMC has been proved to be successful
      from arbitrary initialization is when µβ satisfies a Poincaré Inequality (PI) (Chewi et al., 2024).
    • A stronger, related inequality under which discrete-time LMC efficiently succeeds is when µβ satisfies
      a Log-Sobolev Inequality (LSI) (Vempala and Wibisono, 2019). This is referred to as the ‘sampling
      analogue of gradient domination’, as it implies gradient domination in Wasserstein space (Jordan et al.,
      1998).
    • Under a Weak Poincaré Inequality (WPI), which generalizes a PI, continuous time LMC can efficiently
      sample from µβ from a suitable warm start (Röckner and Wang, 2001; Wang, 2006; Bakry et al., 2014;
      Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025).
We defer more discussion on isoperimetric inequalities to Subsection 2.1. Such sampling results have in turn
been used to show appropriately-scaled LMC can optimize non-convex F to tolerance Õ( βd ) (Raginsky et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2021).3
However, it is not clear what this means more concretely. Classically, when F is convex, µβ satisfies a
PI (Bobkov, 1999); when F is strongly convex, µβ satisfies a LSI (Bakry and Émery, 2006). But beyond
convexity, do we have classes of energy functions/log-densities F for which µβ satisfies isoperimetry? For
example, when F satisfies gradient domination in the traditional sense of optimization – which allows for GF
and GD to optimize F – does µβ satisfy a PI or LSI (and consequently we can sample from it)?
Before highlighting our results, we mention that related works and a comparison to our results, including the
concurrent works Chewi and Stromme (2024); Gong et al. (2024), can be found next in Subsection 1.2.
Convention. For the rest of paper, by shifting we assume WLOG that F attains a minimum value of 0 on Rd .
We let w⋆ denote any arbitrary global minimizer of F , thus F (w⋆ ) = 0.
 3. In runtime worst-case exponential in β.


                                                       2
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




1.1. Overview of Results
PI/LSI Results: The similarity between Langevin Dynamics and GF/GD motivates the overarching:
Conjecture 1 If F is optimizable via Gradient Descent from arbitrary initialization, then µβ ∶= e−βF /Z
satisfies a PI for appropriate β. Thus we can efficiently sample from µβ for such β with oracle access to ∇F .
This is natural: if gradient-based methods succeed for optimization without getting stuck, LMC ought to not
get stuck as well. Moreover, ∇F is the exact same oracle as we have for GF/GD.
We proceed to define optimizability of F via GF following Definition 1 and Theorem 2 of De Sa et al. (2022).
This following condition is derived in De Sa et al. (2022) from the existence of a appropriate rate function for
the convergence of GF. The notion of appropriate rate function from De Sa et al. (2022) is very generic – for
example, is is satisfied whenever GF enjoys an exponential rate – and as such the following definition covers
numerous examples in non-convex optimization. See Section 4 for a subset of these examples.
Definition 2 (Optimizability of F via Gradient Flow) For F with minimum value 0, we say F is optimiz-
able by Gradient Flow if for all w ∈ Rd , there exists a Lyapunov Function Φ(⋅) such that

                                              ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)),                                                          (3)

where g is monotonically non-decreasing with g(0) = 0 and g(x) > 0, g(x) ≥ m′ x − b′ for some m′ , b′ > 0
for all x > 0.4 Moreover, we say F is optimizable by GF from a set Q ⊂ Rd if (3) holds for all w ∈ Q.
Convention. We simply refer to F as optimizable when F is optimizable by GF in the sense of Definition 2.
Moreover, to obtain a PI and therefore discrete-time sampling results, it is natural to assume discrete-time
optimization via GD in addition to GF succeeds. For GD to succeed in optimizing F (i.e. for Taylor terms in
GD to be controlled), we require that Φ and F satisfy the following assumption:
Assumption 1.1 (Self-Bounding Regularity) For some monotonically non-decreasing ρΦ , ρF ∶ R≥0 →
R≥0 , we have ∥∇Φ(w)∥, ∥∇2 Φ(w)∥op ≤ ρΦ (Φ(w)) and ∥∇F (w)∥, ∥∇2 F (w)∥op ≤ ρF (F (w)).5
As shown in Theorem 3 of De Sa et al. (2022), assumptions analogous to Assumption 1.1 are actually
necessary for GD to succeed for discrete-time optimization, and hence come with little loss of generality.
Note smoothness of Φ and F (e.g. Φ = F for PŁ functions) is a special case of Assumption 1.1, but
Assumption 1.1 is much more general. Such a framework with dimension-independent ρΦ , ρF subsumes
numerous examples in non-convex (and convex) optimization; see Section 4 and De Sa et al. (2022).
We confirm Conjecture 1 in the following sense, stated formally in Theorem 12. Under Assumption 1.1,
Assumption 3.1 (which subsumes the literature and is necessary, see Remark 11), and Assumption 3.2:

  Optimizability of F for all w, i.e. (3) Ô⇒ PI for µβ for β = Ω(d) with PI constant O(poly(d, β)). (4)

In Theorem 12, we furthermore establish:

Above conditions + mild regularity on F Ô⇒ LSI for µβ for β = Ω(d) with LSI constant O(poly(d, β)).

In comparing optimization to sampling for F optimizable by GF/GD, β = Ω(d) is the correct scaling (and
has several applications); see Subsection 2.2. When β = Ω(d) is written above, the asymptotic notation hides
F -dependent constants; see e.g. Remark 13 and Subsection D.1 for full expressions. As a direct consequence
 4. We assume g(x) has at least linear tail growth, as g arises to handle when the rate function R(w, t) for GF is not integrable, e.g.
    for convex rate t−1 .
 5. In fact the bound on operator norm implies the bound on the gradient; see Lemma 11, De Sa et al. (2022).


                                                                  3
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




of the literature, having established a PI and/or LSI, we obtain that discrete-time LMC can sample from µβ for
such β in time polynomial in d, β, 1ε under very mild regularity assumptions; see Corollary 19, Corollary 20.
We view this as a core strength of our work: our result complements the literature and ‘plugs and plays’ with
sampling algorithms and their analysis that study sampling under isoperimetry. We further emphasize that
the focus of our work is not to develop or analyze sampling algorithms, but rather to prove that geometric
properties imply functional inequalities (PI/WPI), which are the crux of LMC. To obtain Corollary 19,
Corollary 20 we simply take results in the literature that, to the best of our knowledge, have the state-of-the-
art results for LMC.
For these corollaries we make no warm start assumption, and instead explicitly describe the initialization,
which does not depend on w⋆ . Our sampling algorithms succeed solely because F is optimizable everywhere;
intuitively, LMC ‘moves’ us towards µβ due to the optimizability condition ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).
If optimizability only holds within B(w⋆ , R) for some R, we show in Remark 18 (with details in Propo-
sition 21) that by appropriately regularizing on F outside B(w⋆ , R) to yield F̂ , we can sample from
µ̂β ∝ exp(−β F̂ ) ≈ µβ (the approximation holds for R large). We view this as an interesting algorithmic
implication of our work.
Weak Poincaré Inequalities: In many non-convex landscapes, such as Phase Retrieval and Matrix Square
Root, there is a set S with small Lebesgue measure of bad initializations where GF/GD does not succeed, but
everywhere else GF/GD works (Jain et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; De Sa et al., 2022). It can be moreover
verified that outside S, optimizability as per Definition 2 holds (De Sa et al., 2022). Little is known about
sampling in such settings. As such a deeper understanding of these settings is very important and interesting.
A Weak Poincaré Inequality (WPI) captures this picture, corresponding to efficient sampling under a warm
start which has low density in S. It is crucial to note such a situation is not covered by a PI, as a PI implies
worst-case mixing. Thus it is natural to expect:
Conjecture 3 If F is optimizable via Gradient Descent from everywhere except a set S with small Lebesgue
measure, then µβ satisfies a (CWPI , δ)-WPI with δ small for appropriate β. (See Subsection 2.1 for the
formal definition of a WPI; here δ in the WPI controls the ‘error’ we can sample to efficiently.) Thus we can
efficiently sample from µβ for such β with oracle access to ∇F with a warm start.
For clarity on what we mean by F being optimizable via Gradient Descent from everywhere except a set S
with small Lebesgue measure, we mean that for all w ∈ Rd ∖ S, (3) holds. That is, we have for some Φ and g
satisfying the conditions of Definition 2,

                             ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)) for all w ∈ Rd ∖ S.

We denote this by ‘optimizability of F from S c ’. As a concrete example, this holds if F is PŁ outside of
some S ⊂ Rd .
Indeed, we confirm Conjecture 3 in the following sense, stated formally in Theorem 15. We show under
Assumption 1.1, Assumption 3.1, Assumption 3.2 that

  Optimizability of F from S c Ô⇒ (CWPI , O(µβ (S)))-WPI for µβ , β = Ω(d), CWPI ≈ CPI from (4). (5)

Thus if µβ (S) is small (e.g. if S has small Lebesgue measure and inf w∈S F (w) is not too small), the
above shows we can sample to low error via LMC from a warm start. Again here, the O(⋅), Ω(⋅) hide
F -dependent parameters. With a WPI, sampling from a warm start follows via e.g. Röckner and Wang
(2001); Mousavi-Hosseini et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2025). Note S is arbitrary; it can comprise of saddle
points or even spurious local minima.

                                                       4
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Applications and Significance: Our results Theorem 12, Theorem 15 yield a natural, novel host of non-
log-concave measures µβ ∝ exp{−βF (w)} where LMC samples in time poly(d, β, 1/ε). The crux to
establishing these polynomial guarantees is showing poly(d, β) bounds on isoperimetric constants. This
is known for log-concave measures (convex F ); beyond log-concavity, known methods (e.g. perturbation
criteria) give exp(d) constants, even for e.g. PŁ F . By contrast, Definition 2, and hence our results, subsumes
the following general non-convex function classes for which GF/GD succeed for global optimization: Polyak-
Łojasiewicz (PŁ) (Polyak, 1963; Lojasiewicz, 1963), Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KŁ) (Kurdyka, 1998), and
Linearizable (Kale et al., 2021) functions (also known as Quasar-Convexity (Hinder et al., 2020)).
Definition 4 (Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ)) A differentiable function F is Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PŁ) with pa-
rameter λ > 0 if ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≥ λF (w) for all w ∈ Rd . (Take Φ = F , g(x) = λx in Definition 2. Recall we
shifted so F has minimum value 0 before this section.)
Definition 5 (Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KŁ)) A differentiable function F is Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KŁ) with
parameter λ > 0, θ ∈ [0, 1) if ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≥ λF (w)1+θ for all w ∈ Rd . (Take Φ = F , g(x) = λx1+θ .)
Definition 6 (Linearizable) A differentiable function F is λ-linearizable if for some global minimizer
w⋆ ∈ Rd of F , ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≥ λF (w) for all w ∈ Rd .6 (Take Φ = ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 , g(x) = λx.)
Consequently Theorem 12 yields a PI and thus poly(d, β, 1/ε) sampling guarantees for µβ ∝ exp(−βF )
when F is in the above classes, under the conditions of Theorem 12. Analogously, under the conditions
of Theorem 15, we obtain a WPI and sampling from a warm start for µβ ∝ exp(−βF ) when F is in the
above classes. Such a result has further applications and interpretation in Bayesian inference, as we detail in
Subsection 2.2. This alternate interpretation is: if Maximum a posteriori is optimizable by GF/GD, LMC
efficiently samples from the posterior. Optimizability of ERM/regularized ERM by GF/GD has been studied
extensively; our work lets us systematically use such results to fuel Bayesian inference.
For another application, note general convex functions are 1-Linearizable and automatically satisfy Assump-
tion 3.1. Corollary 23 thus gives Corollary 24, a poly(β, d, 1ε ) sampling guarantee for log-concave measures
at low temperatures under relaxed regularity assumptions (beyond smoothness). Log-concave sampling
beyond smoothness was studied in Lehec (2023); our regularity assumptions are in some sense more general.

Technical Approach: We also highlight our technical approach. We utilize this exact Lyapunov function Φ
from optimization (from Definition 2) to execute the Lyapunov potential technique from probability (Bakry
et al., 2008) to prove a PI/LSI. Generally the technique of Bakry et al. (2008) involves significantly different
Lyapunov potentials than those from optimization, and often ad-hoc. Using the exact same potential from
optimization gives crisp quantitative control over the isoperimetric constants of µβ . This crisp quantitative
control stands in contrast to typical usages of this technique. We also further develop this technique to prove
a WPI. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to develop the Lyapunov function technique to
establish a WPI. Our means of using the Lyapunov function technique to establish a WPI is simple and
user-friendly, and we expect that it will have further applications. As such, our work tightens the link between
optimization, sampling, and probability in several ways.

Connecting Optimization and Sampling: Our results yield fundamental relationships at the algorithmic
level, connecting optimizability via GF/GD to isoperimetry at low temperature (and hence the success of
Langevin Dynamics). There are several connections between sampling and optimization, from the Proximal
Point Method of optimization inspiring the Proximal Sampler, to interior point methods for log-concave
sampling (Kook and Vempala, 2024). Here, we address Conjecture 1, Conjecture 3 and deepen the connection
between optimization, isoperimetry, and sampling from another angle.

 6. We make a change of variables compared to its definition in (Kale et al., 2021).


                                                                 5
                                                   C HEN S RIDHARAN




1.2. Related Works
Several other works have studied the connection between efficient optimization, isoperimetry, and sampling:
    • Ma et al. (2019) studied this connection across different temperature levels β, where the behavior of
      µβ fundamentally changes. In contrast, we study a given, fixed landscape for large β, and study the
      connection between optimization and sampling in this landscape.
    • Several recent works (Li and Erdogdu, 2023; Kinoshita and Suzuki, 2022; Lytras and Sabanis, 2023;
      Huang and Sellke, 2025+; Sellke, 2024) show that when the landscape of − log µβ = F is strict saddle
      in the sense of a constant order negative eigenvalue around spurious critical points, then combined
      with several other regularity assumptions, functional inequalities hold. Among these, Kinoshita and
      Suzuki (2022); Lytras and Sabanis (2023) studies the problem in Euclidean spaces. However, this
      does not capture our setting of general functions optimizable by GF/GD. Thus these settings are
      not comparable. Indeed, there are many functions where GF/GD succeed that are not strict-saddle,
      such as star-convex functions, smooth one-point-strongly convex functions, and even general convex
      functions. See Example 5 for further discussion of these examples. These results also contain many
      unnecessary regularity assumptions and/or suboptimal F -dependent parameters. We bypass these
      suboptimal dependencies via our novel use of the Lyapunov function method.
      Moreover, the results of Kinoshita and Suzuki (2022); Lytras and Sabanis (2023); Li and Erdogdu
      (2023) only hold for an unreasonably low temperature regime, β ≥ Ω(d6 ), where Ω(⋅) again hides
      F -dependent parameters. This is often much larger than β = Θ̃( dε ) used for optimization via LMC to
      tolerance ε. At such the algorithmic implications of their result simply is that optimization is possible
      in strict-saddle landscapes. By contrast, this is not the case for β ≥ Ω(d) as we consider, the regime
      where sampling is of interesting in Bayesian inference; see Subsection 2.2.
    • The concurrent works Chewi and Stromme (2024); Gong et al. (2024) study a special case of our
      problem, when F is PŁ and β is large (a setting subsumed by our Theorem 12), also proceeding
      through Lyapunov functions.
      Gong et al. (2024) studies this problem under a local PŁ condition around local minima. However,
      they place several regularity assumptions on all of Rd , which in they show in their Proposition 3.1
      in fact imply unimodality analogous to our setting. Their Proposition 3.1 implies the existence of a
      connected set of local minima (see their note on page 3) and no saddle points. They further require
      a strictly negative lower bound on the Laplacian ∆F when the gradient is small, which factors into
      their quantitative dependencies; furthermore, such a situation can handled by our exact same proof, see
      Section C. Thus their work reduces to a setting analogous to ours. Their bound on the PI constant also
      implicitly incurs exponential d dependence; it contains a term of the form exp(C) (their Theorem 2,
      Lemma 4), and C = Ω(M∆ ) = Ω(d) for generic smooth F (Lemmas 2, 3).7
      Chewi and Stromme (2024) obtains a sharp characterization of the Poincaré and Log-Sobolev constants
      of µβ when F is PŁ and has a unique minimizer w⋆ in the asymptotic limit β → ∞. In this asymptotic
      limit, sampling degenerates into optimization and consequently the algorithmic implications of their
      result is relatively limited.8 We also remark that our Theorem 12 implies their upper bound on the
      Poincaré constant up to a universal constant factor of 2 (see e.g. Remark 13), and that a Poincaré
      Inequality is sufficient to give an efficient sampling algorithm (see for instance Chewi et al. (2024);
      Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024)).
 7. Note they adopt convention that smaller PI constant is worse.
 8. We point out their result will only hold for β ≥ Ω(d) where asymptotic notation hides F -dependent parameters, since they
    require an upper bound on the Laplacian of F , which scales with d even for e.g. quadratics.


                                                             6
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




      By contrast, our general optimizability condition is far more comprehensive and allows us to capture
      many examples under a single umbrella. It captures not only PŁ but also KŁ, Linearizable, Star-Convex,
      One-Point-Convex and general convex functions (see Example 4, Example 5). As an extreme example,
      convex F need not be PŁ, but are readily subsumed by our setting (see Example 5).
      Our method of using Lyapunov functions is also novel, in that we prove functional inequalities using
      the same Lyapunov function arising from optimization, further highlighting the connection between
      optimization and sampling. Our techniques also yield improved quantitative dependencies on F -
      dependent parameters; see Remark 32. As a consequence of our general optimizability condition,
      beyond a wide host of applications (Example 3, Example 4, Example 5), we obtain fundamental
      relationships at the algorithmic level: that optimizability, at appropriate β, implies the success of
      Langevin Dynamics for sampling.
Furthermore, none of these works connect optimizability outside of some unfavorable region S (as is often
the case in non-convex landscapes, e.g. Phase Retrieval) to a WPI, as we do in Theorem 15. Gong et al.
(2024) allows for local maxima outside a local region (which as remarked above can be readily handled by
our proof), but do not permit saddle points or spurious local minima as we do in Theorem 15. We also present
algorithm implications of our result via regularization if we only have ‘local’ optimizability in Proposition 21
but arbitrary stationary points/spurious local minima elsewhere, a perspective unexplored in these works.

2. Preliminaries and Technical Background
2.1. Isoperimetric Inequalities
Isoperimetric inequalities define geometric properties of F that enable LMC (or other Markov Chains, which
we do not expand on here) to mix rapidly. These isoperimetric inequalities are governed by their isoperimetric
constant; in this work we adopt the notion that a smaller isoperimetric constant implies a stronger inequality.
From arbitrary initializations, the most general condition under which LMC is successful is when µβ satisfies
a Poincaré Inequality (PI) (Villani, 2021; Bakry et al., 2014), defined as follows:
Definition 7 (Poincaré Inequality (PI)) A probability measure µ on Rd satisfies a Poincaré Inequality (PI)
with constant CPI (µ) if for all infinitely differentiable functions f ∶ Rd → R, we have
                                                       2
                              ∫ d f dµ − (∫ d f dµ) ≤ CPI (µ) ∫ d ∥∇f ∥ dµ.
                                    2                                          2
                                R             R                     R
If the above is not satisfied, following the convention, we set CPI (µ) = ∞.
A PI corresponds to exponential contraction of variance for the Langevin Diffusion (1) (note the left hand side
can be written as the variance Vµ (f )), and directly implies continuous-time sampling results in χ2 -divergence
via Langevin Dynamics (1). In particular, letting πT denote the probability measure obtained after running
the Langevin Diffusion (1) (with − log µ in place of β∇F ) for time T and π0 denote the initialization, we
have
                                      χ2 (πT ∣∣µ) ≤ e−2T /CPI (µ) χ2 (π0 ∣∣µ).
For both of these results, see e.g. Chapter 4, Bakry et al. (2014). By Bobkov (1999), if µ is log-concave, or
equivalently − log µ is a convex function of w, then µβ satisfies a PI. We next define Log-Sobolev Inequality
(LSI), which is stronger than PI.
Definition 8 (Log-Sobolev Inequality (LSI)) A probability measure µ on Rd satisfies a Log-Sobolev In-
equality (LSI) with Log-Sobolev constant CLSI (µ) if for all infinitely differentiable functions f ∶ Rd → R, we
have
                     ∫ f ln f dµ − ∫ f ln(∫ f dµ)dµ ≤ 2CLSI (µ) ∫ ∥∇f ∥ dµ.
                                                                                      2
                       Rd               Rd        Rd                           Rd


                                                       7
                                                      C HEN S RIDHARAN




If the above is not satisfied, following the convention, we set CLSI (µ) = ∞.
A LSI has been referred to as the ‘sampling analogue of the PŁ Inequality’, since it implies gradient
domination in Wasserstein space (Chewi, 2024). A LSI corresponds to exponential contraction of entropy
entµ (f ) for the Langevin Diffusion (1), which again is the left hand side of the above, and directly implies
exponential contraction for the KL-divergence via the Langevin Diffusion (1) (run with − log µ in place of
β∇F ). Namely defining πT , π0 as earlier, a LSI implies

                                           KL(πT ∣∣µ) ≤ e−2T /CLSI (µ) KL(π0 ∣∣µ).

See e.g. Chapter 5, Bakry et al. (2014). A LSI is stronger than a PI with the same constant: a LSI with
constant CLSI (µ) implies that a PI with the same constant holds, thus CPI (µ) ≤ CLSI (µ), but the reverse
implication does not hold (Chewi, 2024). Obtaining a sampling result in KL (via LSI) is also stronger than in
χ2 (via PI). Indeed, not all log-concave measures satisfy a LSI.
From a suitable warm-start, the Langevin Diffusion can efficiently sample from µβ under a Weak Poincaré
Inequality (WPI) (Röckner and Wang, 2001; Wang, 2006; Bakry et al., 2014; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023;
Huang et al., 2025), which captures beyond worst-case mixing. Consider e.g. a mixture of two well-separated
identity covariance Gaussians: mixing from arbitrary initialization is exponentially slow in d, but starting from
a normal perfectly centered between the modes, we could conceivably obtain rapid mixing. Indeed, several
works in probability have studied sampling from complicated distributions satisfying a WPI by ‘chaining
together’ warm starts (Alaoui et al., 2025+; Huang et al., 2025). To define a WPI, we adopt convention from
Definition 4.7, Huang et al. (2025).9
Definition 9 (Weak Poincaré Inequality (WPI)) A probability measure µ on Rd satisfies a (CWPI (µ), δ)-
Weak Poincaré Inequality (WPI) if for all infinitely differentiable functions f ∶ Rd → R, letting osc(f ) =
sup f − inf f , we have
                                                         2
                           ∫ d f dµ − (∫ d f dµ) ≤ CWPI (µ) ∫ d ∥∇f ∥ dµ + δosc(f ) .
                                  2                                               2         2
                             R                R                           R


Note osc(f ) ≤ 2 sup(∣f − E[f ]∣), so applying Theorem 2.1 of Röckner and Wang (2001) as in (2) of Huang
et al. (2025) and defining πT , π0 as earlier, we have the following mixing guarantee for the continuous-time
Langevin Diffusion (1) (again, run with − log µ in place of β∇F )):
                                                                                      2
                                  χ2 (πT ∣∣µ) ≤ e−T /CWPI (µ) χ2 (π0 ∣∣µ) + 4δ∥ dπ
                                                                                dµ − 1∥ .
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                             (6)
                                                                                      ∞

                                                              2
Thus if π0 is a suitable warm start in that ∥ dπ
                                              dµ − 1∥∞ is small, then we obtain a mixing guarantee. Hence δ is
                                                 0


the ‘error’ or ‘slack’ in the WPI, indicating how accurately we can sample efficiently with a warm start. Thus
in Theorem 15, if µβ (S) is small, we can sample efficiently in continuous-time to small accuracy.
It is also worth discussing the tail growth of F for which µβ = e−βF /Z satisfies an isoperimetric inequality
(Chewi et al., 2024; Mousavi-Hosseini et al., 2023). A PI for µβ goes hand-in-hand with F having at least
linear tail growth (e.g. F (w) = ∥w∥). For example, we can prove F has linear tail growth if F is convex
and µβ exists; see Lemma 2.2, Bakry et al. (2008). A LSI for µβ goes hand-in-hand with F having at least
quadratic tail growth (e.g. F (w) = ∥w∥2 ). As such, it is natural to assume that F has linear tail growth to
prove a PI, and that F has quadratic tail growth to prove a LSI.

 9. The definition above in fact implies Definition 4.7 of Huang et al. (2025).


                                                                  8
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




2.2. The Role of Temperature and Applications of Low-Temperature Sampling
Notice in our earlier results that the inverse temperature β = Ω(d). Justification for this scaling to study the
connection between optimization and sampling is severalfold:
    • Optimization is fundamentally performed at low temperature. Even at the initialization of optimization
      algorithms, the value of F at initialization is often viewed as O(1) in the literature (De Sa et al., 2022;
      Bubeck et al., 2015; Nesterov et al., 2018), which corresponds to the inverse temperature β = Ω(d);
                                  ⃗ 1 I d ). Furthermore the temperatures range we consider corresponds to
      consider initializing at N (0, β
      initialization (β = Ω(d)) rather than output of optimization to tolerance ε (β = Ω(d/ε)).
    • We use β = Ω(d) simply to follow the above aforementioned scaling from optimization. It is possible
      to obtain an analogous√result to ours in the β = O(1) setting
                                                             √      by changing Assumption 3.1 so that
      diam(W ⋆ ), r(lb ) = Θ( d) rather than Θ(1) and lb = Ω( d). Such a scaling is made for instance in
      Huang and Sellke (2025+). Then one can simply follow the same proof as ours from Section C.
Sampling at low temperature is also of independent theoretical interest and has been studied in several works,
discussed in Subsection 1.2. Typically one expects that as β increases, the isoperimetric constants of µβ
become larger, or isoperimetric inequalities break altogether. This behavior has been rigorously confirmed
in measures from statistical physics (El Alaoui and Gaitonde, 2024). As we establish here, such behavior
sharply contrasts to when F is optimizable, despite the lack of global convexity. Note under the generality
here, finding the exact temperature threshold for β where a PI/LSI holds is likely extremely difficult.10

Applications of Low-Temperature Sampling: Consider posterior sampling in high-dimensional regression.
Following Montanari and Wu (2023) (who use p rather than d), we observe covariates X ∈ Rn×d and response
y 0 ∈ Rn , under the linear model y 0 = X θ + ε , ε ∼ N (0,     ⃗ σ 2I n ). We consider the proportional asymptotics
n/d → δ ∈ (0, ∞), common in high-dimensional statistics (see e.g. Barbier et al. (2018); Wainwright (2019)).
Here, F̂erm (θθ ) = n1 ∥yy 0 − X θ ∥22 is empirical risk approximating population loss. Write the product measure
πΘ   (dθ ) ∝ exp(−R(θθ )). By eq. 12, p. 6 of Montanari and Wu (2023), the desired posterior to sample from
  ⊗d θ

is µX ,yy 0 (dθθ ) ∝ exp(− 2σ1 2 ∥yy 0 − X θ ∥22 )πΘ (dθ ). Thus as n/d → δ,
                                                   ⊗d θ


                                                            dδ                2σ 2
                                 µX ,yy 0 (dθθ ) ∝ exp{−        (F̂erm (θ
                                                                        θ ) +      R(θθ ))}.
                                                           2σ 2                n

This posterior is in the low temperature regime we consider, i.e. β = d⋅ 2σδ 2 = Ω(d). The objective we consider
is the regularized ERM objective. Under the same asymptotics, the posterior is at low temperature β = Ω(d)
more generally: for a Gibbs prior ∝ exp(−R(θθ )) for θ and the model (yy 0 )i = f (x   xi ; θ ) + ε i ∀1 ≤ i ≤ n. For
example, GLMs, where f (x i ; ) = ψ(x i ), are non-convex but are optimizable by GF/GD under appropriate
                             x  θ      x ⊺θ

conditions on ψ(⋅) (Foster et al., 2018; Wang and Wibisono, 2023). Note our results apply when β/d = Θ(1)
as d → ∞; in the regime β/d → ∞ as d → ∞, as is the case for several related works mentioned in
Subsection 1.2, posterior sampling is significantly easier (Montanari and Wu, 2023; Bontemps, 2011).
One can interpret our result from a Bayesian inference perspective: if Maximum a posteriori is optimizable by
GF/GD, LMC efficiently samples from the posterior. Optimizability of ERM and regularized ERM by GF/GD
has been studied extensively; our work lets us systematically use such results to fuel Bayesian inference.
We also note sampling at at low temperature is important in generative AI; the end of the reverse process in
diffusion models is at low temperature. See e.g. Song and Ermon (2019); Song et al. (2021a,b); Song (2021).
Moreover, in the temperature restriction β = Ω(d), we can replace d by the rank of ∇2 Φ when Φ is smooth.

10. For example, it remains open for the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model, for a PI/LSI w.r.t. the Glauber Dynamics.


                                                               9
                                                     C HEN S RIDHARAN




3. Connecting Optimizability and Sampling
Before we state our results, we state the following unimodality assumption on F . Functional inequalities
generally do not hold without exponential dimension-dependence when F has well-separated modes (Bovier
et al., 2004, 2005; Menz and Schlichting, 2014). This is a probabilistic analogue to standard assumptions in
non-convex optimization of good local behavior, such as F being convex or PŁ/KŁ near the global minima or
near all saddle points, in e.g. Damian et al. (2021); Ahn et al. (2024).

Assumption 3.1 Let W ⋆ denote the set of global minima. For all small enough l > 0, there exists r(l) > 0
such that {F ≤ l} ⊂ B(W ⋆ , r(l)) and µβ,LOCAL (l), the restriction of µβ on B(W ⋆ , r(l)), satisfies a Poincaré
Inequality with constant CPI , LOCAL (l). Here B(W ⋆ , r(l)) = {w ∶ d(w, W ⋆ ) ≤ r(l)}, where d(⋅, W ⋆ )
denotes the distance from w to the closest point in W ⋆ .

                                                                                               √ if F is
Remark 10 We believe the growth condition in the above is relatively unrestrictive. For example,
PŁ with parameter λ, by Theorem 2 of Karimi et al. (2016), {F ≤ l} ⊂ B(W ⋆ , r(l)) for r(l) = 2 l/λ.11

Furthermore, there are several natural, general examples satisfying Assumption 3.1 subsuming standard
settings of the literature with precise quantitative bounds on CPI , LOCAL (l). We explain fully in Subsection A.3:

Example 1 Suppose W ⋆ is convex and F is convex on B(W ⋆ , r(l)) for some l > 0. Then, we have that
                  (diam(W ⋆ )+2r(lb ))2
CPI , LOCAL (l) ≤         π2
                                        = O(1) if diam(W) = O(1) (which is the case for β = Ω(d)).

Example 2 Suppose also that F is α-strongly convex on B(W ⋆ , r(l)); then CPI , LOCAL (l) = O( β1 ). As
a special case, consider the following stronger assumption in Lytras and Sabanis (2023) (see also Li
and Erdogdu (2023)): W ⋆ = {w⋆ }, F is α-strongly convex at w⋆ , and ∇2 F is L′ -Lipschitz in a Ω(1)
neighborhood of w⋆ .12

We emphasize that Assumption 3.1 or analogous assumptions are in fact necessary. For example, even W ⋆
being connected is not enough for efficient sampling.

Remark 11 Consider when W ⋆ is dumbbell-shaped. Suppose F (w) = d(w, W ⋆ )2 , where d(w, w⋆ )
denotes the distance from w to the closest point in W ⋆ . F is optimizable – its gradient is nonzero until
reaching W ⋆ .13 However due to the poor isoperimetric constant of the dumbbell (Vempala, 2005), LMC will
not mix rapidly upon reaching W ⋆ , and so the isoperimetric constants of µβ behave poorly for β large.

To our knowledge, the only other related work handling multiple minimizers of F is Gong et al. (2024).
Their result also deteriorates when W ⋆ has poor isoperimetric constant. Moreover, Assumption 3.1 does not
directly imply a PI; terrible isoperimetry elsewhere gives poor mixing times from arbitrarily initialization. It
also does not imply a WPI in terms of S, the set where optimizability does not hold.

Convention. From here on out, asymptotic notation sometimes hides problem-dependent parameters; however
we never suppress β, d-dependence. Explicit dependencies are written fully in the appendix.


3.1. Main Results: Poincaré and Log-Sobolev Inequalities
Consider the following assumption on the tail growth of F , which corresponds to linear tail growth of F ,
which goes hand-in-hand with a PI. We note only the second part of this assumption is required for smooth Φ.


11. See also Chewi and Stromme (2024), Otto and Villani (2000).
12. This applies for small enough l such that B(W ⋆ , r(l)) is a subset of this Ω(1) neighborhood.
13. One can straightforwardly check this verifies optimizability in our sense.


                                                               10
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Assumption 3.2 Suppose that for some r1 , r2 , R > 0, for all w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c , we have ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≥
r1 F (w) and F (w) ≥ r2 ∥w − w⋆ ∥ for some w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ .
This assumption is very general in the context of optimization, and can be enforced via suitable regularization
outside B(w⋆ , R) (Raginsky et al., 2017). The standard dissipativity assumption made in many prior works
on non-convex optimization (Raginsky et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2021; Mou et al., 2022) are
a special case of Assumption 3.2; consequently we present the assumption in the above form. Note as per
Raginsky et al. (2017), for β = Ω(d), the dissipativity assumption (even dissipativity with b = 0) implies µβ
satisfies a PI, but with constant worst-case exponential in dimension.
Theorem 12 (Establishing PI and LSI under optimizability from all initializations) Suppose F is opti-
mizable in the sense of Definition 2 for all w and satisfies Assumption 3.2, the corresponding Φ satisfies
Assumption 1.1 (F satisfying Assumption 1.1 is unnecessary here; see Remark 29), and Assumption 3.1 is
satisfied for some lb > 0. Then for β ≥ Ω(d):

   1. µβ satisfies a PI with CPI = O(CPI , LOCAL + β1 ), where CPI , LOCAL is the Poincaré constant of µβ
      restricted to B(W ⋆ , r(lb )).
   2. Suppose F is L-weakly-convex, that is ∇2 F (w) ⪰ −LII d for some L > 0, and F has quadratic tail
      growth, that is, F (w) ≥ m∥w∥2 − b for some m, b > 0.14 Let S < ∞ be the second moment of µβ . Then
      µβ satisfies a LSI with constant CLSI = O((S + βd + 1)(βCPI , LOCAL + 1)).

From Theorem 12, we have established that optimizability of F via GF/GD (under the conditions from above,
among which Assumption 3.1 and Assumption 1.1 are needed) implies PI/LSI at low temperature. These
inequalities are the crux of non-log-concave sampling via LMC. Central to this proof is the optimizability
condition ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)) from Definition 2; see Section C. As such, Theorem 12 confirms
our initial Conjecture 1. Later in Subsection 3.3, we present corollaries of Theorem 12 for sampling.
Explicit constants are in the proof in Subsection D.1; they are not included for simplicity. To demonstrate
one such example, consider when Φ is L-smooth, which as explained in Section 4 subsumes many cases of
interest. Then we have the following, which we expand further on in Remark 30.
Remark 13 Suppose Φ is L-smooth, g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1, and WLOG that r1 ≤ 1/2. Then µβ satisfies a PI
with
                                 2     L                   L         8R2    2L
             CPI = 2CPI , LOCAL + (1 +     ) for β ≥ 2(1 +     )(d +     ∨          ).           (7)
                                 β     λlb                 λlb       r1 L r1 r22 λ2

Remark 14 We also consider the sharpness of our guarantees. For F (w) = ∥w∥2 (and strongly convex F ),
the PI constant from Theorem 12 is tight up to O(⋅). The LSI constant is lossy by around a β factor.
The proof of Theorem 12 uses the Lyapunov function technique in a fairly novel way. Typically one uses a
particular ad-hoc Lyapunov function such as eβF , F , or similar, as in Chewi and Stromme (2024); Gong et al.
(2024); Lytras and Sabanis (2023); Li and Erdogdu (2023). Rather, we use Φ from Definition 2 – the exact
same Lyapunov function arising from optimization (recall Definition 2, from De Sa et al. (2022)). We present
the main ideas for the proof in Section C and the full proof in Section D.

3.2. Main Results: Weak Poincaré Inequalities
We now discuss how to extend our work to when optimizability in the form of Definition 2 holds in some
region S, where we prove a WPI. We establish the following; the proof is in Subsection D.2:
14. Recall quadratic tail growth goes hand-in-hand with a LSI.


                                                                 11
                                                   C HEN S RIDHARAN




Theorem 15 (Establishing WPI under optimizability from most initializations) Suppose F is optimiz-
able in the sense of Definition 2 for all w not in some S ⊆ Rd , F satisfies Assumption 3.2, F and the
corresponding Φ satisfy Assumption 1.1, and Assumption 3.1 is satisfied for some lb > 0. Then for all
β ≥ Ω(d), µβ satisfies a (CWPI , δ)-WPI with CWPI = O(CPI , LOCAL + β1 ), δ = O(µβ (S)).
S typically has small Lebesgue measure ν, for example in the landscape of Phase Retrieval, Matrix
Square Root, or the set of ‘bad initializations’ around a saddle point where Gradient Descent does not
escape (Jain et al., 2017; Jin et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019; De Sa et al., 2022). For β ≥ Ω(d), µβ (S) ≤
Z exp(−β inf w∈S F (w))ν(S), where Z = ∫ e           dw. Unless S already comprises of favorable near-global-
 1                                               −βF

optima or ν(S) is large, this term is small. A crude upper bound follows from Markov’s Inequality. Moreover
if F is L-smooth, for β = Ω̃(d), we can lower bound Z ≥ e−d ln(βL/2π) ; see 3.21, Raginsky et al. (2017).15
Thus in this case, the term Z1 exp(−β inf w∈S F (w)) = e−Ω(β) is exponentially small.
                                                                2                                           2
Thus by (6), LMC can sample to accuracy 4µβ (S)∥ dµ
                                                 dπ0
                                                   β
                                                     − 1∥           ≤ Z1 exp(−β inf w∈S F (w))ν(S)∥ dµ
                                                                                                    dπ0
                                                                                                       β
                                                                                                         − 1∥ .
                                                                ∞                                           ∞
                                                                       2
Thus if ν(S) is small and we have a warm start in that ∥ dµ
                                                         dπ0
                                                            β
                                                              − 1∥ is controlled, LMC can sample to high
                                                                  ∞
accuracy. This confirms the intuition in Conjecture 3.
Remark 16 Suppose Φ, F are L-smooth, g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1, and WLOG that r1 ≤ 1/2. Then µβ satisfies
a
                        2     B            B                                B
         (2CPI , LOCAL + (1 +     ), 6(1 +     )µβ (S)) − WPI for β ≥ 2(1 +     )(d + C ′′ ),
                        β     λlb          λlb                              λlb
where B = L ∨ GF GΦ ∨ 1, GF = supw∈S∩B(w⋆ ,R+1) ∥∇F (w)∥, GΦ = supw∈S∩B(w⋆ ,R+1) ∥∇Φ(w)∥, C ′′ =
              2
         r1 L ∨ r r2 λ2 ) + λGF . Notice in S, the region where GF/GD do not succeed, we except GF to be
(λ + 1)( 8R       2L          2
                    1 2
very small; if Φ = F (e.g. for PŁ, KŁ functions), we also obtain that GΦ is small.
Corollary 17 (Of the proof; relaxing Assumption 3.1) Suppose µβ,LOCAL satisfies a (CWPI , LOCAL , δLOCAL )-
WPI. Then in the setting of Theorem 12, µβ satisfies a (O(CWPI , LOCAL + β1 ), 2δLOCAL )-WPI. Analogously in
the setting of Theorem 15, µβ satisfies a (O(CWPI , LOCAL + β1 ), O(µβ (S) + 2δLOCAL ))-WPI.
Remark 18 (Sampling with only Local Optimizability) We further note that upon examining the proofs
of Theorem 12, Theorem 15, we only need Definition 2 within B(w⋆ , R + 1) for some w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ . This
suggests the following interesting algorithmic implication: if Definition 2 only holds locally in B(w⋆ , R),
with advance knowledge of w⋆ and R, one can still approximately sample from µβ by regularizing F so
Assumption 3.2 holds. We elaborate further in Subsection A.2; in particular see Proposition 21, Corollary 22.

3.3. Algorithmic Implications for Sampling
We now state direct algorithmic implications of Theorem 12, Theorem 15. We remark Theorem 15 yields
sampling results for the Langevin Diffusion (1) under a suitable warm start, via (6) (from Theorem 2.1,
Röckner and Wang (2001)). Now we will focus on the implications of Theorem 12. Note establishing
improved sampling algorithms under isoperimetry is not the main focus of our work; the following results are
rather corollaries of Theorem 12 via the literature. Again, we believe this is a core strength of our work; our
results complement the literature. Note several recent works have shown the success of discrete-time LMC
under solely a PI and smoothness in TV and KL divergences, e.g. Chewi et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2022);
Altschuler and Chewi (2024). We now are in position to state these implications.
Assumption 3.3 (L-Hölder-smoothness) For any w1 , w2 ∈ Rd , ∥∇F (w1 ) − ∇F (w2 )∥ ≤ L∥w1 − w2 ∥s .
15. This requires an additional polylog factors.


                                                          12
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Corollary 19 Suppose F is optimizable by GF in the sense of Definition 2, the other conditions of Theorem 12
hold, and F satisfies Assumption 3.3. Then for all β ≥ Ω(d), where the Ω(⋅) hides F -dependent parameters,
discrete-time LMC initialized at a distribution π0 ∼ N (0, ⃗
                                                              2βL+γ I d ) with appropriate step size has the
                                                                1

following guarantees, where γ ≤ 1 is defined in our proof in Subsection D.3.
   1. Suppose F satisfies Assumption 3.3, that is, F is L-Hölder-continuous with parameter s in (0, 1]. Then
      with access to a gradient oracle ∇F , the recursion (2) yields a distribution πT with TV(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤
                                                1      3            s/2     2
       ε after T = Õ(d(CPI , LOCAL + β1 )1+ s β 1+ s max{1, β d }ε− s ) iterations.

   2. Suppose that F is L-smooth. Given additional access to a Proximal Oracle, the Proximal Sampler
      yields µT with d(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε after T = Õ((CPI , LOCAL + β1 )βd1/2 {β + d + log( 1ε )}) iterations, in the
                      √      √
      metrics d ∈ {TV, KL, χ2 }. See Subsection B.2 for more details on the Proximal Sampler.
We discuss further details on how the above follows from the literature in Subsection D.3. Furthermore,
note Assumption 3.3 does not capture many (optimizable) F of interest, for example simply F (x) = x2p for
any p ≥ 1 in one dimension. In Subsection A.1 we discuss how we can adapt the recent work Lytras and
Mertikopoulos (2024) to such situations; see Corollary 20. Note in both of Corollary 19, Corollary 20, we do
not use information about W ⋆ in the initialization, and do not make a warm start hypothesis. The initialization
1                                                                          ⃗              16
β I d is for similar scaling as µβ , needed to control initialization, and 0 is arbitrary. Our sampling algorithms
do not use knowledge of F in initialization; they succeed because the success of GF/GD imply isoperimetry,
as per Theorem 12. Intuitively, the optimizability condition ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)) allows gradient-
based LMC to ‘find’ W ⋆ without a warm start.


4. Examples and Applications
The framework of ‘optimizability’ from Definition 2 and Assumption 1.1 subsumes many interesting examples
in non-convex (and convex) optimization, from smooth PŁ and KŁ functions to Phase Retrieval and Matrix
Square Root to all Linearizable functions; see De Sa et al. (2022). In all these examples (3) holds, and
Assumption 1.1 is satisfied with dimension-independent ρΦ . Combining with the conditions of Theorem 12,
Corollary 19, Corollary 20, we obtain results on isoperimetry and sampling via LMC for many examples.
Example 3 (PŁ functions) Consider smooth PŁ functions F , that is with ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≥ λF (w). Then
Definition 2 holds with Φ(w) = F (w) and g(x) = λx. Note Assumption 1.1 holds as F is smooth. Note also
that F need not be smooth; we only need Assumption 1.1 to hold with F in place of Φ. For example, for
ρΦ (x) = A′ x + B ′ , Assumption 1.1 allows for arbitrary polynomial tail growth of F in ∥w∥.
Example 4 (KŁ functions) Now consider KŁ functions F , that is with ∥∇F (w)∥2 ≥ λF (w)1+θ for θ ≥ 0.
The main difference between the PŁ and KŁ conditions is that the KŁ condition is weaker near the global
                                                  F (w)
minima. For KŁ functions F , we can take Φ(w) = λ in the above, and Definition 2 holds with g(x) = x1+θ ,
if F satisfies Assumption 1.1 with Φ in place of F . Again, note Assumption 1.1 holds if F is smooth by the
definition of smoothness and Lemma 42, but that F satisfying Assumption 1.1 is much more general than F
being smooth, and in particular allows for any polynomial tail growth of F in ∥w∥.
Example 5 (Linearizable/Quasar-Convex Functions) Consider λ-Linearizable functions F (Kale et al.,
2021), that is s.t. ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≥ λF (w) (also known as Quasar-Convexity, see Definition 3 of Hinder
et al. (2020), or Weak Quasi-Convexity, see Hardt et al. (2018)). Here Φ(w) = ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 and g(x) = λx,
and Definition 2 holds. Note Φ, being 2-smooth, vacuously satisfies Assumption 1.1 by Lemma 42. For a PI
(Theorem 12), Assumption 1.1 is not needed on F , and thus we obtain a PI with no regularity assumptions on
16. The initial divergence can be controlled in Lemma 43, Lemma 46, and these divergences already factor into our runtime bounds.


                                                              13
                                             C HEN S RIDHARAN




F . One can obtain the β-range for which one obtains a PI from our results by taking L = 2 in (7). This setting
generalizes numerous other non-convex function classes from optimization, such as star-convex functions
(Lee and Valiant, 2016) and smooth one-point-strongly convex functions (Kleinberg et al., 2018). See Hinder
et al. (2020) for further discussion.
Applying our main results Theorem 12, Theorem 15, we obtain isoperimetry for all these examples (under the
conditions of those Theorems). Noting Assumption 3.1 is satisfied automatically for all convex F , combining
Theorem 12 with Corollary 20 gives sampling results for log-concave measures beyond smoothness. Formal
statements of these corollaries are in Corollary 23, Corollary 24.

5. High-Level Proof Ideas
Here, we give high-level proof ideas. A more detailed proof sketch and full proofs are in Section C and
Section D respectively. The central idea is to prove a PI via the Lyapunov potential Φ from optimization
using the Lyapunov function technique from Bakry et al. (2008). We develop the technique to fully exploit
the property (3) implied by success of GF/GD, which gives us sharp quantitative control of the isoperimetric
constant. For simplicity, we suppose here that Φ is L-smooth and that g(x) = x.
Proving a PI: Let U = B(W ⋆ , r(lb )), where lb is any l satisfying Assumption 3.1. Consider an arbitrary
test function ψ. Let f = ψ − α, where α = ∫U ψdµβ,LOCAL . For B > 0 to be chosen later, note as t+B t
                                                                                                       is
increasing in t ≥ 0, we have
                 lb               lb               lb              lb
                     Vµβ [ψ] ≤        ∫ f dµβ ≤
                                         2
                                                      ∫ f dµβ +
                                                         2                   2
                                                                        ∫ f dµβ
              lb + B           lb + B           lb + B U        lb + B U c
                                                   lb                 2 F (w)
                                              ≤       ∫ f dµβ + ∫ f
                                                         2
                                                                                 dµβ .
                                                lb + B U               F (w) + B
We upper bound the first integral ∫U f 2 dµβ by Assumption 3.1 and the choice of α. For the second integral,
note by the condition (3) and letting L denote the so-called infinitesimal generator of (1), we have
                                      1       1             1       1
    F (w) + B ≤ ⟨∇Φ(w), F (w)⟩ + B = − LΦ(w) + ∆Φ(w) + B ≤ − LΦ(w) + ∣∆Φ(w)∣ + B.
                                      β       β             β       β
We divide by F (w) + B > 0, multiply both sides by f 2 ≥ 0, and integrate with respect to µβ to obtain
                      F (w)        1         −LΦ(w)         1         ∣∆Φ(w)∣
            ∫ f
                2
                              dµβ ≤ ∫ f (w)2           dµβ + ∫ f (w)2           dµβ .
                    F (w) + B      β         F (w) + B      β         F (w) + B
We upper bound the first integral above using properties of the infinitesimal generator, Lemma 26. We upper
bound the second integral above using smoothness of Φ and that β = Ω(d). Rearranging and converting
back to ψ gives the desired PI. To generalize the proof to non-smooth Φ, we ‘interpolate’ Φ with the smooth
function ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 and use Assumption 3.2.
Proving a WPI: We follow the same steps as above, except we apply the above inequality pointwise, for
w ∈ S c where it holds. We use this to upper bound ∫ f 2 dµβ in a similar fashion as above, which in turn lets
                        F (w)
us upper bound ∫ f 2 F (w)+B dµβ . The difference is that we pick up an ‘error term’ ∫S f 2 dµβ . However by
definition of f , we have f 2 ≤ osc(ψ)2 , and so the error term is at most osc(ψ)2 µβ (S).

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Ayush Sekhari for collaboration on initial stages of the project and generously reading
an earlier manuscript, Ahmed El Alaoui for a related collaboration which inspired part of our work, and Brice
Huang and Robert Kleinberg for discussions.

                                                      14
       O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




References
Kwangjun Ahn, Ali Jadbabaie, and Suvrit Sra. How to Escape Sharp Minima with Random Perturbations.
 Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Ahmed El Alaoui, Ronen Eldan, Reza Gheissari, and Arianna Piana. Fast relaxation of the random field Ising
  dynamics. Annals of Probability (to appear), 2025+.

Jason M Altschuler and Sinho Chewi. Faster high-accuracy log-concave sampling via algorithmic warm
  starts. Journal of the ACM, 71(3):1–55, 2024.

Dominique Bakry and Michel Émery. Diffusions hypercontractives. In Séminaire de Probabilités XIX
 1983/84: Proceedings, pages 177–206. Springer, 2006.

Dominique Bakry, Franck Barthe, Patrick Cattiaux, and Arnaud Guillin. A simple proof of the Poincaré
  inequality for a large class of probability measures. Electronic Communications in Probability, 13:60–66,
  2008.

Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, and Michel Ledoux. Analysis and geometry of Markov diffusion operators,
 volume 103. Springer, 2014.

Jean Barbier, Florent Krzakala, Nicolas Macris, Léo Miolane, and Lenka Zdeborová. Optimal errors and
  phase transitions in high-dimensional generalized linear models. In Conference on Learning Theory, 2018.

Sergey G Bobkov. Isoperimetric and analytic inequalities for log-concave probability measures. The Annals
  of Probability, 27(4):1903–1921, 1999.

Michel Bonnefont. Poincaré inequality With Explicit Constant In Dimension d ≥ 1. https://www.math.u-
 bordeaux.fr/ mibonnef/Poincaré__Toulouse.pdf, 2022.

Dominique Bontemps. Bernstein–von mises theorems for Gaussian regression with increasing number of
  regressors. Annals of Statistics, 39, 2011.

Anton Bovier, Michael Eckhoff, Véronique Gayrard, and Markus Klein. Metastability in reversible diffusion
  processes. I. Sharp asymptotics for capacities and exit times. Journal of the European Mathematical
  Society, 6(4):399–424, 2004.

Anton Bovier, Véronique Gayrard, and Markus Klein. Metastability in reversible diffusion processes II:
  Precise asymptotics for small eigenvalues. Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 7(1):69–99,
  2005.

Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge University press, 2004.

Herm Jan Brascamp and Elliott H Lieb. On extensions of the Brunn-Minkowski and Prékopa-leindler
  theorems, including inequalities for log concave functions, and with an application to the diffusion
  equation. Journal of Functional Analysis, 22(4):366–389, 1976.

Sébastien Bubeck et al. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Foundations and Trends in
  Machine Learning, 8(3-4):231–357, 2015.

Patrick Cattiaux, Arnaud Guillin, and Li-Ming Wu. A note on Talagrand’s transportation inequality and
  logarithmic Sobolev inequality. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 148:285–304, 2010.

                                                    15
                                           C HEN S RIDHARAN




August Y Chen, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. Langevin Dynamics: A Unified Perspective on
  Optimization via Lyapunov Potentials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04264, 2024.

Yongxin Chen, Sinho Chewi, Adil Salim, and Andre Wibisono. Improved analysis for a proximal algorithm
  for sampling. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2984–3014. PMLR, 2022.

Sinho Chewi. Log-concave sampling. Book draft available at https://chewisinho. github.io, 2024.

Sinho Chewi and Austin J Stromme. The ballistic limit of the log-Sobolev constant equals the Polyak-
  Lojasiewicz constant. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11415, 2024.

Sinho Chewi, Murat A Erdogdu, Mufan Li, Ruoqi Shen, and Matthew S Zhang. Analysis of Langevin Monte
  Carlo from Poincaré to Log-Sobolev. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, pages 1–51, 2024.

Tzuu-Shuh Chiang, Chii-Ruey Hwang, and Shuenn Jyi Sheu. Diffusion for global optimization in rˆn. SIAM
  Journal on Control and Optimization, 25(3):737–753, 1987.

Alex Damian, Tengyu Ma, and Jason D Lee. Label Noise SGD Provably Prefers Flat Global Minimizers.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27449–27461, 2021.

Aniket Das, Dheeraj M Nagaraj, and Anant Raj. Utilising the CLT Structure in Stochastic Gradient based
  Sampling: Improved Analysis and Faster Algorithms. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning
 Theory, pages 4072–4129. PMLR, 2023.

Christopher M De Sa, Satyen Kale, Jason D Lee, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. From Gradient
  Flow on Population Loss to Learning with Stochastic Gradient Descent. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 35:30963–30976, 2022.

Ahmed El Alaoui and Jason Gaitonde. Bounds on the covariance matrix of the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick
  model. Electronic Communications in Probability, 29:1–13, 2024.

Jiaojiao Fan, Bo Yuan, and Yongxin Chen. Improved dimension dependence of a proximal algorithm for
   sampling. In The Thirty Sixth Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1473–1521. PMLR, 2023.

Dylan J Foster, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. Uniform convergence of gradients for non-convex
  learning and optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.

Dani Gamerman and Hedibert F Lopes. Markov Chain Monte Carlo: stochastic simulation for Bayesian
  inference. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2006.

Walter R Gilks, Sylvia Richardson, and David Spiegelhalter. Markov Chain Monte Carlo in practice. CRC
 press, 1995.

Yun Gong, Niao He, and Zebang Shen. Poincaré Inequality for Local Log-Polyak-Lojasiewicz Measures:
  Non-asymptotic Analysis in Low-temperature Regime. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00429, 2024.

Moritz Hardt, Tengyu Ma, and Benjamin Recht. Gradient descent learns linear dynamical systems. Journal
 of Machine Learning Research, 19(29):1–44, 2018.

Oliver Hinder, Aaron Sidford, and Nimit Sohoni. Near-optimal methods for minimizing star-convex functions
  and beyond. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1894–1938. PMLR, 2020.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

                                                   16
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Brice Huang and Mark Sellke. Strong topological trivialization of multi-species spherical spin glasses. Annals
  of Probability (to appear), 2025+.

Brice Huang, Sidhanth Mohanty, Amit Rajaraman, and David X Wu. Weak Poincaré inequalities, Simulated
  Annealing, and Sampling from Spherical Spin Glasses. In Symposium on Theory of Computation, 2025.

Xunpeng Huang, Difan Zou, Hanze Dong, Yian Ma, and Tong Zhang. Faster Sampling via Stochastic
  Gradient Proximal Sampler. Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Prateek Jain, Chi Jin, Sham Kakade, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Global convergence of non-convex gradient
  descent for computing matrix squareroot. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 479–488. PMLR,
  2017.

Chi Jin, Rong Ge, Praneeth Netrapalli, Sham M Kakade, and Michael I Jordan. How to Escape Saddle Points
  Efficiently. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1724–1732. PMLR, 2017.

Richard Jordan, David Kinderlehrer, and Felix Otto. The variational formulation of the Fokker–Planck
  equation. SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 29(1):1–17, 1998.

Satyen Kale, Ayush Sekhari, and Karthik Sridharan. SGD: The Role of Implicit Regularization, Batch-size
  and Multiple-epochs. Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27422–27433, 2021.

Hamed Karimi, Julie Nutini, and Mark Schmidt. Linear convergence of gradient and proximal-gradient
  methods under the Polyak-łojasiewicz condition. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
  Databases: European Conference, ECML PKDD 2016, Riva del Garda, Italy, September 19-23, 2016,
  Proceedings, Part I 16, pages 795–811. Springer, 2016.

Yuri Kinoshita and Taiji Suzuki. Improved convergence rate of stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics with
  variance reduction and its application to optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  35:19022–19034, 2022.

Bobby Kleinberg, Yuanzhi Li, and Yang Yuan. An alternative view: When does SGD escape local minima?
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2698–2707. PMLR, 2018.

Yunbum Kook and Santosh S Vempala. Gaussian Cooling and Dikin Walks: The Interior-Point Method for
  Logconcave Sampling. In The Thirty Seventh Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 3137–3240.
  PMLR, 2024.

Dirk P Kroese, Thomas Taimre, and Zdravko I Botev. Handbook of monte carlo methods. John Wiley &
  Sons, 2013.

Krzysztof Kurdyka. On gradients of functions definable in o-minimal structures. Annales de l’institut Fourier,
  48(3):769–783, 1998.

Jason D Lee, Ioannis Panageas, Georgios Piliouras, Max Simchowitz, Michael I Jordan, and Benjamin Recht.
  First-order methods almost always avoid strict saddle points. Mathematical Programming, 176:311–337,
  2019.

Jasper CH Lee and Paul Valiant. Optimizing star-convex functions. In 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Symposium
  on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 603–614. IEEE, 2016.

Yin Tat Lee, Ruoqi Shen, and Kevin Tian. Structured logconcave sampling with a restricted Gaussian oracle.
  In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2993–3050. PMLR, 2021.

                                                     17
                                           C HEN S RIDHARAN




Joseph Lehec. The Langevin Monte Carlo algorithm in the non-smooth log-concave case. The Annals of
  Applied Probability, 33(6A):4858–4874, 2023.
Mufan Li and Murat A Erdogdu. Riemannian langevin algorithm for solving semidefinite programs. Bernoulli,
 29(4):3093–3113, 2023.
Jiaming Liang and Yongxin Chen. A proximal algorithm for sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.13975,
   2022a.
Jiaming Liang and Yongxin Chen. A proximal algorithm for sampling from non-smooth potentials. In 2022
   Winter Simulation Conference, pages 3229–3240. IEEE, 2022b.
Chaoyue Liu, Libin Zhu, and Mikhail Belkin. Loss landscapes and optimization in over-parameterized
  non-linear systems and neural networks. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 59:85–116,
  2022.
Stanislaw Lojasiewicz. A topological property of real analytic subsets. Coll. du CNRS, Les équations aux
  dérivées partielles, 117(87-89):2, 1963.
Iosif Lytras and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Tamed Langevin sampling under weaker conditions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2405.17693, 2024.
Iosif Lytras and Sotirios Sabanis. Taming under isoperimetry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09003, 2023.
Yi-An Ma, Yuansi Chen, Chi Jin, Nicolas Flammarion, and Michael I Jordan. Sampling can be faster than
  optimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(42):20881–20885, 2019.
Georg Menz and André Schlichting. Poincaré and logarithmic Sobolev inequalities by decomposition of the
  energy landscape. Annals of Probability, 42(5):1809–1884, 2014.
Andrea Montanari and Yuchen Wu. Posterior Sampling in High Dimension via Diffusion Processes.
  arXiv:2304.11449, 2023.
Wenlong Mou, Nicolas Flammarion, Martin J Wainwright, and Peter L Bartlett. Improved bounds for
 discretization of Langevin diffusions: Near-optimal rates without convexity. Bernoulli, 28(3):1577–1601,
 2022.
Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini, Tyler K Farghly, Ye He, Krishna Balasubramanian, and Murat A Erdogdu.
  Towards a complete analysis of Langevin Monte Carlo: Beyond Poincaré Inequality. In The Thirty Sixth
  Annual Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1–35. PMLR, 2023.
Yurii Nesterov et al. Lectures on convex optimization, volume 137. Springer, 2018.
Felix Otto and Cédric Villani. Generalization of an inequality by Talagrand and links with the logarithmic
  Sobolev inequality. Journal of Functional Analysis, 173(2):361–400, 2000.
Lawrence E Payne and Hans F Weinberger. An optimal Poincaré inequality for convex domains. Archive for
  Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 5(1):286–292, 1960.
Boris T Polyak. Gradient methods for the minimisation of functionals. USSR Computational Mathematics
  and Mathematical Physics, 3(4):864–878, 1963.
Maxim Raginsky, Alexander Rakhlin, and Matus Telgarsky. Non-convex learning via Stochastic Gradient
 Langevin Dynamics: a nonasymptotic analysis. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1674–1703.
 PMLR, 2017.

                                                   18
       O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Michael Röckner and Feng-Yu Wang. Weak Poincaré inequalities and L2-convergence rates of Markov
 semigroups. Journal of Functional Analysis, 185(2):564–603, 2001.

Mark Sellke. The threshold energy of low temperature Langevin dynamics for pure spherical spin glasses.
 Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 77(11):4065–4099, 2024.

Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models. International
   Conference on Learning Representations, 2021a.

Yang Song. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution.            https://yang-
  song.net/blog/2021/score/, 2021.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole.
  Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021b.

Nathan Srebro, Karthik Sridharan, and Ambuj Tewari. Smoothness, low noise and fast rates. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 23, 2010.

Andrew M Stuart. Inverse problems: a Bayesian perspective. Acta Numerica, 19:451–559, 2010.

Michalis K Titsias and Omiros Papaspiliopoulos. Auxiliary gradient-based sampling algorithms. Journal of
 the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 80(4):749–767, 2018.

Santosh Vempala. Geometric random walks: a survey. Combinatorial and Computational Geometry, 52
  (573-612):2, 2005.

Santosh Vempala and Andre Wibisono. Rapid Convergence of the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm: Isoperime-
  try Suffices. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.

Cédric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation, volume 58. American Mathematical Society, 2021.

Martin J Wainwright. High-Dimensional Statistics: A Non-Asymptotic Viewpoint, volume 48. Cambridge
 University Press, 2019.

Fengyu Wang. Functional Inequalities, Markov Semigroups and Spectral Theory. Elsevier, 2006.

Jun-Kun Wang and Andre Wibisono. Continuized Acceleration for Quasar-Convex Functions in Non-Convex
  Optimization. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Pan Xu, Jinghui Chen, Difan Zou, and Quanquan Gu. Global Convergence of Langevin Dynamics Based
  Algorithms for Nonconvex Optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Jingzhao Zhang, Tianxing He, Suvrit Sra, and Ali Jadbabaie. Why gradient clipping accelerates training: A
   theoretical justification for adaptivity. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Difan Zou, Pan Xu, and Quanquan Gu. Faster Convergence of Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics for
  Non-Log-Concave Sampling. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 1152–1162. PMLR, 2021.



                                                   19
                                                C HEN S RIDHARAN




Contents

1   Introduction                                                                                                  1
    1.1 Overview of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
    1.2 Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

2   Preliminaries and Technical Background                                                                         7
    2.1 Isoperimetric Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
    2.2 The Role of Temperature and Applications of Low-Temperature Sampling . . . . . . . . . .                   9

3   Connecting Optimizability and Sampling                                                                        10
    3.1 Main Results: Poincaré and Log-Sobolev Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           10
    3.2 Main Results: Weak Poincaré Inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        11
    3.3 Algorithmic Implications for Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       12

4   Examples and Applications                                                                                     13

5   High-Level Proof Ideas                                                                                        14

A Additional Results and Discussion                                                                               21
  A.1 Further Algorithmic Implications of Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            21
  A.2 Sampling Under Local Optimizability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           22
  A.3 Further Discussion of Examples and Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           23
  A.4 Sampling Under a Stochastic Gradient Oracle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           24

B Additional Background                                                                                           25
  B.1 Markov Semigroup Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           25
  B.2 The Proximal Sampler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        25
  B.3 The Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             26

C Proof Ideas                                                                                                     27
  C.1 Proving a PI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
  C.2 Proving a WPI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28

D Proofs                                                                                                          29
  D.1 Proof of Theorem 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
  D.2 Proof of Weak Poincaré Inequality Results Theorem 15, Corollary 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                38
  D.3 Proofs of Corollary 19, Corollary 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        43
  D.4 Proofs of Subsection A.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47

E Technical Helper Results                                                                                        54
Notation. The domain is Rd , with origin 0.     ⃗ Let ν denote Lebesgue measure on Rd . When we write
∥⋅∥ without explicitly specifying, we mean the l2 Euclidean norm of a vector. For vectors a, b, let θ⟨⃗    a, ⃗b⟩
denote the directed angle they make in [0, π]. We denote the Laplacian (sum of second derivatives) of a
twice-differentiable function f by ∆f . We denote the Euclidean l2 ball centered at p ∈ Rd with radius
R ≥ 0 by B(p, R). When P is a set, B(P, R) = {w ∶ inf w′ ∈P ∥w − w′ ∥ ≤ R}. We denote the surface of the
d-dimensional sphere with radius r by S d−1 (r). For some f differentiable to k orders, we will let ∇k f denote
the tensor of all the k-th order derivatives of f , and ∥⋅∥op denotes the corresponding tensor’s operator norm.
For a matrix M , let λmin (M M ) denote its minimum eigenvalue, and tr(M     M ) denote its trace. For matrices

                                                         20
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




M 1 , M 2 , we let ⪰ denote the PSD order, that is M 1 ⪰ M 2 if and only if M 1 − M 2 is positive semi-definite.
We denote Total Variation distance, Kullback–Leibler divergence, and Chi-squared divergence by TV, KL, χ2
respectively.
                                                                  ̃ Θ,
For an arbitrary function f , let osc(f ) = sup f − inf f . Here, Ω, ̃ O
                                                                       ̃ hide universal constants and log factors
in β, d, ε. We denote the set of all global minimizers w of F by W ⋆ . We say F is smooth (L-smooth) if the
                                                            ⋆

magnitude of the eigenvalues of its Hessian are universally bounded by a constant (when this constant is at
most L). We let Z denote the partition function of the corresponding measure, which may change line-by-line
(e.g. for different β).


Appendix A. Additional Results and Discussion
A.1. Further Algorithmic Implications of Main Results
The assumption of smoothness or Hölder continuity does not capture many optimizable F of interest, for
example simply F (x) = x2p for any p > 1 in one dimension. See e.g. Zhang et al. (2020) and follow-ups for
a study of optimizable F which are not smooth. We thus consider a more general assumption from Lytras
and Mertikopoulos (2024) (their Assumption 1, slightly simplified) which goes far beyond, allowing for
tail growth of F that is any arbitrary polynomial in ∥w∥. In particular, this assumption can be verified for
F (x) = x2p , which is not true for Assumption 3.3. Under this assumption, we obtain less sharp, but still
polynomial, convergence rates:
Assumption A.1 (Almost Assumption 1, Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024)) F satisfies the following:
    • Weak Dissipativity: for some s2 ≥ 1, A2 , b2 > 0, we have for all w ∈ Rd , ⟨∇F (w), w⟩ ≥ A2 ∥w∥s2 − b2 .
    • Polynomial Jacobian Growth: for some L3 , s3 > 0 and all k ≥ 2 for which the following is well-defined,
      we have for all w ∈ Rd , max(∥∇F (w)∥, ∥∇k F (w)∥op ) ≤ L3 (1 + ∥w∥)2s3 .

We emphasize we do not use these assumptions to obtain isoperimetry in Theorem 12. Rather, they are just
different regularity assumptions under which we obtain different rates for discrete-time LMC. Under these
assumptions, and recalling all dependence on d, β is polynomial in Theorem 12, we obtain from Theorem 12
that:
Corollary 20 Suppose the conditions of Theorem 12 hold and F satisfies Assumption A.1. Moreover, suppose
                                                   ′
we initialize at a distribution π0 ∝ exp(−2∥w∥2s3 ) where s′3 = max(s3 + 12 , r + 1), r ≥ max(2s3 + 1, s3 + 2).
Then assuming knowledge of A2 , s1 , s2 , s3 from Assumption A.1 and with this initialization π0 , for β = Ω(d),
discrete-time LMC enjoys the following guarantees:
   1. Via the discrete-time algorithm Regularized Tamed Unadjusted Langevin (reg-TULA) of Lytras and
      Mertikopoulos (2024), we have TV(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε after T = Õ(poly(d, β, CPI , LOCAL , 1ε ) log( 1ε )) itera-
      tions.
   2. Suppose the assumptions in point 2 of Theorem 12 also hold, which implies µβ satisfies a Log-Sobolev
      Inequality with constant CLSI = O(β max{S, 1} max{CPI , LOCAL , 1}). Then via the discrete-time
      algorithm Weakly Dissipative Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (wd-TULA) of Lytras and
                                                                   poly(d,β) max{S,1} max{CPI , LOCAL ,1}
      Mertikopoulos (2024), we have TV(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε after T = Õ(                 ε2
                                                                                                          log( 1ε ))
      iterations.
Both of these sampling algorithms from Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) are fully detailed in Subsection B.3.
Explicit polynomial dependencies can be found in the proof of Theorems 2, 3 from Lytras and Mertikopoulos
(2024); the degrees of these polynomials depend (polynomially) on s2 , s3 .

                                                        21
                                                    C HEN S RIDHARAN




A.2. Sampling Under Local Optimizability
Suppose rather than global optimizability, F is optimizable by GF only in a large region around w⋆ . Such a
situation has been often observed in non-convex landscapes, for example in neural networks (Kleinberg et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2022). Rather than a WPI, we aim to prove a PI/LSI here for a regularized version of µβ ,
and discuss its algorithmic implications. We impose the following regularity assumption on F :

Assumption A.2 F is L-smooth for all w, and for some R > 0:

    • F is optimizable in B(w⋆ , R) where g in (3) is of the form g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1.

    • ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≥ 0 for all w with R − 1 ≤ ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R.

    • F (w) ≥ r2 ∥w − w⋆ ∥ for some r2 > 0.

We can replace the smoothness assumption with Assumption A.1 by changing the regularization added to F
appropriately, and can also replace 1 in the second condition R − 1 ≤ ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R above by an arbitrary
universal constant; see the proof in Subsection D.4. The condition on g(⋅) above is made for simplicity, and
already captures several examples, e.g. PŁ and Linearizable functions; again, by suitably modifying the proof
one can extend this to general g(⋅) satisfying the conditions of Definition 2. We stick with the above and
discuss in Remark 40 how to generalize the proof.

Note here that outside B(w⋆ , R), besides smoothness and a lower bound on growth, F could have arbitrarily
many points with vanishing gradient, saddle points and local minima.17 This contrasts to the main result of
Gong et al. (2024), where despite its supposed ‘local’ nature, their Assumption 5 lower bounds on ∥∇F ∥ and
the lack of saddle points are assumed outside a compact set.

By regularizing F appropriately, we establish:

Proposition 21 Suppose Assumption A.2 holds, the corresponding Φ satisfies Assumption 1.1, and As-
sumption 3.1 is satisfied for some lb > 0 with B(W ⋆ , r(lb )) ⊆ B(w⋆ , R − 1) for some w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ . Let
F̂ (w) = F (w) + χF (w) ⋅ L(∥w − w⋆ ∥2 + 1) where χF ∈ [0, 1] is a suitable interpolant which depends on
problem parameters, defined in our proof in (41).

Then for β ≥ Ω(d), µ̂β ∝ e−F̂ /Z satisfies a PI with constant O(CPI , LOCAL + β1 ). Furthermore, F̂ is smooth
with O(1) smoothness constant.

Explicit constants are in the proof in Subsection D.4. We note that under the conditions of point 2 of
Theorem 12 and via the same proof, one can also extend this to an LSI. As an algorithmic implication,
Proposition 21 directly shows the following.

Corollary 22 Let δ = µβ (B(w⋆ , R − 1)c ). Given oracle access to ∇F , F and knowledge of w⋆ ∈ W ⋆
satisfying the conditions of Proposition 21, R, and g(⋅), then running LMC in both continuous and discrete
time with ∇F̂ in place of ∇F yields a distribution π such that TV(π, µβ ) ≤ ε + 3δ, in time O(poly(d, β, 1ε )).

Proof of Corollary 22. By Proposition 21 and Corollary 19, Corollary 20, in continuous and discrete time,
LMC yields a distribution π such that TV(π, µ̂β ) ≤ ε in time O(poly(d, β, 1ε )). Note LMC is implementable
because we can construct ∇F̂ using knowledge of ∇F , w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ satisfying the conditions of Proposition 21,
R, and problem-dependent parameters. The problem-dependent parameters are defined in the proof of
Subsection D.4, and can be computed with oracle access to F, ∇F , knowledge of w⋆ , R, g(⋅), and appropriate
cross validation; we expand on this in Remark 41 in Subsection D.4. Hence we can implement LMC and

17. Smoothness and the lower bound on growth do not ‘sandwich’ F in a way that implies a lack of critical points.


                                                              22
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




produce a hypothesis π which approximately samples from µ̂β as per the above. Thus, we have

                                  TV(π, µβ ) ≤ TV(π, µ̂β ) + TV(µ̂β , µβ ) ≤ ε + 3δ,

where the last step is verified in Lemma 36.                                                                      ∎
We conclude from Corollary 22 that optimizability from appropriate neighborhoods of the global minima
yields sampling guarantees, via running LMC on a regularized version of F . Running LMC on a regularized
version of F has seen recent interest, as a way to sample from µβ under relaxed regularity assumptions
(Lytras and Sabanis, 2023; Lytras and Mertikopoulos, 2024). Here we offer a novel perspective justifying the
benefit of regularization for LMC as a way we can sample from a regularized Gibbs measure if we only have
‘local optimizability’, and possibly adversarial behavior outside of this neighborhood.

A.3. Further Discussion of Examples and Implications
We first expand on why the natural settings Example 1, Example 2 are subsumed by Assumption 3.1:
    • Example 1: Suppose W ⋆ is convex and F is convex on B(W ⋆ , r(l)) for some l > 0. Note convexity
      of W ⋆ implies convexity of B(W ⋆ , r(l)) (Exercise 2.14, Boyd and Vandenberghe (2004)). By the
      Payne-Weinberger Theorem (Payne and Weinberger, 1960), in the form of Theorem 6.2 of Bonnefont
                                       (diam(W ⋆ )+2r(lb ))2
      (2022), we see CPI , LOCAL (l) ≤         π2
                                                             = O(1) if diam(W) = O(1). Note diam(W) = O(1)
      is the case for β = Ω(d).
    • Example 2: As a special case of the above, suppose additionally that F is α-strongly convex on
      B(W ⋆ , r(l)). Then CPI , LOCAL (l) = O( β1 ) by Brascamp-Lieb (Brascamp and Lieb, 1976) in the form
       of Theorem 5.1, Bonnefont (2022).18 A special case of this is the following stronger assumption in
       Lytras and Sabanis (2023), also considered in Li and Erdogdu (2023): W ⋆ = {w⋆ }, F is α-strongly
       convex at w⋆ , and the Hessian of F is L′ -Lipschitz in a Ω(1) neighborhood of w⋆ . To see why, consider
       lb > 0 small enough so that in B(W ⋆ , r(lb )), the Hessian of F is L′ -Lipschitz, and r(lb ) ≤ 2L
                                                                                                        α
                                                                                                          ′ . This is
       possible by taking lb small enough. Using that eigenvalues are 1-Lipschitz in the Hessian, we see for
       any w and arbitrary w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ that

       ∣λmin (∇2 F (w))∣ = ∣λmin (∇2 F (w)) − λmin (∇2 F (w⋆ ))∣ ≤ ∥∇2 F (w) − ∇2 F (w⋆ )∥op ≤ L′ ∥w − w⋆ ∥.

       It follows for all w with ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ 2L
                                              α
                                                ′ , F is α/2-strongly convex.


We next formally instantiate the corollaries of Theorem 12, Theorem 15 for the examples from Section 4.
Directly applying Theorem 12, Theorem 15 for F satisfying the conditions of Example 3, Example 4,
Example 5 implies the following.
Corollary 23 (Implications for Isoperimetry and Sampling) Suppose F satisfies the conditions of Exam-
ple 3, Example 4, or Example 5, and F also satisfies Assumption 3.1, Assumption 3.2. Then the following
holds true:
    • µβ satisfies a PI with CPI = O(CPI , LOCAL ) for β = Ω(d).
    • Under the conditions of point 2 of Theorem 12, we also obtain a LSI for µβ with CLSI = O(SβCPI , LOCAL )
      for β = Ω(d), where S is the second moment of µβ .
    • Suppose that F satisfies the conditions of Example 3, Example 4, or Example 5 outside some set S. In
      this case, we obtain an O((CPI , LOCAL ), O(µβ (S))-WPI for µβ for β = Ω(d).
18. Which applies to a domain of Rd with convex boundary, see page 20, Bonnefont (2022).


                                                            23
                                                     C HEN S RIDHARAN




    • As per Corollary 17, we can obtain a WPI for all these examples if µβ,LOCAL does not satisfy Assump-
      tion 3.1 but instead satisfies a (CWPI , LOCAL , δLOCAL )-WPI.
    • Via Corollary 19, Corollary 20, we obtain sampling guarantees polynomial in β, d, 1ε for discrete-time
      LMC under Assumption 3.3, Assumption D.1.
Our sampling results hold when F satisfies Assumption 3.1. While this or analogous conditions are
necessary as per Remark 11, note convex F immediately satisfy Assumption 3.1. Thus taking lb = 1
in Theorem 12, using the result of Payne and Weinberger (Payne and Weinberger, 1960) which states
CPI , LOCAL = O(diam(W ⋆ )2 + r(lb )2 ), and combining with Example 1, we directly obtain the following.
Corollary 24 (Sampling from non-smooth convex functions via LMC) Suppose F is convex. Then
                                                                      1                       2
                        CPI (µβ ) = O(diam(W ⋆ )2 + r(lb )2 +           ) for β ≥ Ω(d + 4R2 ∨ 2 ).
                                                                      β                      r2
Furthermore, as a direct corollary of Corollary 20, we obtain results on sampling from particular log-concave
measures (with the temperature restriction) where the potential is not smooth, similar to Lehec (2023). In
fact, in some senses our results are stronger; those of Lehec (2023) (see Theorem 5) do not permit tail growth
of F that is an arbitrary polynomial in ∥w∥.

A.4. Sampling Under a Stochastic Gradient Oracle
We can also use our results on a Log-Sobolev Inequality, in particular part 2 of Theorem 12 for F optimizable
from all initializations, to show we can sample from µβ when we only have a stochastic gradient oracle
∇f ≈ ∇F . To the best of knowledge, the most recent guarantees in this setting are Das et al. (2023); Huang
et al. (2024), where a variety of discretizations of (1) are considered. For the algorithms themselves, we refer
the reader to these papers.
Under standard assumptions on bounded variance of a stochastic gradient oracle, to the best of our knowledge,
the state-of-the-art guarantees for LMC in this setting are Theorems 4.1 and 4.2 of Huang et al. (2024).
The results of Huang et al. (2024) state the following. Suppose F satisfies L-smoothness and µβ satisfies a
Log-Sobolev Inequality with constant CLSI , and that f is written as a finite sum log-density. Then letting
σ be an upper bound on the variance of the stochastic gradients ∇f , we can sample in TV-error ε from µβ
            β 3 C3LSI d1/2 min{d+β 2 σ 2 ,d1/2 β 2 σ 2 }
using Õ(                      ε2
                                                         ) expected queries to the stochastic gradient oracle.

Combine this with the second part of our Theorem 12 for optimizable F . Recall β = Ω(d) for our results.
Under the assumptions of the second part of Theorem 12, and that F is finite-sum and L-smooth, we obtain
the following from Theorem 12:
    • In the setting of Example 1: Here CPI , LOCAL = O(1) and so CLSI (µβ ) = O(Sβ(1 + d/β) + d/β). We
                                                         β 5 (Sβ(1+d/β)+d/β)3 d1/2 σ 2
      obtain a sampling guarantee in TV of Õ(                        ε2
                                                                                       ) for the algorithm given in Theorem
      4.1 of Huang et al. (2024).
    • In the setting of Example 2: Here CPI , LOCAL = O(1/β) and so CLSI (µβ ) = O(S(1 + d/β) + d/β). We
                                                    2
      obtain a sampling guarantees in TV of Õ( dβε2
                                                      ) for the discretization (2) with ∇f used in place of ∇F ,
                 β 5 (S(1+d/β)+d/β)3 d1/2 σ 2
      and Õ(                ε2
                                              ) for the same algorithm from Theorem 4.1 of Huang et al. (2024).

Note if we also assume the standard dissipativity condition in Raginsky et al. (2017); Xu et al. (2018); Zou
et al. (2021); Mou et al. (2022), by Lemma 1 of Raginsky et al. (2017), we can take S = O(d/β) in the
above.

                                                               24
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Appendix B. Additional Background
B.1. Markov Semigroup Theory
We introduce the concept of the infinitesimal generator of a Markov process, which will make this exposition
and our proofs much more natural. We give only what is needed for our work and refer the reader to Chewi
(2024); Bakry et al. (2014) for more details.

Definition 25 The infinitesimal generator of a Markov process w(t) is the operator L defined on all
(sufficiently differentiable) functions ϕ by

                                                       E[ϕ(w(t))] − ϕ(w)
                                     Lϕ(w) = lim                         .
                                                 t→0           t

This can be thought of as the instantaneous derivative of the Markov process in expectation. It is well-known
that for the Langevin Diffusion (1), the generator takes the following form:

                                 Lϕ(w) = −⟨β∇F (w), ∇ϕ(w)⟩ + ∆ϕ(w).                                           (8)

For example, this calculation can be found in Example 1.2.4 of Chewi (2024).

We also need to introduce the idea of symmetry of the measure µ with respect to the stochastic process. In
particular, we say µ is symmetric with respect to the Langevin Diffusion (1) if for all infinitely differentiable
f, g,
                                           ∫ f Lgdµ = ∫ Lf gdµ.

It is well-known that µβ is symmetric. See e.g. Example 1.2.18 of Chewi (2024). This is used in Lemma 26.


B.2. The Proximal Sampler
Earlier we only discussed the discretization (2) of the Langevin Diffusion (1), which as shown in Chewi
et al. (2024); Vempala and Wibisono (2019), succeeds in sampling from µβ if µβ satisfies an isoperimetric
inequality. Another discretization of (1) that can sample from µβ if µβ satisfies an isoperimetric inequality is
the Proximal Sampler, first introduced in Titsias and Papaspiliopoulos (2018); Lee et al. (2021). See Lee et al.
(2021); Chen et al. (2022); Liang and Chen (2022a,b); Fan et al. (2023); Altschuler and Chewi (2024) for a
variety of important developments on the proximal sampler. To the best of our knowledge, the state-of-the-art
guarantees for the Proximal Sampler with exact gradients are in Altschuler and Chewi (2024), Fan et al.
(2023). For state-of-the-art guarantees for the Proximal Sampler with stochastic gradients, see Huang et al.
(2024). The Proximal Sampler is motivated by the Proximal Point Method in optimization, and works as
follows: fix h > 0 and consider the joint distribution π on Rd × Rd defined as follows:

                                             1               1        2
                              π(w, w′ ) ∶=     exp(−βF (w) − ∥w − w′ ∥ ).
                                             Z              2h

Initialize w0 ∼ π0 and perform the following recursion between two sequences wk (the samples of interest)
and wk′ (an auxiliary sequence) for k ≥ 0:

   1. Sample wk′ ∼ π w ∣w (⋅∣wk ) = N (wk , hId ).
                        ′




   2. Sample the next iterate wk+1 ∼ π w∣w (⋅∣wk′ ).
                                             ′




                                                         25
                                             C HEN S RIDHARAN




Notice the second step is implementable if F is L-smooth for small enough h ≤ 2βL
                                                                               1
                                                                                  , as for such h, π w∣w (⋅∣w)
                                                                                                       ′


is log-concave. In fact in Altschuler and Chewi (2024) and many other works on the proximal sampler, it is
shown the Proximal Sampler is implementable with a Proximal Oracle, which given w′ ∈ Rd , returns
                                                           1          2
                                   argminw∈Rd (F (w) +       ∥w − w′ ∥ ).
                                                          2h
A Proximal Oracle is implementable if F is smooth, as for small enough h, the above optimization problem is
smooth and strongly convex. When we cite Theorems 5.3, 5.4 from Altschuler and Chewi (2024), we assume
F is smooth.

B.3. The Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm
Here, we describe in detail the Weakly-Dissipative/Regularized Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm
from Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024). In recent years, works such as Lehec (2023); Lytras and Sabanis
(2023); Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) have aimed to develop sampling algorithms that succeed beyond
the relatively restrictive smoothness or Hölder continuity conditions in a variety of settings. As shown in
2.3 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), one needs to modify the sampling algorithm beyond (2) to sample
from the Gibbs measure when F grows faster than a quadratic in ∥w∥. To our knowledge, the most general
guarantees are in Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), and so we go with the results from there. The idea of
these tamed sampling schemes is to split the gradient into two parts: one that grows at most linearly, and
another part which we ‘tame’. This allows for convergence results under far milder regularity conditions,
Assumption 1 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), which we fully present in Assumption D.1, though we
note Assumption D.1 is implied by Assumption A.1.
The Weakly-Dissipative Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (wd-TULA) from their work gives an
algorithm with more efficient guarantees under weak convexity of F or a LSI, and is defined as follows.
Letting η denote the step size, we first let
                                                           s2                  f (w)
                   f (w) ∶= β∇F (w) − βA2 w(1 + ∥w∥2 ) 2 −1 , fη (w) =         √        ,
                                                                            1 + η∥w∥2s3

where A2 , s2 , s3 are defined in Assumption A.1. We then let
                                                                s2
                                 hη (w) ∶= βA2 w(1 + ∥w∥2 ) 2 −1 + fη (w),

and use hη (w) in place of β∇F (w) in (2). That is, for standard d-dimensional normals ε t ,
                                                              √
                                   wt+1 = wt − ηhη (wt ) + 2ηεεt .                                         (9)

We use Theorem 2 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), which obtains a nonasymptotic polynomial-time
guarantee for (9) under Assumption D.1 and a LSI for µβ . The guarantee depends on the initialization
KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), but we argue in Lemma 46 that this can be controlled for appropriate π0 .
However, the Weakly-Dissipative Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (wd-TULA) does not succeed
when µβ satisfies a PI. To this end, for large enough r (for example, r = 4s3 + 4 is enough), we instead
define (9) the same way as above, except F is replaced by a regularized version, F (w) + βλ ∥w∥2r+2 . That is,
in defining f (w) above, we take ∇(F (w) + βλ ∥w∥2r+2 ) rather than ∇F (w). This yields the Regularized
Tamed Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (reg-TULA). In Theorem 3 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024),
reg-TULA was shown to succeed in sampling from µβ under Assumption D.1 and a PI for µβ . Again, we
argue in Lemma 46 that the initialization error can be controlled for appropriate π0 .

                                                     26
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Appendix C. Proof Ideas
Here, we sketch our proof; our full proofs are in Section D. We invite the reader interested in learning our
proofs to first read this subsection, as we will build off the work here in Section D.

C.1. Proving a PI
The central idea is to prove a PI via the Lyapunov potential arising from optimization, a similar idea to Bakry
et al. (2008). However, we modify their technique in a novel way to fully exploit local geometric properties
implied by success of Gradient Descent, which gives us sharper quantitative control of the isoperimetric
constant. Rather than building an ad-hoc Lyapunov potential from F , we instead utilize Φ as our potential in
proving the functional inequality.
In our setting, recall we have a twice-differentiable and non-negative Lyapunov function Φ(w) such that

                                       ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w))

for a non-negative, monotonically increasing g with g(x) ≥ m′ x − b′ , g(0) = 0, and g(x) > 0 for x > 0.
Recall the definition of the infinitesimal generator L of (1), defined as the following operator on any
sufficiently differentiable test function ϕ:

                                  Lϕ(w) = ∆ϕ(w) − ⟨β∇F (w), ∇ϕ(w)⟩.

Crucial to our analysis is the following Integration by Parts identity, which holds by reversibility of the
Langevin Diffusion (1):
Lemma 26 (Theorem 1.2.14, Chewi (2024)) For all functions f, g for which Lf , Lg are defined,

                           ∫ (−L)f gdµβ = ∫ f (−L)gdµβ = ∫ ⟨∇f, ∇g⟩dµβ .

For more background on the infinitesimal generator and the above identity, see Subsection B.1.
Now, we outline our argument. Following the discussion from Section 5, it remains to upper bound a term of
                   g(F (w))
the form ∫ f (w)2 g(F (w))+B dµβ . We do so via Lemma 27, which crucially uses Lemma 26. Consider any
B > 0, and let h(w) = g(F (w)) + B. Lemma 27 gives

               g(F (w))        1               f (w)2             f (w)2
 ∫ f (w)                  dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥2 +        ∥∇Φ(w)∥   −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩)dµβ
         2                                                    2
             g(F (w)) + B      β               h(w)2              h(w)2
                                           1           ∣∆Φ(w)∣
                                         + ∫ f (w)2            dµβ .
                                           β             h(w)
With Lemma 27 in hand and following the ideas from Section 5, we prove Theorem 12 by using Assump-
tion 3.2 to upper bound
                               ∥∇Φ(w)∥2 ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩
                                          −                    ≤ C ′,
                                 h(w)2            h(w)2
for some C ′ > 0. Plugging this upper bound into the implication of Lemma 27 above and combining with
the discussion from Section 5, rearranging and converting from f back to ψ eventually gives the desired PI.
Using the ‘tightening’ technique of Cattiaux et al. (2010), we can strengthen the PI into a LSI for µβ under
the assumption of quadratic tail growth for F – which goes hand-in-hand with a LSI – and weak-convexity.
Finally, once we have proved a PI or LSI, sampling from µβ via LMC is known from the literature. This is
fully detailed in Section D.

                                                      27
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




C.2. Proving a WPI
We also extend the Lyapunov technique to prove an WPI, which may be of independent interest. The idea is
as follows: if (3) does not hold in S but otherwise holds in S c , instead consider arbitrary test function ψ and
let f = ψ − α be defined exactly as in Section 5.
Considering any B > 0, for all w ∈ S c , we have:
                                         1       1             1       1
0 < g(F (w)) + B ≤ ⟨∇Φ(w), F (w)⟩ + B = − LΦ(w) + ∆Φ(w) + B ≤ − LΦ(w) + ∣∆Φ(w)∣ + B.
                                         β       β             β       β
Defining again h(w) = g(F (w)) + B > 0, we obtain that
                                             1 −LΦ 1 ∣∆Φ∣ B
                                        1≤     ⋅   + ⋅   + .
                                             β   h  β  h  h
Rather than integrating this inequality everywhere, we integrate it only where this holds, in S c . Multiplying
the above by f 2 and integrating w.r.t. µβ over S c gives

 ∫ f dµβ = ∫ f dµβ + ∫ c f dµβ
    2         2           2
                 S           S
                        1      −LΦ        1      ∣∆Φ∣              B
            ≤ ∫ f dµβ + ∫ f 2
                     2
                                   dµβ + ∫ f 2        dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ
               S        β S c   h         β S c    h         S c   h
              1     −LΦ       1      ∣∆Φ∣            B                  1       −LΦ
            ≤ ∫ f2       dµβ + ∫ f 2      dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ + (∫ f 2 dµβ − ∫ f 2      dµβ )
              β       h       β        h             h           S      β S      h
              1     −LΦ       1      ∣∆Φ∣            B                  1       −LΦ
            ≤ ∫ f2       dµβ + ∫ f 2      dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ + (∫ f 2 dµβ + ∣∫ f 2     dµβ ∣).
              β       h       β        h             h           S      β S      h
The key difference is that the condition above not holding everywhere implies we picked up the ‘error term’
                                                     1        −LΦ
                                       ∫ f dµβ +       ∣∫ f 2     dµβ ∣,
                                          2
                                         S           β S       h
which we wish to relate to osc(ψ) to establish a WPI.
Notice for β = Ω(d), β1 ∣ −LΦ
                           h
                              ∣ can be controlled by a constant depending on problem-dependent parameters
involving supremums over S (which is typically thought of as small).
Now we aim to see why f 2 can be related to osc(ψ)2 . Indeed, since f = ψ − α where ψ is an expectation of
ψ w.r.t a probability measure, namely µβ,LOCAL , we obtain that ∣f ∣ ≤ osc(ψ) pointwise. Consequently we can
upper bound the error term by
                         1        −LΦ
            ∫ f dµβ +      ∣∫ f 2     dµβ ∣ ≤ problem dependent parameters ⋅ osc(ψ)2 ⋅ µβ (S).
               2
             S           β S       h
Thus, rearranging the above, we obtain
           g(F (w))
       ∫ f ⋅
          2
                    dµβ
             h(w)
        1     −LΦ       1     ∣∆Φ∣                    1       −LΦ
       ≤ ∫ f2     dµβ + ∫ f 2      dµβ + (∫ f 2 dµβ + ∣∫ f 2      dµβ ∣)
        β       h       β       h           S        β S       h
        1     −LΦ       1     ∣∆Φ∣
       ≤ ∫ f2     dµβ + ∫ f 2      dµβ + problem dependent parameters ⋅ osc(ψ)2 ⋅ µβ (S).
        β       h       β       h
From here, we proceed similarly to our proof of the PI from earlier. Finally, to prove Corollary 17, rather
than applying a PI for µβ,LOCAL to upper bound ∫U f 2 dµβ from Assumption 3.1, apply the hypothesis that
µβ,LOCAL satisfies a WPI and use the same steps as above.

                                                       28
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Appendix D. Proofs
In all of these proofs, we define U = B(W ⋆ , r(lb )) for lb satisfying Assumption 3.1, as done in Section C.

D.1. Proof of Theorem 12
We first introduce the following Lemma.
Lemma 27 Consider any Lyapunov function Φ(⋅) and g(⋅) satisfying (3) for all w ∈ Rd . Then for any B > 0
and any test function f , we have

              g(F (w))        1               f (w)2             f (w)2
∫ f (w)                  dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥2 +        ∥∇Φ(w)∥   −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩)dµβ
        2                                                    2
            g(F (w)) + B      β               h(w)2              h(w)2
                                          1           ∣∆Φ(w)∣
                                        + ∫ f (w)2            dµβ .                     (10)
                                          β             h(w)

Note when we apply Lemma 27, we will apply it with Φ̃ in place of Φ and g̃ in place of g, where Φ̃, g̃ are
such that (3) holds with Φ̃ in place of Φ and g̃ in place of g.
Proof of Lemma 27. By the condition (3), we obtain
                                      1       1             1       1
 g(F (w)) + B ≤ ⟨∇Φ(w), F (w)⟩ + B = − LΦ(w) + ∆Φ(w) + B ≤ − LΦ(w) + ∣∆Φ(w)∣ + B. (11)
                                      β       β             β       β

Denote h(w) ∶= g(F (w)) + B > 0. Therefore for any f , as f 2 ≥ 0, we obtain

                                    − β1 LΦ(w) + β1 ∣∆Φ(w)∣ + B
     ∫ f (w) dµβ ≤ ∫ f (w)
              2                 2
                                                   dµβ
                                      h(w)
                      1         −LΦ(w)      1         ∣∆Φ(w)∣                 B
                     ≤ ∫ f (w)2        dµβ + ∫ f (w)2         dµβ + ∫ f (w)2      dµβ .
                      β          h(w)       β           h(w)                 h(w)
For the first term, we use Lemma 26 in the second equality below to obtain

                  −LΦ(w)          f (w)2
     ∫ f (w)             dµβ = ∫         ⋅ −LΦ(w)dµβ
             2
                   h(w)           h(w)
                                      f (w)2
                             = ∫ ⟨∇(         ), ∇Φ(w)⟩dµβ
                                      h(w)
                                        2f (w)                   f (w)2
                               =∫ (            ⟨∇f (w), ∇Φ(w)⟩ −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩)dµβ
                                         h(w)                    h(w)2
                                          f (w)                    f (w)2
                               ≤ ∫ (2∣          ∣∥∇f (w)∥∥∇Φ(w)∥ −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩)dµβ
                                          h(w)                     h(w)2
                                                   f (w)2             f (w)2
                               ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 +            ∥∇Φ(w)∥ 2
                                                                    −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩dµβ .
                                                   h(w)2              h(w)2
Combining the above two inequalities and rearranging gives

              g(F (w))        1               f (w)2             f (w)2
∫ f (w)                  dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥2 +        ∥∇Φ(w)∥   −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ(w)⟩)dµβ
        2                                                    2
            g(F (w)) + B      β               h(w)2              h(w)2
                                          1           ∣∆Φ(w)∣
                                        + ∫ f (w)2            dµβ ,
                                          β             h(w)

                                                      29
                                                C HEN S RIDHARAN




and this proves Lemma 27.                                                                                             ∎
Now, we prove Theorem 12.
Proof of Theorem 12. Our proof proceeds in three parts:
    • Appropriately modifying Φ to make it more regular (which does not require additional regularity
      assumptions beyond those stated in Theorem 12).
    • Using the Lyapunov function technique in a novel manner as sketched in Section C to prove a PI.
    • Turning a PI into an LSI using established methods.
Part 1: Modifying Φ to introduce additional regularity. The first part of our proof is to show we can
create a smooth (bounded Hessian eigenvalues) Lyapunov function Φ̃ with that satisfies (3). The dependence
on the allowed β and the resulting isoperimetric constants will in turn depend on Φ̃. We emphasize this step
is only necessary when Φ is not smooth.
First note without loss of generality we can take m′ ← min(m′ , 21 ). Also note we can without loss of
generality replace g with a lower bound g̃ such that g̃(0) = 0, g̃(x) > 0 for x > 0, is increasing, and has
exactly linear tail growth. We do so by constructing g̃ as follows. First define
                                                     1
                                              x′ =       (g(r2 R) + b′ ),                                           (12)
                                                     m ′

and notice that m′ x′ − b′ = g(r2 R) > 0. We now construct g̃(⋅) as follows:
    • If r2 R ≥ x′ , define:
                                         ⎧
                                         ⎪ 1
                                             g(x)          for x ≤ r2 R
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪2
                                 g̃(x) = ⎨smoothed version for x ∈ [r2 R, r2 R + δ]
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎪
                                         ⎩m x − b
                                              ′   ′
                                                           for x ≥ r2 R + δ
      for a small enough universal constant δ > 0. By ‘smoothed version’ we just mean interpolating between
      the relevant two functions to preserve that g̃(x) is differentiable and increasing while staying under the
      line m′ x − b′ , which we can easily see is possible because m′ x′ − b′ > 12 g(r2 R) = g̃(r2 R).
    • Otherwise if r2 R < x′ , define:
                           ⎧
                           ⎪ 1
                                                                                 for x ≤ r2 R
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪ 2 g(x)
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪smoothed version 1                                   for x ∈ [r2 R, r2 R + δ]
                           ⎪
                           ⎪ 10
                              9
                                 (m′ x′ −b′ )− 43 g(r2 R)
                   g̃(x) = ⎨                              (x − r2 R) + 4 g(r2 R) for x ∈ [r2 R + δ, x′ − δ]
                                                                       3
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                                      x′ −r2 R
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪smoothed version 2                                   for x ∈ [x′ − δ, x′ ]
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎩m x − b                                              for x ≥ x′
                                ′       ′


      for a small enough universal constant δ > 0. Similarly as before, by ‘smoothed version 1’ we just
      mean interpolating between the relevant two functions to preserve that g̃(x) is differentiable and
                                                      9
                                                          (m′ x′ −b′ )− 3 g(r2 R)
     increasing while staying under the line 10        x′ −r2 R
                                                               4
                                                                     (x − r2 R) + 43 g(r2 R), and likewise by
     ‘smoothed version 2’ we just mean interpolating between the relevant two functions to preserve that
     g̃(x) is differentiable and increasing while staying under the line m′ x − b′ . This is possible because 1)
                                                                     9
                                                                        (m′ x′ −b′ )− 34 g(r2 R)
      1
      2 g(r2 R) < 3
                  4 g(r2 R) < 9
                              10 g(r2 R) < g(r2 R) = m ′ ′
                                                        x  −b ′
                                                                , 2) 10
                                                                             x′ −r2 R            (x′ −r2 R)+ 43 g(r2 R) =
      10 (m x − b ) = 10 g(r2 R) < g(r2 R), and 3) 10 (m x − b ) − 4 g(r2 R) = 20 g(r2 R) > 0. In particular,
      9     ′ ′   ′     9                           9     ′ ′      ′     3                 3

      1), 2) and 3) ensure we can always interpolate so that g̃ is increasing, and 2) also ensures that
      g̃(x) ≤ g(x).

                                                             30
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Finally, take g̃(x) ← rg̃(x) where
                                                                     x
                                         r = min(1,       inf               ).                           (13)
                                                       x∈[r2 R,x′ ] g̃(x)

Note r > 0 since g(r2 R) > 0 and as [r2 R, x′ ] is compact. These parameters also all behave in a dimension
free way if m′ , b′ , r2 , R do.
In either case, the constructed g̃(x) is increasing, differentiable, and has linear tail growth. In particular
note g̃(x) ≥ r(m′ (x − x′ ) − b′ ) = m′ rx − r(m′ x′ + b′ ). Moreover, by this construction, we can check
that for x ≥ r2 R we have g̃(x) ≤ x, and for all x ≥ 0 we have g(x) ≥ g̃(x). By Assumption 3.2, for all
w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c we have F (w) ≥ r2 R, therefore

                                   1
                               ⟨      (w − w⋆ ), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ F (w) ≥ g̃(F (w))
                                   r1

outside B(w⋆ , R). Also, since for all x we have g(x) ≥ g̃(x), this implies for all w that

                                ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)) ≥ g̃(F (w)).

Let Φ2 (w) = 2r11 ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 + M ′ where

                                          M ′ ∶=        sup       Φ(w).                                  (14)
                                                   w∈B(w⋆ ,R+1)

Therefore, we have ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)) outside B(w⋆ , R), and also that Φ2 (w) ≥ Φ(w) on
B(w⋆ , R + 1). Furthermore, note the above construction of g̃(x) is unnecessary if g(x) = λx, by taking
λ = min(λ, 1), which is the case in many of our examples e.g. Example 3, Example 5.
From here on out, if g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1 we define

                                              m′NEW = m′ , b′NEW = b′ .                                  (15)

Otherwise if the above construction of g̃ was needed we define

                                      m′NEW = m′ r, b′NEW = r(m′ x′ + b′ ),                              (16)

where r, x′ are defined as per (13), (12). Consequently we always have

                                              g̃(x) ≥ m′NEW x − b′NEW .                                  (17)

Now, we let χ(w) ∈ [0, 1] be a bump function interpolating between B(w⋆ , R) and B(w⋆ , R + 1) in the
natural way, such that χ ≡ 0 on B(w⋆ , R) and χ ≡ 1 on B(w⋆ , R + 1)c . In Lemma 47, we explicitly construct
a χ(w) such that:
    • χ(w) is differentiable to all orders.
    • ∥∇χ(w)∥, ∥∇2 χ(w)∥op ≤ B where B > 0 is a universal constant.

    • ⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ 0 for w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1).
Now, define
                                Φ̃(w) ∶= χ(w)Φ2 (w) + (1 − χ(w))Φ(w).
We break into cases and show that Φ̃ is still a valid Lyapunov function.

                                                         31
                                                 C HEN S RIDHARAN




    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R), as χ ≡ 0 holds identically in this set, we have

                                 ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≡ ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)).

    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R + 1)c , as χ ≡ 1 identically in this set, we have

                                ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ = ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)).

    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1), we have

                 ∇Φ̃(w) = χ(w)∇Φ2 (w) + (1 − χ(w))∇Φ(w) + ∇χ(w)Φ2 (w) − ∇χ(w)Φ(w).

       This means

                  ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ = χ(w)⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w)⟩ + (1 − χ(w))⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩
                                                            + (Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩
                                        ≥ (χ(w) + 1 − χ(w))g̃(F (w)) = g̃(F (w)).

       The above uses that Φ2 (w) ≥ Φ(w) for w ∈ B(w⋆ , R+1), and the property of χ that ⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥
       0 for w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1).
Therefore, for all w ∈ Rd we have

                                          ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)).

That is, Φ̃(⋅), together with g̃(⋅), satisfies (3).
Moreover, we claim Φ̃ is smooth. Note ∥∇2 Φ2 (w)∥op = r11 where r1 was defined above. Let

                                     L′ =       sup        ρΦ (Φ(w)) ≤ ρΦ (M ′ ),                       (18)
                                            w∈B(w⋆ ,R+1)


where M ′ is as in (14).

    • In B(w⋆ , R) ∪ B(w⋆ , R + 1)c we have ∥∇2 Φ̃(w)∥op ≤ max(L′ , r11 ).

    • In B(w⋆ , R)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1), we can compute

                   ∇2 Φ̃(w) = ∇2 Φ(w) + (Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))∇2 χ(w) + ∇2 (Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))χ(w)
                                                + 2∇χ(w)∇(Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))T .

       By Triangle Inequality for operator norm and the inequality ∥abT ∥op ≤ ∥a∥∥b∥, it follows that

           ∥∇2 Φ̃(w)∥op

           ≤ ∥∇2 Φ(w)∥op + (∣Φ2 (w)∣ + ∣Φ(w)∣)∥∇2 χ(w)∥op + (∥∇2 Φ2 (w)∥op + ∥∇2 Φ(w)∥op )χ(w)
                              + 2∥∇χ(w)∥∥∇(Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))∥
                       (R + 1)2             1                     R+1
           ≤ L′ + B(            + 2M ′ ) + ( + L′ ) ⋅ 1 + 2B(L′ +     ).
                         2r1                r1                     r1

                                                            32
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Recalling L′ from (18), define

                                   (R + 1)2             1                 R+1
               L̃ ∶= {L′ + B(               + 2M ′ ) + ( + L′ ) + 2B(L′ +     )} ∨ 2b′NEW ∨ 1,                       (19)
                                     2r1                r1                 r1

where b′NEW defines the linear univariate tail growth of g̃. Here, we recall the definitions of L′ in (18), M ′ in
(14), b′NEW from (15) or (16) (whichever applies here), and B which is a universal constant coming from the
construction of χ. Thus, Φ̃ is L̃-smooth. Clearly Φ̃ is non-negative as well.


Part 2: Proving a PI with the new Lyapunov function.             Now we go back to our setup to prove a Poincaré
Inequality. Consider any test function ψ. Let
                                                                  1
                                       f = ψ − α where α =           ∫ ψdµβ .                                        (20)
                                                               µβ (U) U

Recall that Φ̃(⋅) together with g̃(⋅) satisfies (3). Thus, applying Lemma 27 with Φ̃(⋅), g̃(⋅), B = L̃ > 0 and
h(w) = g̃(F (w)) + L̃ gives

                g̃(F (w))        1               f (w)2           2   f (w)2
 ∫ f (w)
         2
                            dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥2 +        ∥∇ Φ̃(w)∥   −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩)dµβ
             g̃(F (w)) + L̃      β               h(w)2                h(w)2
                                                        1           ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣
                                                    +     ∫ f (w)
                                                                  2
                                                                             dµβ .                                   (21)
                                                        β             h(w)

Step a: Upper bounding relevant terms using the construction of Φ̃. We aim to upper bound the interme-
diate term in (21). Observe as g̃ is non-decreasing and non-negative,

               ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ = g̃ ′ (F (w))⟨∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ ≥ g̃ ′ (F (w))g̃(F (w)) ≥ 0.

Also observe by L̃-smoothness of Φ̃ and using Lemma 42, because χ ∈ [0, 1] and by definition of M ′ ,
                              2                                                        1           2
                 ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ≤ 4L̃Φ̃(w) ≤ 4L̃(M ′ + Φ2 (w)) = 4L̃(2M ′ +                     ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ).
                                                                                      2r1
Therefore, as g(x) ≥ 0, using the above implies
                          2
               ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩                ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥
                                                                    2
                                                                            4L̃(2M ′ + 2r11 ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 )
                                                     ≤                  ≤                                  .
                                  h(w)2                    h(w)2                       h(w)2
Furthermore recall that because g̃(x) ≥ max(0, m′NEW x − b′NEW ), we have

                                      h(w) ≥ max(L̃, m′NEW F (w) − b′NEW + L̃).
                                                                                  8(R2 +4M ′ r1 )
    • If w ∈ B(w⋆ , R), using L̃/2 ≥ b′NEW , the above is clearly at most              r1 L̃
                                                                                                  .

    • Otherwise, using the second part of Assumption 3.2 and L̃/2 ≥ b′NEW , we have

                4L̃(2M ′ + 2r11 ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 )            2r1 ∥w − w ∥ + 2M
                                                         1         ⋆ 2      ′
                                                                                                 2L̃       32M ′
                                           2
                                             ≤ 4L̃ ⋅                                    ≤                ∨       .
                (m′NEW F (w) − b′NEW + L̃)                 NEW ∥w − w ∥ + 4
                                                     r22 m′2           ⋆ 2 L̃2              r1 r22 m′2
                                                                                                     NEW     L̃

                                              tc+d ≤ c ∨ d for all t, a, b, c, d ≥ 0.
      The last line uses the simple fact that ta+b   a   b



                                                          33
                                                       C HEN S RIDHARAN




Define
                                               8(R2 + 4M ′ r1 )            2L̃       32M ′
                                      C ′ ∶=                      ∨                ∨       .                     (22)
                                                      r1 L̃           r1 r22 m′2
                                                                               NEW     L̃
Here M ′ is from (14), L̃ is from (19), and m′NEW is from (15) or (16) (whichever case applies here).
Consequently the above proves that for any f , letting h(w) = g̃(F (w)) + L̃, we have
                                                        2
                                          ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩
                                                                                  ≤ C ′.                         (23)
                                                              h(w)2


Step b: Using the Lyapunov method.               Applying (23) in (21) and using L̃-smoothness of Φ̃ and that f 2 ≥ 0,
we now have
                                   g̃(F (w))
                 ∫ f (w)
                         2
                                               dµβ
                                g̃(F (w)) + L̃
                         1                 1               1             ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣
                     ≤     ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ C f (w) dµβ + ∫ f (w)
                                     2         ′     2              2
                                                                                    dµβ
                         β                 β               β          g̃(F (w)) + L
                      1                 1                    1            dL̃
                     ≤  ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ C f (w) dµβ + ∫ f (w)
                                  2          ′     2              2
                                                                                   dµβ
                      β                 β                    β      g̃(F (w)) + L̃
                      1                 1
                     ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + ∫ f (w)2 (d + C ′ )dµβ .
                      β                 β
         g̃(t)
Notice g̃(t)+L̃ is non-decreasing as g̃ is non-decreasing. We thus obtain:

                                g̃(lb )
                 ∫ f (w)
                         2
                                            dµβ
                             g̃(lb ) + L̃
                                      g̃(lb )                    g̃(lb )
                     = ∫ f (w)2                dµβ + ∫ f (w)2              dµβ
                        Uc        g̃(lb ) + L̃        U       g̃(lb ) + L̃
                                    g̃(F (w))                         g̃(lb )
                     ≤ ∫ f (w)2                   dµβ + ∫ f (w)2                dµβ
                                g̃(F (w)) + L̃           U         g̃(lb ) + L̃
                       1                         1                                 g̃(lb )
                     ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + ∫ f (w)2 (d + C ′ )dµβ +                           ∫ f (w) dµβ .
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                 (24)
                       β                         β                              g̃(lb ) + L̃ U

We now upper bound ∫U f (w)2 dµβ . As µβ,LOCAL ∶= µβ,LOCAL (lb ) satisfies a Poincaré Inequality by Assump-
tion 3.1, we have
                          Vµβ,LOCAL (f ) ≤ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ,LOCAL .

Using definition of variance and µβ,LOCAL in the above, we obtain that

            1                   1                   2                    1
               ∫ f (w) dµβ −          (     (w)dµ  )  ≤ CPI , LOCAL ⋅       ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ .
                      2                                                               2
                                       ∫  f      β
         µβ (U) U            µβ (U) 2   U                             µβ (U) U

Recalling the definition of f = ψ − α for α = µβ 1(U ) ∫U ψdµβ , we obtain from the above that

                                                                             1               2
             ∫ f (w) dµβ ≤ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ +                         (∫ f (w)dµβ )
                    2                            2
                 U                                U                       µβ (U) U

                                                                 34
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS



                                                                                                   2
                                                     1                1
             ≤ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ +            (∫ (ψ(w) −       ∫ ψ(w)dµβ )dµβ )
                                                  µβ (U) U         µβ (U) U
             = CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + 0.

Applying this in (24), we obtain

                            g̃(lb )        1                      1
             ∫ f (w)
                     2
                                      dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + ∫ f (w)2 (d + C ′ )dµβ
                         g̃(lb ) + L̃      β                      β
                                                           g̃(lb )
                                                     +               ⋅ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ .
                                                        g̃(lb ) + L̃

For β ≥ 2(1 + g̃(lL̃b ) )(d + C ′ ) = Ω(d), this gives

           g̃(lb )                  1                    g̃(lb )
                       ∫ f (w) dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ +              ⋅ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ .
                              2                2
       2(g̃(lb ) + L̃)              β                 g̃(lb ) + L̃

Rearranging this inequality and converting back to ψ, recalling the definition of variance, and noting ∇f = ∇ψ
gives:

                            Vµβ [ψ] ≤ ∫ (ψ − α)2 dµβ

                                      = ∫ f 2 dµβ
                                                          2        L̃
                                      ≤ (2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ
                                                          β      g̃(lb )
                                                          2        L̃
                                      = (2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇ψ∥2 dµβ .
                                                          β      g̃(lb )

Recalling ψ is an arbitrary test function, this shows that µβ satisfies a Poincaré Inequality with a Poincaré
constant of
                                       2         L̃                      L̃
                        2CPI , LOCAL + (1 +            ) for β ≥ 2(1 +         )(d + C ′ ),              (25)
                                       β       g̃(lb )                 g̃(lb )

where L̃ is defined in (19) and C ′ is defined in (22).

Part 3: Proving a Log-Sobolev Inequality. With the above PI in hand, and under the relevant conditions
given in Theorem 12, we use the following result of Cattiaux et al. (2010) in the form given by Proposition
15 from Raginsky et al. (2017) to prove an LSI.
Theorem 28 (Proposition 15, Raginsky et al. (2017)) Suppose the following conditions hold:
   1. There exists constants κ, γ > 0 and a twice continuously differentiable function V ∶ Rd → [1, ∞) such
      that for all w ∈ Rd ,
                                              LV (w)
                                                       ≤ κ − γ∥w∥2 .
                                               V (w)

   2. µβ satisfies a Poincaré Inequality with constant CPI .
   3. There exists some constant K ≥ 0 such that ∇2 F ⪰ −K.

                                                           35
                                                 C HEN S RIDHARAN




Then, for any δ > 0. µβ satisfies a Log-Sobolev Inequality with CLSI = C1 + (C2 + 2)CPI , where

                           2 1 βK                             2 1 βK
                   C1 ∶=    ( +   )+δ          and   C2 ∶=     ( +   )(κ + γ ∫ ∥w∥2 dµβ ).
                           γ δ  2                             γ δ  2          Rd



Use V (w) = eΦ̃(w) in Theorem 28. Condition 2 in Theorem 28 follows from the above part, and condition 3
in Theorem 28 is trivially satisfied with K = L by our condition on weak convexity of F . For condition 1, let
V (w) = eΦ̃(w) ≥ 1. Compute
                                                                                         2
                      ∇V (w) = eΦ̃(w) ∇Φ̃(w), ∆Φ̃(w) = eΦ̃(w) (∆Φ̃(w) + ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ).

Therefore,
                                                                  2
                       LV (w) V (w)(∆Φ̃(w) + ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨β∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩)
                             =
                       V (w)                      V (w)
                                                         2
                                = ∆Φ̃(w) + ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨β∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩.

We now upper bound the above. Recall we showed Φ̃(w) is L̃ smooth, hence ∆Φ̃(w) ≤ dL̃. Now we break
into cases:
    • Consider w ∈ B(w⋆ , R + 1). Recall for such w, ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ≤ L′ . Also recall ⟨∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ ≥
      g̃(F (w)) ≥ 0. Thus in this case
                                            LV (w)
                                                    ≤ dL̃ + L′ .
                                             V (w)

    • Consider w ∈ B(w⋆ , R + 1)c . Now, ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ = r11 ∥w − w⋆ ∥. Also recall ⟨∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ ≥
      g̃(F (w)). By construction of g̃, we have g̃(x) ≥ m′NEW x − b′NEW (recall (17)). Hence, by conditions on
      the growth of F in this part, we obtain

           ⟨∇F (w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)) ≥ m′NEW (m∥w∥2 − b) − b′NEW = mm′NEW ∥w∥2 − (bm′NEW + b′NEW ).

         Thus in this case, we have
                        LV (w)         1          2
                               ≤ dL̃ + 2 ∥w − w⋆ ∥ − β(mm′NEW ∥w∥2 − (bm′NEW + b′NEW )).
                         V (w)        r1

Doing casework based on the above cases and with one application of Young’s Inequality, we see that when
β ≥ r24m , condition 1 is of Theorem 28 is satisfied with
     1


                                        2      ⋆ 2                        βmm′NEW
                       κ = dL̃ + L′ +       ∥w  ∥  + β(bm′
                                                          NEW + b′
                                                                  NEW ) +         (R + 1)2 ,
                                        r12                                 2
                            βmm′NEW
                       γ=           .
                              2
Choose δ = √1γ . As β ≥ 2, we can check
                        √               √
                4      ⎛ βmm′NEW βL ⎞       2      4L + 3  3
         C1 =                   +     +          ≤        + ,
              mm′NEW β ⎝   2      2 ⎠     βmm′NEW 2mm′NEW 2

                                                         36
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




             √    βL κ
      C2 = 2( γ +    )( + S)
                   2   γ
             √
            ⎛ βmm′NEW βL ⎞
         ≤2             +
            ⎝      2      2 ⎠
                              ⎛           2(b′NEW + bm′NEW )      4         ⋆ 2   2(dL̃ + L′ )   ⎞
                             ⋅ (R + 1)2 +                    +           ∥w  ∥  +              +S .
                              ⎝                mmNEW
                                                   ′                   2
                                                               βmmNEW r1
                                                                  ′                βmmNEW′
                                                                                                 ⎠

Using β ≥ 2, and our earlier upper bound on CPI , this yields a Log-Sobolev constant of

CLSI ≤ C1 + (C2 + 2)CPI
        4L + 3     3
     ≤          +
       2mmNEW 2
            ′

                  √              ⎧
                                 ⎪                                                    2(dL̃ + L′ )     ⎫
                                                                                                       ⎪
        ⎛                        ⎪                   b′NEW   b        4         ⋆ 2                    ⎪⎞
     + 4 1 + {L + mmNEW } ⋅ ⎨(R + 1) + 2(
                         ′                 2
                                                           +   ) +           ∥w  ∥  +              + S ⎬
        ⎝                        ⎪
                                 ⎪                 mmNEW m
                                                         ′                 2
                                                                   βmmNEW r1
                                                                      ′                βmmNEW′         ⎪
                                                                                                       ⎪⎠
                                 ⎩                                                                     ⎭
                               L̃
                     ⋅ ({1 +         } + βCPI , LOCAL ),                                              (26)
                             g̃(lb )

for β ≥ 2(1 + g̃(lL̃b ) )(d + C ′ ) ∨ r24m ≥ 2. Again, in the above, L̃ comes from (19), C ′ comes from (22), L′
                                    1
comes from (18), and m′NEW , b′NEW are as per (15) or (16), whichever case is appropriate. This proves the
desired LSI.                                                                                            ∎
Remark 29 Notice in the above proof, we did not use Assumption 1.1 on F , hence the statement of
Theorem 12. Note also that this proof establishes a PI from optimizability almost everywhere (w.r.t. Lebesgue
measure ν), since µ is absolutely continuous with respect to ν.
Remark 30 We note when Φ is L-smooth to begin with (for example, L = 2 when Φ(w) = ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 ,
which holds in the Linearizable example Example 5), the construction of g̃ and Φ̃ is unnecessary. We can just
use Φ instead of Φ̃, and in the above guarantees from (25), (26), using Lemma 42 we have

                                                           8R2                 2L̃
                       L̃ = L ∨ 2b′ , M ′ = 0, C ′ =                  ∨                      .             (27)
                                                       min(1/2, r1 )L̃ min(1/2, r1 )r22 m′2
                                                                                         NEW


For example, in this case we obtain µβ satisfies a Poincaré Inequality with a Poincaré constant of

                       2      L ∨ 2b′                 L ∨ 2b′           8R2                 2L̃
CPI = 2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         ) for β ≥ 2(1 +         )(d +                ∨                      ).
                       β       g(lb )                  g(lb )       min(1/2, r1 )L̃ min(1/2, r1 )r22 m′2
                                                                                                      NEW


We similarly obtain a cleaner and tighter bound for CLSI plugging the expressions from (27) back into (26).
Also note the construction of g̃ is unnecessary if g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1; if this is the case, we can just take
m′NEW = λ, b′NEW = 0.
Remark 31 By tracking the proof, we see that if Assumption 3.2 holds, it suffices to have Φ, F, g satisfy
(3) inside B(w⋆ , R + 1). This is because in our construction of g̃, we did not change R. After this, in
our construction of Φ̃, we only need the condition from Assumption 3.2 outside B(w⋆ , R + 1). After our
construction of Φ̃, the condition (3) is no longer used in the proof.
Remark 32 Consider a canonical example of non-convex, optimizable F : when F is λ-Linearizable (Kale
et al., 2021; Kleinberg et al., 2018; De Sa et al., 2022; Hinder et al., 2020). For simplicity say λ ≤ 1. Thus

                                                            37
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




Definition 2 holds with Φ = ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 (which is 2-smooth) and g(x) = λx. For

                                       2           8R2              4
                          β ≥ 2(1 +       )(d +              ∨ 2                 ),                          (28)
                                      λlb       min(r1 , 1/2) λ min(r1 , 1/2)r22

Theorem 12 gives a PI. Note as Assumption 1.1 is not needed for F , no regularity assumptions are placed on
F . Also note the construction of g̃ is unnecessary here, hence we can just take m′NEW = λ, b′NEW = 0.
The concurrent work Gong et al. (2024); Chewi and Stromme (2024) only consider PŁ functions, which
is not a natural parametrization for this example. Both approaches also do not yield a PI without further
assumptions on F . Examining Lemma 3.3 of Gong et al. (2024), they require β ≥ 4dLg2
                                                                                      where g0 is a lower
                                                                                          0
bound on the gradients outside W ⋆ and L is defined in their Assumption 4 and is analogous to the Lipschitz
constant of the Hessian near W ⋆ . Chewi and Stromme (2024) requires an upper bound on the Laplacian,
which often scales with d, even in the standard setting when F is L-smooth and so ∆F ≤ dL. Following their
approach to derive a PI, one needs β∥∇F ∥2 ≥ dL outside w⋆ (see their page 10).
In this Linearizable setting under Assumption 3.2, all we can obtain for generic F is ∥∇F (w)∥ ≥ r1 r2 ∧ r1Rλlb
outside W ⋆ . Thus the techniques of Gong et al. (2024); Chewi and Stromme (2024) require

                                                        1    R2
                                       β ≥ d(L ∧ L′ )( 2 2 ∨ 2 2 2 ).
                                                      r1 r2 λ lb r1

Often r1 , r2 could be quite small and R is quite large; these costly terms are multiplied by the dimension d
in the requirement for inverse temperature. This is not the case using our result Theorem 12 to obtain our
inverse temperature requirement (28).

D.2. Proof of Weak Poincaré Inequality Results Theorem 15, Corollary 17
Proof of Theorem 15. For the rest of the proof, borrow the same notation as in the proof in Subsection D.1.
Consider any test function ψ. As in (20), let
                                                               1
                                    f = ψ − α where α =           ∫ ψdµβ .
                                                            µβ (U) U

First, recall we can preserve Definition 2 by replacing Φ with Φ̃ and g with g̃, as done in Part 1 of the proof in
Subsection D.1. By the work there, which was all done pointwise, the resulting Φ̃ still satisfies Definition 2,
but now only for all w ∈ S c . That is, we have

                                ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g̃(F (w)) for all w ∈ S c .                               (29)

Moreover, the construction of Φ̃ there using Assumption 3.2 ensures Φ̃ satisfies ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥
g̃(F (w)) for all w ∈ B(w, R + 1)c . Thus, Φ̃ does not satisfy Definition 2 only for w ∈ S ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1), so
we assume from now on that S ⊆ B(w⋆ , R + 1) (equivalently, take S ← S ∩ B(w⋆ , R + 1)). The verification
of the smoothness of Φ̃ did not use optimizability, and so we know that Φ̃ is L̃-smooth over all of Rd , where
L̃ is again defined as in (19).
Next, let
                                              B = L̃ ∨ GF GΦ ≥ 1,                                            (30)
where again L̃ is from (19), and where we define

                       GF ∶= sup∥∇F (w)∥ ≤ LF R, GΦ ∶= sup∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ≤ ρΦ (M ′ ),                              (31)
                              w∈S                             w∈S


                                                       38
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Here we define MF = supw∈B(w⋆ ,R+1) F (w) and upper bound

                                       ∥∇2 F (w)∥op ≤ ρF (MF ) ∶= LF ,

where we use Assumption 1.1 for F and that S ⊆ B(w⋆ , R + 1). Thus, the following holds for all w ∈ S c :

                                           1        1              1        1
0 < g̃(F (w)) + B ≤ ⟨∇Φ̃(w), F (w)⟩ + B = − LΦ̃(w) + ∆Φ̃(w) + B ≤ − LΦ̃(w) + ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣ + B.
                                           β        β              β        β

Define h(w) = g̃(F (w)) + B. Thus for all w ∈ S c ,

                                         1 LΦ̃(w) 1 ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣ B
                                   1≤−     ⋅     + ⋅        + .
                                         β    h   β    h     h

Thus, as f 2 ≥ 0, we obtain

 ∫ f dµβ = ∫ f dµβ + ∫ c f dµβ
    2         2           2
                 S            S
                      1       2 −LΦ̃        1      ∣∆Φ̃∣             B
            ≤ ∫ f 2 dµβ +∫ cf        dµβ + ∫ f 2         dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ
              S       β S        h          β Sc     h          Sc   h
             1     −LΦ̃       1       ∣∆Φ̃∣            B                  1      −LΦ̃
            ≤ ∫ f2      dµβ + ∫ f 2         dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ + (∫ f 2 dµβ − ∫ f 2      dµβ )
             β      h         β         h              h           S      β S     h
                1     2 −LΦ̃      1      ∣∆Φ̃∣            B                  1       −LΦ̃
            ≤     ∫ f        dµβ + ∫ f 2       dµβ + ∫ f 2 dµβ + (∫ f 2 dµβ + ∣∫ f 2      dµβ ∣).
                β        h        β        h              h        S         β S      h

The last term in parantheses is now our error term. The first three terms will be controlled analogously to
Subsection D.1. Namely, the same application of Integration by Parts as in Lemma 27, which never uses the
optimizability condition, yields

                              −LΦ̃                  f2      2 f2
                      ∫ f
                          2
                                   dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f ∥2 + 2 ∥∇Φ̃∥ − 2 ⟨∇h, ∇Φ̃⟩)dµβ .
                               h                    h         h

Substituting this inequality in the above, we obtain in the same way as with (10) that

               g̃(F (w))       1               f (w)2           2   f (w)2
∫ f (w)
        2
                          dµβ ≤ ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥2 +        ∥∇ Φ̃(w)∥   −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩)dµβ
            g̃(F (w)) + B      β               h(w)2                h(w)2
                                                     1           ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣
                                                 +     ∫ f (w)
                                                               2
                                                                          dµβ
                                                     β             h(w)
                                                                       1           −LΦ̃(w)
                                                 + (∫ f (w)2 dµβ +       ∣∫ f (w)2         dµβ ∣).          (32)
                                                       S               β S          h(w)

                                                                                          −LΦ̃(w)
As discussed in Section C, we picked up the ‘error term’ ∫S f (w)2 dµβ + β1 ∣∫S f (w)2     h(w) dµβ ∣.

Step a. Now, we follow Part 2, Step a, Subsection D.1 to upper bound the first term in the right hand side
above. Note for w ∈ S c , we still have (23) for such w, as the proof of (23) only used optimizability pointwise.
Otherwise, consider w ∈ S. Let
                                                 G′ = sup∣g ′ (t)∣.                                         (33)
                                                      t∈R


                                                       39
                                                C HEN S RIDHARAN




Note this is dimension free and has no F -dependence. Note by choice of h(w),
                                                                                                              2
          −⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩ ≤ g̃ ′ (F (w))∥∇F (w)∥∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ≤ G′ (∥∇F (w)∥2 + ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ).

Furthermore recall that in Part 2, Step a of Subsection D.1, without using optimizability of F , it was
                         2
                  ∥∇Φ̃∥
established that h(w)2 ≤ C ′ , where C ′ was defined in (23). Thus,

           2                                        2                                      2
∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩              ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥         ′ ∥∇F (w)∥
                                                                          2
                                                                              + ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥                          ∥∇F (w)∥2
                                    ≤                   +G                                     ≤ (G′ +1)C ′ +G′             .
                h(w)2                    h(w)2                            h(w)2                                     h(w)2

Recalling h(w) ≥ B ≥ 1, an upper bound on the above is then simply

                                            C ′′ ∶= (G + 1)C ′ + G′ G2F ,                                                (34)

Here C ′ is from (22), GF is as per (31), and G′ is as defined above. As discussed above, this bound still
applies in the w ∈ S c case. Thus, we have for all w that
                                                2
                                    ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩
                                                                                ≤ C ′′ .
                                                    h(w)2

Step b.   From here, we can conclude a WPI analogously to Step b, Subsection D.1, the one difference being
                                                                                  −LΦ̃(w)
that we need to control the ‘error term’ ∫S f (w)2 dµβ + β1 ∣∫S f (w)2             h(w) dµβ ∣. For convenience, let


                                                             1           −LΦ̃(w)
                             err(f ) ∶= ∫ f (w)2 dµβ +         ∣∫ f (w)2         dµβ ∣.                                  (35)
                                        S                    β S          h(w)

Recalling (32) and using that f 2 ≥ 0 thus gives

                           g̃(F (w))
          ∫ f (w)
                  2
                                      dµβ
                        g̃(F (w)) + B
               1                 1               1             ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣
          ≤      ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ C f (w) dµβ + ∫ f (w)
                           2         ′′    2              2
                                                                          dµβ + err(f )
               β                 β               β          g̃(F (w)) + B
           1                 1                     1                  dL̃
          ≤  ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ C f (w) dµβ + ∫ f (w)
                       2          ′′     2                    2
                                                                               dµβ + err(f )
           β                 β                     β            g̃(F (w)) + L̃
           1                 1
          ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + ∫ f (w)2 (d + C ′′ )dµβ + err(f ),
           β                 β
                                                                  g̃(t)
where we used (34) and the L̃-smoothness of Φ̃. Notice g̃(t)+B is non-decreasing as g̃ is non-decreasing. We
thus obtain:
                     g̃(lb )
          ∫ f (w)
                  2
                                 dµβ
                  g̃(lb ) + B
                           g̃(lb )                   g̃(lb )
          = ∫ f (w)2               dµβ + ∫ f (w)2               dµβ
             U c       g̃(lb ) + B        U       g̃(lb ) + B
                         g̃(F (w))                        g̃(lb )
          ≤ ∫ f (w)2                  dµβ + ∫ f (w)2               dµβ
                     g̃(F (w)) + B           U         g̃(lb ) + B

                                                             40
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




              1                 1                         g̃(lb )
          ≤     ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ f (w) (d + C )dµβ +            ∫ f (w) dµβ + err(f ).
                          2             2      ′′                        2
                                                                                                         (36)
              β                 β                      g̃(lb ) + B U
Exactly as in Subsection D.1, using Assumption 3.1 and the definition f = ψ − α (the choice of α is crucial),
we obtain
                              ∫ f (w) dµβ ≤ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ .
                                       2                               2
                                   U
Applying this in (36), we obtain

                 g̃(lb )
 ∫ f (w)
         2
                          dµβ
              g̃(lb ) + B
      1                 1                         g̃(lb )
  ≤     ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ f (w) (d + C )dµβ +             ⋅ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + err(f ).
                  2             2      ′′
      β                 β                      g̃(lb ) + B

For β ≥ 2(1 + g̃(lBb ) )(d + C ′′ ) = Ω(d), this gives

     g̃(lb )                 1                    g̃(lb )
                ∫ f (w) dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ +             ⋅ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ + err(f ).
                       2                2
 2(g̃(lb ) + B)              β                 g̃(lb ) + B
Rearranging this inequality and converting back to ψ, recalling the definition of variance, and noting ∇f = ∇ψ
gives:

                Vµβ [ψ] ≤ ∫ (ψ − α)2 dµβ

                          = ∫ f 2 dµβ
                                              2        B                               B
                          ≤ (2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + 2(1 +         )err(f )
                                              β      g̃(lb )                         g̃(lb )
                                              2        B                              B
                          = (2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇ψ∥2 dµβ + 2(1 +         )err(f ).
                                              β      g̃(lb )                        g̃(lb )

Finally, we control the error term err(f ). First note for w ∈ S, by definition of B in (30),

                       −LΦ̃(w)    β∥∇F (w)∥∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ ∣∆Φ̃∣ βGF GΦ dL̃
                   ∣           ∣≤                  +      ≤       +    ≤ β + d.
                        h(w)         g(F (w)) + B    h(w)   GF GΦ   L̃

Next, recall f = ψ − α where α = µβ 1(U ) ∫U ψdµβ = ∫U ψdµβ,LOCAL is defined as before. Note α ∈
[inf ψ, sup ψ]. Note for all w,

                                       ψ(w) − α ≤ sup ψ − inf ψ = osc(ψ),
                                       ψ(w) − α ≥ inf ψ − sup ψ = −osc(ψ).

Consequently, we have for all w,

                                           f (w)2 = (ψ(w) − α)2 ≤ osc(ψ)2 .

Thus, recalling β ≥ d, we obtain

                                                         1           −LΦ̃(w)
                           err(f ) = ∫ f (w)2 dµβ +        ∣∫ f (w)2         dµβ ∣
                                       S                 β S          h(w)

                                                           41
                                                  C HEN S RIDHARAN




                                                           1
                                  ≤ osc(ψ)2 µβ (S)(1 +       (d + β)) ≤ 3osc(ψ)2 µβ (S).
                                                           β

Consequently we have

                                       2        L̃                             B
          Vµβ [ψ] ≤ (2CPI , LOCAL +      (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇ψ∥2 dµβ + 6(1 +         )µβ (S)osc(ψ)2 .
                                       β      g̃(lb )                        g̃(lb )

Recalling ψ is an arbitrary test function, this shows that µβ satisfies a WPI of the form

                              2        B                B                              B
            (2CPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         ), 6(1 +         )µβ (S)) for β ≥ 2(1 +         )(d + C ′′ ),   (37)
                              β      g̃(lb )          g̃(lb )                        g̃(lb )

where B is defined in (30) and C ′′ is defined in (34).                                                       ∎
Remark 33 Notice that in the region S where GF/GD do not work, one would generally expect ∥∇F (w)∥
and thus GF to be very small. Moreover, the dependence on F -dependent constants above can be optimized
in the above analysis; we made little effort to do so.
Remark 34 Note that the construction of Φ̃ is unnecessary if Φ is smooth, and in this case the expressions
simplify analogously to Remark 30. However, in this setting, we cannot assume S ⊆ B(w⋆ , R + 1).
Proof of Corollary 17. If we only have a (CWPI , LOCAL , δLOCAL )-WPI for µβ,LOCAL rather than Assumption 3.1,
we can proceed as follows to prove a WPI for µβ . Perform the exact same moves as in Subsection D.1 up
until establishing (24), including our choice of arbitrary test function ψ and f defined in terms of ψ, none of
which utilize Assumption 3.1. Follow the exact same notation as in that proof. These same exact steps again
give (24):

                      g̃(lb )        1              1                         g̃(lb )
          ∫ f
              2
                                dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + ∫ f 2 (d + C ′ )dµβ +                2
                                                                                       ∫ f dµβ .             (38)
                   g̃(lb ) + L̃      β              β                      g̃(lb ) + L̃ U

Now rather than utilizing a PI for µβ,LOCAL which we do not have, use the (CWPI , LOCAL , δLOCAL )-WPI for
µβ,LOCAL on the test function f to obtain

                       Vµβ,LOCAL (f ) ≤ CWPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ,LOCAL + δLOCAL osc(f )2 .

The left hand side above also equals
                                                      2      1               1             2
             ∫ f dµβ,LOCAL − (∫ f dµβ,LOCAL ) =                 ∫ f dµβ −        (        )
                2                                                  2
                                                                                  ∫ f dµβ    .
                                                          µβ (U) U        µβ (U)2 U

That is, we have

             1               1                2   CWPI , LOCAL
                ∫ f dµβ −          (         )  ≤              ∫ ∥∇f ∥ dµβ + δLOCAL osc(f ) .
                   2                                                  2                    2
                                    ∫  f dµβ
          µβ (U) U        µβ (U) 2   U             µβ (U)       U

Recalling the definition of f in terms of ψ, the above rearranges to

             ∫ f dµβ ≤ CWPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f ∥ dµβ + µβ (U) ⋅ δLOCAL osc(f )
                2                          2                              2
               U                           U
                                                                                                       2
                                                    1                1
                                             +         (∫ (ψ(w) −       ∫ ψ(w)dµβ )dµβ )
                                                 µβ (U) U         µβ (U) U

                                                          42
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




                           ≤ CWPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + δLOCAL osc(f )2 .

Applying this in (38), we obtain

                  g̃(lb )        1                 1
       ∫ f
           2
                            dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + ∫ f 2 (d + C ′ )dµβ
               g̃(lb ) + L̃      β                 β
                                                  g̃(lb )
                                             +              (CWPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + δLOCAL osc(f )2 ).
                                               g̃(lb ) + L̃

If β ≥ 2(1 + g̃(lL̃b ) )(d + C ′ ) = Ω(d), this gives

       g̃(lb )              1                 g̃(lb )
                   ∫ f dµβ ≤ ∫ ∥∇f ∥ dµβ +              (CWPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + δLOCAL osc(f )2 ).
                      2             2
   2(g̃(lb ) + L̃)          β              g̃(lb ) + L̃
Now, we rearrange above the inequality and convert back to ψ. Recalling the definition of variance and noting
∇f = ∇ψ, and noting ψ is just a constant shift of f and hence osc(ψ) = osc(f ), we obtain:

                  Vµβ [ψ] ≤ ∫ (ψ − α)2 dµβ

                           = ∫ f 2 dµβ
                                                 2        L̃
                           ≤ (2CWPI , LOCAL +      (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇f ∥2 dµβ + 2δLOCAL osc(f )2
                                                 β      g̃(lb )
                                                 2        L̃
                           = (2CWPI , LOCAL +      (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇ψ∥2 dµβ + 2δLOCAL osc(ψ)2 .
                                                 β      g̃(lb )

Recalling ψ is an arbitrary test function, this shows that µβ satisfies a WPI with constants

                                       2        L̃                                 L̃
                    (2CWPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         ), 2δLOCAL ) for β ≥ 2(1 +         )(d + C ′ ).              (39)
                                       β      g̃(lb )                            g̃(lb )

Again, L̃ comes from (19), C ′ comes from (22).
The extension to the setting of Theorem 15 follows the exact same steps, and shows that µβ satisfies a Weak
Poincaré Inequality of the form

                         2        B                B                                         B
      (2CWPI , LOCAL +     (1 +         ), 6(1 +         )µβ (S) + 2δLOCAL ) for β ≥ 2(1 +         )(d + C ′′ ),
                         β      g̃(lb )          g̃(lb )                                   g̃(lb )

where again B is defined in (30) and C ′′ is defined in (34).                                                       ∎

D.3. Proofs of Corollary 19, Corollary 20
Proof of Corollary 19. First, apply Theorem 12 to obtain

                                              CPI = O(CPI , LOCAL + 1/β).

    • Now, the first part on sampling via LMC under Assumption 3.3 follows directly as a corollary of
      Theorem 7 of Chewi et al. (2024) on sampling from targets satisfying a PI, which we apply with βL in
      place of L there as our potential in question is βF , and with Rényi divergence of order q = 1 (hence
      we obtain a result in KL) and LOI inequality of order α = 1. The implementation for the step size is

                                                           43
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




      exactly the same as in these theorems and the corresponding implementation in Chewi et al. (2024).
      In particular the step size h is given by 6.10 of Chewi et al. (2024); the only change is changing L
      to βL exactly as mentioned above, and applying the new bounds for initialization in this setting now
      from Lemma 43. We appeal to Lemma 43 to control the initialization, KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), and the Rényi
      Divergence of order 2, which is ln(χ2 (π0 ∣∣µβ ) + 1). This justifies that the explicit β, d dependence of
      the initialization is Õ(β) for β = Ω(d) up to log factors (see more discussion in Remark 44). Thus,
      as a direct corollary of Theorem 7 of Chewi et al. (2024), we see that LMC satisfies the following
      guarantee:

                                         ⎛                                       β s/2 ⎞
                                                                 1
                                                         1 1+ s  3    1
            KL(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε after T = Õ d(CPI , LOCAL + ) β 1+ s ε− s ⋅ max{1,      } iterations.
                                         ⎝               β                         d ⎠

      Applying Pinkser’s Inequality yields the desired.
                          s/2
      The term max{1, β d } warrants some discussion. It arises here in the maximum of Theorem 7, Chewi
      et al. (2024). The second term there does not dominate, and it seems reasonable that the third term
      there does not dominate, as we justify in Remark 44. However, now the fourth term in the maximum
      could dominate, and we argue in Lemma 43 that we can take it to be Õ(β). This gives the factor
                 s/2
      max{1, β d }.

      For more details on the implementation of γ here, here γ ≤ 768T    1
                                                                           h ≤ 1 as per Proposition 29, Chewi
      et al. (2024). Since γ ≤ 1, applying Lemma 43 gives the claimed bounds on the initialization. T is the
      iteration count reported above, and the step size h is given by 6.10 of Chewi et al. (2024), with the only
      explicit change of changing L to βL and using the new bounds on initialization.
    • The second part on sampling under the Proximal Sampler follows directly from Theorem 5.4, Altschuler
      and Chewi (2024), on sampling from targets satisfying a PI. The implementation for the step size is
      exactly the same as in these theorems and the corresponding implementation in Altschuler and Chewi
      (2024), where we take the smoothness constant in their result equal to βL, the smoothness constant of
      our potential βF . Here we can initialize π0 as in Corollary 19 for any γ ≤ 1, and simply use the first
      part of Lemma 43 to argue the initial divergence ln(χ2 (π0 ∣∣µβ )) is controlled by Õ(β + d) (again see
      more discussion in Remark 44).
This completes the proof.                                                                                    ∎
Note that the above is simply a corollary of our main results, and is not the focus of our work.
Remark 35 Notice we only used the PI from Theorem 12 above. Indeed, there is little gain in using the
LSI vs PI from Theorem 12 in the proof above. This is certainly not because is no gain in an LSI; rather,
it is because our LSI bound loses about a factor of βS for β = Ω(d), and so combining Theorem 12 with
pre-existing results on sampling under LSI does not give better results.
Proof of Corollary 20. We first show that Assumption A.1 implies the following assumption from Lytras
and Mertikopoulos (2024), allowing us to use their results:
Assumption D.1 (Assumption 1 from Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024)) Suppose F satisfies the follow-
ing properties, from Assumption 1, Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024):
    • Polynomial Lipschitz Continuity: for some s1 , L′1 > 0, we have for all w1 , w2 ∈ Rd ,

                            ∥∇F (w1 ) − ∇F (w2 )∥ ≤ L′1 (1 + ∥w1 ∥ + ∥w2 ∥)s1 ∥w1 − w2 ∥.

                                                      44
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




    • Weak Dissipativity: for some s2 ≥ 1, A2 , b2 > 0, we have for all w ∈ Rd ,

                                             ⟨∇F (w), w⟩ ≥ A2 ∥w∥s2 − b2 .

    • Polynomial Jacobian Growth: for some L3 , s3 > 0 and all k ≥ 2 for which the following is well-defined,
      we have for all w ∈ Rd ,

                                 max(∥∇F (w)∥, ∥∇k F (w)∥op ) ≤ L3 (1 + ∥w∥)2s3 .


To verify this, take k = 2 in Assumption A.1, and note for any w = tw1 + (1 − t)w2 for 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 that

                  ∥∇2 F (w)∥ ≤ L3 (1 + ∥tw1 + (1 − t)w2 ∥)2s3 ≤ L3 (1 + ∥w1 ∥ + ∥w2 ∥)2s3 .

Consequently as this holds for all w in the line segment w1 w2 , we obtain

                        ∥∇F (w1 ) − ∇F (w2 )∥ ≤ L3 (1 + ∥w1 ∥ + ∥w2 ∥)2s3 ∥w1 − w2 ∥,

and so from Assumption A.1, we have Assumption D.1 with L′1 = L3 , s1 = 2s3 .
Now to establish Corollary 20, we directly apply Theorems 2 and 3 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024).
These results show that their relevant algorithm can yield a distribution πT with KL(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε for large
enough T . In particular:
    • Theorem 2 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) shows that under Assumption D.1, if µβ satisfies a
      Log-Sobolev Inequality with constant CLSI , then via their algorithm wd-TULA we have

                                                    ⎛ poly(d, β)CLSI     ⎛ KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ) ⎞⎞
                   KL(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε within T = Õ                    log                   iterations.
                                                    ⎝       ε            ⎝     ε        ⎠⎠

    • Theorem 3 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) shows that under Assumption D.1, if µβ satisfies a
      Poincaré Inequality with constant CPI , then via their algorithm reg-TULA we can take

                                               ⎛                1      ⎛ KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) ⎞⎞
                 KL(πT ∣∣µβ ) ≤ ε within T = Õ poly(d, β, CPI , ) log                    iterations.
                                               ⎝                ε      ⎝     ε         ⎠⎠
                                                 2r+2
      Here, µ̂β corresponds to e−(βF (w)+η∥w∥ ) /Z, where r is taken large enough in terms of the exponents
      s1 , s2 , s3 from Assumption D.1. The degree of these polynomials also depends on s1 , s2 , s3 .
Note Assumption 1 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) is phrased in terms of the true potential βF rather
than F . Their results have polynomial d dependence, but to convert these results to our setting where
β = Ω(d), we need to track their proofs and find the explicit dependency on their parameters A, L, L′ , b,
which are scaled up by β for us.
We explicitly make this conversion here for the reader’s convenience: converting to their notation we have

                                 L′ = βL′1 = βL3 , A = βA2 , b = βb2 , L = βL3 .

The powers do not change: converting to their notation we still have l′ = s1 , a = s2 , l = s3 . For the rest of this
discussion, we follow the notation of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) so the reader can easily reference their
work.

                                                         45
                                                   C HEN S RIDHARAN




We find that this dependency is polynomial in their guarantees from Theorems 2 and 3. In particular, we
carefully track this for Ĉ from their Theorem 2 and their Ĉ, c9 from their Theorem 3, and see the dependencies
on these is polynomial with respect to d, A′ , K, L, L′ , b from their Assumption 1. By consequence the
dependence on β is also polynomial.19 However such dependence on problem-dependent A′ , K, L, L′ , b is
not made as explicit in Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), and so we explicitly track this here. For more
details:
    • Consider their Theorem 2. The convergence rate there is given in terms of CLSI , KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), and Ĉ. Ĉ
      bounds the discretization error, and through the proof of Lemma A.5, Ĉ is in turn given by a polynomial
      function of C1,p , Cp for integers p ≥ 0 from their Lemmas A.3 and A.4. These quantities control various
      moment bounds. In turn, these are all given in terms of the Cp from their Lemma A.3 and polynomial
      factors in A′ , L, L′ , d (recall A′ , L, L′ are β times our smoothness constants). Cp here is at most
      (ln Cµ )2p where Cµ is defined in their Lemma A.2 and controls the growth of particular exponential
      moments. Tracking the proof of Lemma A.2, we can see that Cµ ≤ exp{poly(A, L, L′ , b, d)}. Thus
      Cp ≤ poly(A, L, L′ , b, d), and so Ĉ ≤ poly(A, L, L′ , b, d).
    • Consider their Theorem 3. This is derived from their Theorem 7, where the convergence rate there is
      given in terms of Ĉ, which again controls discretization error, and c,9 which governs the Log-Sobolev
      constant of a particular regularized version of the potential βF . The regularization is in particular given
      by βF (w) + λ∥w∥2r+2 . Here λ denotes the step size and we can without loss of generality take λ ≤ 1.
                                                                                                                          reg
      First we consider Ĉ. Analyzing the proof of Theorem 7, we see that it is given by the sum of Ctam
             reg
      and Conestep from Lemmas C.2, C.3. In turn, these quantities are controlled exactly the same way by
      the moment bounds as in Lemmas A.5, and in turn Lemmas A.3 and A.4, except now we are dealing
      with the regularized potential βF + λ∥w∥2r+2 rather than the original potential βF (this is shown for
      example in their Lemma C.6). As noted in the article, we can prove analogous moment bounds the
      same way, with still dependence that is poly(A, L, L′ , b, d). This is because the proof of their Lemma
      A.6 shows the regularized potential still satisfies their Assumption 1 parts A1 and A2 and a result
      analogous to Lemma A.1, with smoothness parameters only a universal constant shift from A, L, L′ , b
      for regularization λ ≤ 1. These are all the conditions needed to prove Lemma A.2, which in turn give
      the desired bounds Lemma A.3 and A.4, for the regularized potential.
       Next we consider c.
                        9 The dependence of c9 on λ is given in Proposition 3.8, Lytras and Mertikopoulos
                                                                         1       s1
       (2024), which upon converting to our notation, is ( λ1 ) r+1 2r−s1 . We need r+1     + 2r−s
                                                                                                s1
                                                                                                     ≤ 1 to obtain
                                                                             +           1
                                                                                                   1
       a meaningful convergence rate, and indeed we can make r+1 + 2r−s1 ≤ 2 by taking r large enough
                                                                       1      s1     1

       in terms of s1 . The dependence of c9 on all other parameters is given from their equation C.8 in the
       proof of their Proposition A.4 (we note that the third term in that equation is a typo and should read,
       following their notation, AKregλ
                                         from using Theorem 3.15 of Menz and Schlichting (2014)). We can
       check that, by what we have argued on moment control in the above paragraph, all the other parameters
       Areg , Kλ , πreg (∥x∥2 ) and Poincaré constant of the Gibbs measure of the regularized potential all depend
       polynomially on A′ , L, L′ , b, d. Hence c9 depends polynomially on A′ , L, L′ , b, d.
      We conclude upon applying the same rationale as Theorem 7 and Corollary 4 of Lytras and Mertikopou-
      los (2024).
One additional point of consideration is these results contain dependence on initial divergences

                                               KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β ).

19. This is to be expected; in many results on discrete-time LMC, e.g. Chewi et al. (2024), dependence on smoothness constants
    (which are also scaled up by β here) are polynomial.


                                                             46
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




We argue that these both can be controlled by Õ(dβ) in Lemma 46, given appropriate initialization. As noted
on footnote 1 of page 7 of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024), or just by tracking their proof, we note that their
result holds for any initialization (at the expense of a different price for initialization KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β )).
Note since these initializations are polynomial in d, β, they do not affect the claimed rate or Corollary 20 (as
they appear in the logarithm, as per Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024)). Putting all this together, combining
with Points 1 and 2, and using Pinkser’s Inequality gives Corollary 20.                                               ∎
We emphasize that we just cite the result of Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024) and made no attempt to optimize
the polynomial dependency. The focus on our work is on proving isoperimetric inequalities. Moreover, while
the dependence indicated above is polynomial, again note the degree of the polynomials in question depends
on the exponents s1 , s2 , s3 from Assumption D.1.

D.4. Proofs of Subsection A.2
We first verify that µ̂β , µβ are indeed close in TV distance:
Lemma 36 Defining δ as in Corollary 22, we have TV(µ̂β , µβ ) ≤ 3δ.

Proof. Let I = ∫B(w,R−1) e−βF (w) dw. By construction of F̂ , we also have I = ∫B(w,R−1) e−β F̂ (w) dw.
Let I1 = ∫B(w,R−1)c e−βF (w) dw, I2 = ∫B(w,R−1)c e−β F̂ (w) dw. Note I2 ≤ I1 as F̂ ≥ F on B(w, R − 1)c .
Consequently, recalling the definition of δ, we have
                                     I      I                        I1     I2
                              1≥         ≥       ≥ 1 − δ, thus 0 ≤       ,       ≤ δ.
                                   I + I2 I + I1                   I + I1 I + I2
Now consider any subset A ⊆ Rd , and let A1 = A ∩ B(w, R − 1), A2 = A ∩ B(w, R − 1)c . Note F, F̂ agree
on A1 and so ∫A1 e−βF (w) dw = ∫A1 e−β F̂ (w) dw = xI for some x ∈ [0, 1]. Let Y1 = ∫A2 e−βF (w) dw, let
Y2 = ∫Ac e−β F̂ (w) dw, and note Y1 ≤ I1 , Y2 ≤ I2 . Thus we obtain
         2

                                                         xI       xI      Y1        Y2
                              ∣µ̂β (A) − µβ (A)∣ = ∣          −       +         −       ∣
                                                       I + I1 I + I2 I + I1 I + I2
                                                         xI       xI        Y1       Y2
                                                    ≤∣        −       ∣+∣        −        ∣
                                                       I + I1 I + I2      I + I1 I + I2
                                                           I        I        Y1       Y2
                                                    ≤ x∣        −      ∣+         +
                                                         I + I1 I + I2     I + I1 I + I2
                                                    ≤ δ + δ + δ = 3δ.

This applies for all A ⊂ Rd , and we conclude.                                                                        ∎
Proof of Proposition 21. Let U = B(W ⋆ , r(lb )) for any lb satisfying Assumption 3.1.
Part 1: Modifying the Interpolation Argument Recall for a suitable bump function χF ∈ [0, 1] which we
will define later, we defined
                           ⎧
                           ⎪F (w)                                 ∶ ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R − 1
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                 F̃ (w) ∶= ⎨F (w) + χF (w) ⋅ λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1) ∶ R − 1 < ∥w − w⋆ ∥ < R
                                                            2
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎪
                           ⎩F (w) + λREG (∥w − w ∥ + 1)
                                                 ⋆ 2
                                                                  ∶ R ≤ ∥w − w⋆ ∥,

where λREG = L.20 Also let
                                               Lb,1 =         inf       F (w).
                                                        R−1≤∥w−w⋆ ∥≤R

20. In fact, λREG can be any upper bound on L, which can be seen by tracking the following proof.


                                                              47
                                                     C HEN S RIDHARAN




By assumption that B(W ⋆ , r(lb )) ⊆ B(w⋆ , R − 1), we have Lb,1 ≥ lb .
We now show that we can perform the same interpolation steps as in the proof of Theorem 12 in Subsec-
tion D.1, Step 1, to create Φ̃, except using F̃ in place of F . From here, very similar steps as the proof of
Theorem 12 in Subsection D.1 prove that µ̂β ∝ exp(−β F̂ ) satisfies a PI. To this end, define the interpolators
as follows. First define
                           ⎧
                           ⎪                                      ⎫
                                                                  ⎪ 1 1
                           ⎪                                      ⎪
                      M = ⎨ sup Φ(w) + sup F (w)⎬ ∨ ( g(Lb,1 ) + 1).                                       (40)
                           ⎪
                           ⎪                                      ⎪
                                                                  ⎪  λ 4
                           ⎩w∈B(w ,R)            w∈B(w⋆ ,R)       ⎭
                                   ⋆



Now let χ(w) = p(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) be the interpolator from the proof in Subsection D.1, where
               −1/x2
p(x) = −1/x2e −1/(1−x2 ) . Recall the derivatives of p, and hence ∥∇χ(w)∥, ∥∇2 χ(w)∥op , are upper bounded
       e      +e
by B for a universal (F -independent) constant B, and that p is differentiable to all orders. As per Lemma 48,
we know p is increasing on [0, 1] as well. (We extend p to [0, 1] by p(0) = 0, p(1) = 1, which clearly
preserves all these properties.)
Let σΦ be a bijection from [0, 1] to itself such that p(σΦ (1/2)) = 1/2. Clearly we can choose σΦ to
be infinitely differentiable, increasing, and with first and second derivatives bounded by a universal, F -
independent constant. Now define define the interpolator χΦ for Φ by

                                pΦ = p ○ σΦ , χΦ (w) = pΦ (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)).

Consequently, χΦ (1/2) = 1/2, χΦ is increasing, and χΦ has gradient norm and Hessian operator norm
bounded by a universal constant BΦ .
Next let
                                                  g(Lb,1 )
                                  cF ∶=                          , tTHRES,F = 1/2.
                                           8λREG (R2 + 1)ρΦ (M )
Let σF be a bijection from [0, 1] to itself such that p(σΦ (1/2)) = cF . Clearly we can choose σF to be
infinitely differentiable, increasing, and with first and second derivatives bounded by a cF -dependent constant,
which in turn depends on F, Φ in turn. Let χ̃F be defined by

                                qF = p ○ σF , χ̃F (w) = qF (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)).

Hence qF is increasing and qF (1/2) = cF . Now define the interpolator χF for F by
                                                            ∥w−w⋆ ∥−(R−1)
                                         χF (w) = ∫                           qF (t)dt.                               (41)
                                                        0
                                                                     x
It follows that χF is increasing. Also define pF (x) = ∫0 qF (t)dt. Thus p′F = qF and p′F is increasing,
p′F (1/2) = cF , and that
                                   χF (w) = pF (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)).
Also, notice for ∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1) ≤ tTHRES,F ,
                       ∥w−w⋆ ∥−(R−1)
      χF (w) = ∫                       p′F (t)dt ≤            sup            p′F (t), thus pF (t) ≤ cF for t ≤ 1/2.   (42)
                   0                                 0≤t≤∥w−w⋆ ∥−(R−1)

It also follows by the above discussion that χF has gradient norm and Hessian operator norm bounded by an
F -dependent parameter BF .
Finally, let
                                                                         2
                                             Φ2 = cWGT ∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 2M

                                                               48
       O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




where cWGT is defined by

                                               g(Lb,1 )           2ρΦ (M )R
                           cWGT =                               ∨           .
                                    λREG (R − 1)((R − 1) + 1)cF
                                                        2          (R − 1)2

This defines how much we regularize by ∥w − w⋆ ∥2 to ensure this construction is successful. Notice Φ2 ≥ Φ
on B(w⋆ , R). In terms of Φ2 , define

                              Φ̃(w) ∶= χΦ (w)Φ2 (w) + (1 − χΦ (w))Φ(w).                              (43)

We first show:
Lemma 37 F̂ is smooth with smoothness constant O(1) (here O(⋅) hides problem-dependent parameters).
Proof. This is evident for ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R − 1, ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ R, where it is straightforward to verify that
∥∇2 F̃ ∥ ≤ 3L. Otherwise, we have
                                                          2
                    ∇F̃ = ∇F + ∇χF ⋅ λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1) + χF ⋅ 2λREG (w − w⋆ ),

and
                                                          2
                 ∇2 F̃ = ∇2 F + ∇2 χF ⋅ λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1) + ∇χF ⋅ 2λREG (w − w⋆ )T
                                        + ∇χF ⋅ 2λREG (w − w⋆ ) + 2λREG χF .

Recalling λREG = L, Triangle Inequality thus gives

                             ∥∇2 F̃ ∥ ≤ L + LBF (R2 + 1) + 4LBF R + 2LBF .

This proves this Lemma.                                                                                ∎
The benefit of regularizing is shown via the following Lemma.
Lemma 38 For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c , we have

                                     ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).

Proof of Lemma 38. For such w,

                  ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w)⟩ = ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w) + 2λREG (w − w⋆ )⟩
                                                                                     2
                                       = 2cWGT (⟨w − w⋆ , ∇F (w)⟩ + 2λREG ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ).

Thus we have
                                                      2                             2
       ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ 2cWGT (2λREG ∥w − w⋆ ∥ − L∥w − w⋆ ∥) ≥ L∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ g(F (w)),

where the last inequality follows from L-smoothness of F and that g(x) = λx for λ ≤ 1.                 ∎
From Lemma 38 and the definition of Φ2 (⋅), we directly obtain the following Corollary.
Corollary 39 For w with ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ∈ [R − 1, R], we have

                                          ⟨w − w⋆ , ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ 0.

                                                     49
                                              C HEN S RIDHARAN




Now we break into cases and show that Φ̃ is still a valid Lyapunov function, in an appropriate sense:
    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R − 1), as χΦ , χF ≡ 0 holds identically in this set, we have

                              ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≡ ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).


    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c , as χF , χΦ ≡ 1 identically in this set, we have by Lemma 38

                              ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ = ⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).


    • For w ∈ B(w⋆ , R − 1)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R), we have

            ∇Φ̃(w) = χΦ (w)∇Φ2 (w) + (1 − χΦ (w))∇Φ(w) + ∇χΦ (w)Φ2 (w) − ∇χΦ (w)Φ(w).

      First let Lb,1 denote the minimum value of F in B(w⋆ , R − 1)c ∩ B(w⋆ , R). Note Lb,1 ≥ lb by
      assumption that B(W ⋆ , r(lb )) ⊆ B(w⋆ , R − 1). This means

               ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ = (1 − χΦ (w))⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ + χΦ (w)⟨∇Φ2 (w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩
                                                    + (Φ2 (w) − Φ(w))⟨∇χΦ (w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩.                   (44)

      Note in this region,
                                                              2
          ∇F̃ (w) = ∇F (w) + ∇χF (w) ⋅ λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1) + χF (w) ⋅ 2λREG ∥w − w⋆ ∥(w − w⋆ ).

      Also recall that
                                                w − w⋆                                            w − w⋆
       ∇χΦ (w) = p′Φ (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1))               , ∇χ F (w) = p ′
                                                                          (∥w − w ⋆
                                                                                    ∥ − (R − 1))           .
                                               ∥w − w⋆ ∥                F
                                                                                                 ∥w − w⋆ ∥

      Define

                     A = ⟨∇Φ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)) ≥ 0,
                         p′F (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1))                2
                    B1 =                           λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1)⟨∇Φ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩,
                                 ∥w − w⋆ ∥
                    B2 = χF (w) ⋅ 2λREG ∥w − w⋆ ∥⟨∇Φ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩,
                                                2
                    C1 = cWGT λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1)⟨∇χF (w), w − w⋆ ⟩
                                                2
                         = cWGT λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥ + 1)∥w − w⋆ ∥p′F (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) ≥ 0,
                                        ∥w − w⋆ ∥2
                         = B1 cWGT                    ,                                                    (45)
                                     ⟨∇Φ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩
                                                          3
                    C2 = 2cWGT λREG χF (w)∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ 0
                                    ∥w − w⋆ ∥2
                         = B2 cWGT                 ,                                                       (46)
                                ⟨∇Φ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩
                    C3 = cWGT ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≥ 0.

      It is clear that C1 , C2 ≥ 0, and C3 ≥ 0 follows by Assumption A.2. In the above, A, C1 , C2 are favorable
      terms, and B1 , B2 are terms that could be negative that we must control.

                                                      50
 O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Recalling the definition of Φ2 , that for w ∈ B(w⋆ , R) we have Φ(w) ≤ M , and furthermore using
Corollary 39, we obtain from (44) that

      ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 )
                                              M p′Φ (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1))
                           + (cWGT χΦ (w) +                               )⟨∇F̃ (w), w − w⋆ ⟩
                                                          R
                           ≥ (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 ) + cWGT χΦ (w)⟨∇F̃ (w), w − w⋆ ⟩
                           = (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 ) + χΦ (w)(C1 + C2 + C3 ).

We aim to find a lower bound on the above. We break into cases:
  1. Suppose ∥w − w⋆ ∥ < R − 1 + tTHRES,F . In this case by Corollary 39, it remains to lower bound
     (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 ) by a positive constant. (This is where it becomes very useful to have
     independent interpolators χF , χΦ .)
     By construction of χΦ , for ∥w − w⋆ ∥ < R − 1 + tTHRES,F , recall we have

                                                                  1
                                  χΦ (w) = pΦ (w − w⋆ − (R − 1)) ≤ .
                                                                  2

     That is, we still ‘weight’ Φ substantially in the construction of Φ̃. Furthermore for such w, recall
     by (42) that

                                         F (w) ≥ g(Lb,1 ).
                       pF (∥w − w ∥ − (R − 1)) ≤ cF .
                        ′        ⋆

                       χF (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) = pF (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) ≤ cF .

     That is, we do not weight the regularizer much yet.
     Thus we obtain
                                                                             1
                   ∣B1 ∣ ≤ p′F (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) ⋅ λREG (R2 + 1)ρΦ (M ) ≤ g(Lb,1 ).
                                                                             4
                                                                         1
                   ∣B2 ∣ ≤ pF (∥w − w ∥ − (R − 1)) ⋅ 2λREG R ρΦ (M ) ≤ g(Lb,1 ).
                                      ⋆                       2
                                                                         4
     Consequently we have
                                1          1          1          1          1
        A + B1 + B2 ≥ g(F (w)) − g(Lb,1 ) ≥ g(F (w)) + g(Lb,1 ) − g(Lb,1 ) = g(F (w)).
                                2          2          2          2          2
     Recalling C1 , C2 , C3 ≥ 0, we obtain
                                                              1          1
              ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 ) ≥ g(F (w)) ≥ g(Lb,1 ).
                                                              4          4

  2. Suppose ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ R − 1 + tTHRES,F . In this case A + B1 + B2 < 0 is possible. The benefit
     however is that cWGT comes into play, and allows for C1 , C2 to dominate. The relations (45),
     (46) between B1 , C1 and B2 , C2 earlier, that w ∈ B(w⋆ , R) in this case, and the choice of cWGT
     together imply that
                                                          C1
                                       B2 + C2 ≥ 0, B1 +       ≥ 0.
                                                           2

                                               51
                                               C HEN S RIDHARAN




            Notice here by construction of χΦ that in this case, we have χΦ (w) ≥ 12 . Consequently, we have

                      ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ (1 − χΦ (w))(A + B1 + B2 ) + χΦ (w)(C1 + C2 + C3 )
                                          1             1
                                        ≥ (B1 + B2 ) + (C1 + C2 )
                                          2             2
                                          1      1     1     1
                                        ≥ C1 + C2 + B1 ≥ C1 .
                                          4      4     2     4
            By choice of cWGT , and since

                            p′F (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − (R − 1)) ≥ cF for ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ R − 1 + tTHRES,F ,

           we have for such w,
                                1     1                                   1
                                  C1 ≥ cWGT λREG ((R − 1)2 + 1)(R − 1)cF ≥ g(Lb,1 ).
                                4     4                                   4
           This last step follows by definition of cWGT .
      Thus in either case, we have
                                                               1
                                            ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(Lb,1 ).
                                                               4

Putting these cases together, we obtain:
   1. For F (w) ≥ M , then we must have w ∈ B(w⋆ , R)c and so

                                            ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).

   2. For F (w) ∈ [lb , M ), then as F is non-decreasing and as Lb,1 ≥ lb ,

                                                                1
                                             ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(lb ).
                                                                4

   3. For F (w) ≤ lb , we must have w ∈ B(w⋆ , R − 1) and so

                                            ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ g(F (w)).


We now construct a non-decreasing, infinitely differentiable function h̃ analogously to the definition of g̃
from Subsection D.1. Notice 14 g(Lb,1 ) ≤ g(M ) as Lb,1 ≤ M and as g is non-decreasing. Now for some small
constant 1 > δ > 0, we can interpolate to create h̃ as follows:

                                ⎧
                                ⎪ 8 g(x) = 8 λx                      ∶ x ≤ lb
                                  1        1
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪smooth interpolation to 41 g(lb )   ∶ lb < x < lb + δ
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪1
                        h̃(x) = ⎨ 4 g(lb )                           ∶ lb + δ ≤ x ≤ M .                 (47)
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪ smooth interpolation to λx         ∶M <x<M +δ
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎪
                                ⎩λx                                  ∶M +δ ≤x

These interpolators can be defined analogously as in the definition of g̃, from Subsection D.1, so that h̃ is
non-decreasing and differentiable, and so that h̃(x) ≤ λx = g(x) for x ∈ [M, M + δ] (because we took M

                                                      52
        O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




so that we have λx ≥ 14 g(Lb,1 ) + 1 ≥ 41 g(lb ) + 1 for x ≥ M ), and h̃(x) ≤ 18 g(lb ) ≤ 14 g(lb ) for x ∈ [˜l, ˜l + δ].
Moreover, note h̃(x) = λx for x ≥ M̃ + 1.
Noting h̃(x) ≥ 0, define
                                             m′NEW = λ, b′NEW = λ(M + 1)′ ,                                         (48)
where M is defined as per (40). Consequently we always have h̃(x) ≥ m′NEW x − b′NEW .
Therefore, for all w ∈ Rd we have

                                            ⟨∇Φ̃(w), ∇F̃ (w)⟩ ≥ h̃(F (w)).                                          (49)

We can also check now similarly to Part 1 of Subsection D.1 that

                 ∥∇2 Φ̃∥op ≤ L′ + BΦ (R2 cWGT + 4M ) + (cWGT + L′ ) ⋅ 1 + 2BΦ (L′ + RcWGT ),

where
                                              L′ =       sup        ρΦ (Φ(w)).                                      (50)
                                                     w∈B(w⋆ ,R)

Consequently, Φ̃ is again L̃-smooth, where we now define

             L̃ ∶= (L′ + BΦ (R2 cWGT + 4M ) + (cWGT + L′ ) ⋅ 1 + 2BΦ (L′ + RcWGT )) ∨ 2b′NEW ∨ 1.                   (51)

Part 2: Proving a PI with the same idea as before. From here, the finish is analogous to the proof of
Theorem 12. We omit straightforward details that are checked verbatim as there. Because of (49), letting
h(x) = h̃(x) + B where B = L̃, Lemma 27 gives for any test function f :

               h̃(F (w))              1               f (w)2         2   f (w)2
 ∫ f (w)
         2
                              dµβ ≤     ∫ (∥∇f (w)∥ +
                                                   2
                                                             ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥  −        ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩)dµβ
             h̃(F (w)) + L̃           β               h(w)2              h(w)2
                                                             1           ∣∆Φ̃(w)∣
                                                         +     ∫ f (w)
                                                                       2
                                                                                  dµβ .                             (52)
                                                             β             h(w)

Step a: Upper bounding intermediate terms. Using L̃-smoothness of Φ̃, and that h̃(x) ≥ m′NEW x − b′NEW ,
L̃/2 ≥ b′NEW , F (w) ≥ r2 ∥w − w⋆ ∥, we obtain analogously to Step a in Subsection D.1 that
                                                     2
                                       ∥∇Φ̃(w)∥ − ⟨∇h(w), ∇Φ̃(w)⟩
                                                                                  ≤ C ′,
                                                         h(w)2
where now
                                            8(R2 + 8M r1 )              2L̃           64M
                                   C ′ ∶=                       ∨                 ∨       .,                        (53)
                                                 r1 L̃              r1 r22 m′2
                                                                            NEW        L̃
where L̃ is defined in (51), m′NEW = λ, and M is defined in (40).
Step b: Finishing the proof of PI identically to before.              Consider an arbitrary test function ψ and define f
in terms of ψ identically as in Subsection D.1, (20).
Now using C ′ to upper bound the right hand side of (52), we obtain

                            h̃(F (w))                1                 1
              ∫ f (w)                       dµβ ≤      ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ f (w) (d + C )dµβ .
                      2                                          2             2      ′
                          h̃(F (w)) + L̃             β                 β

                                                               53
                                                       C HEN S RIDHARAN




The only difference is the h̃ rather than g̃ in the left hand side, and that now C ′ is defined in (53), rather than
(22).
Now recalling that h̃ is non-decreasing, we obtain from the above that

               h̃(lb )              1                 1                         h̃(lb )
 ∫ f (w)                    dµβ ≤     ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ f (w) (d + C )dµβ +             ∫ f (w) dµβ .
         2                                      2             2      ′                          2
             h̃(lb ) + L̃           β                 β                      h̃(lb ) + L̃ U

An analogous manipulation using Assumption 3.1 to upper bound ∫U f (w)2 dµβ , using the choice of α, now
proves

                                    h̃(lb )           1                 1
                 ∫ f (w)                      dµβ ≤     ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥ dµβ + ∫ f (w) (d + C )dµβ
                         2                                        2             2      ′
                               h̃(lb ) + L̃           β                 β
                                                        h̃(lb )
                                                 +                   ⋅ CPI , LOCAL ∫ ∥∇f (w)∥2 dµβ .
                                                      h̃(lb ) + L̃

If β ≥ 2(1 + h̃(lL̃ ) )(d + C ′ ) = Ω(d), where h̃ is as per (47), C ′ is as per (53), L̃ is as per (51), we obtain
                 b


                                                                  2        L̃
                              Vµβ [ψ] ≤ (2CPI , LOCAL +             (1 +         )) ∫ ∥∇ψ∥2 dµβ .
                                                                  β      h̃(lb )

Recalling ψ is an arbitrary test function, this gives the desired Poincaré Inequality. We furthermore verified
that F̂ is O(1)-smooth in Lemma 37, so this finishes the proof.                                             ∎
Remark 40 Note if we instead have an upper bound of the form ∥∇F (w)∥ ≤ L(∥w − w⋆ ∥s + 1) rather
than smoothness, one can instead add regularization in the form λREG (∥w − w⋆ ∥s+1 + 1). To capture other
forms of g(⋅), one can perform similar ideas of lower bounding g(x) by a g̃(x) that grows linearly for large
enough x, as done in Subsection D.1. One can also tighten the PI to an LSI as in Subsection D.1. These
details follow the exact same argument as in Subsection D.1 and are straightforward to verify.
Remark 41 Notice to construct ∇F , all the problem-dependent parameters used in the construction can be
computed with oracle access to F , knowledge of w⋆ , R, except for ρΦ (M ) (to define cF ) and L (to define
λREG ). However, for ρΦ (M ), L, it suffices to use a upper bound on them, as can be seen through the above
proof. Consequently we can construct a suitable F̂ via appropriate cross-validation on these parameters.

Appendix E. Technical Helper Results
Lemma 42 (Lemma 2.1, Srebro et al. (2010)) If some G is non-negative and L-smooth, then
                                                √
                                    ∥∇G(w)∥ ≤ 4LG(w).

Lemma 43 Suppose F is L-Hölder continuous with parameter s ∈ (0, 1]. Let M = ∫ ∥⋅∥dµβ . Ad-
ditionally define F̂ (w) = F (w) + 2β   γ
                                          max(0, ∥w∥ − R)2 for γ > 0, µ̂β = e−β F̂ /Z. With initialization
         ⃗
π0 ∼ N (0,    1
                  Id ), we have the following:
            2βL+γ


                                                               ⃗ +2+                 d
                ln(χ2 (π0 ∣∣µβ ) + 1), KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ) ≤ βL + βF (0)                      ln(4M 2 (βL + γ/2)),
                                                                                     2

                                                                 ⃗ + 2 + d ln(4M̂ 2 (βL + γ/2)).
                ln(χ2 (π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) + 1), KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) ≤ βL + βF (0)
                                                                         2

                                                                     54
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




Proof. Since Rényi divergence (for the definition, see e.g. Chewi (2024)) is increasing in its order, and as
KL divergence is Rényi divergence of order 1 and ln(χ2 + 1) is Rényi divergence of order 2, it suffices to
show these upper bounds for the Rényi divergence of order ∞, R∞ (⋅∣∣⋅). This is the supremum of the log
ratio of the probability density functions. Now the proof follows by exactly the same argument as the proof
of Lemmas 31 and 32 from Chewi et al. (2024). We highlight it here by proving the second upper bound. Let
V = βF , V̂ = β F̂ . Then we can compare the ratio of their unnormalized densities:
                    γ                                   ⃗ − (βL + γ )∥w∥2 )
                                                ⃗ + V̂ (0)
  exp(V̂ (w) − (Lβ + )∥w∥2 ) ≤ exp(V̂ (w) − V̂ (0)
                    2                                             2
                                                 γ                         ⃗ − (Lβ + γ )∥w∥2 )
                             ≤ exp(βL∥w∥ + max{0, ∥w∥ − R}2 + βF (0)
                                          s+1
                                                 2                                   2
                                              ⃗
                             ≤ exp(βL + βF (0)).

                                                                                    ⃗ = β(F (w) − F (0))
Here we used the inequality xs+1 ≤ x2 + 1 for all x ≥ 0 (as s ≤ 1) and V̂ (w) − V̂ (0)               ⃗ +

2 max{0, ∥w∥ − R} ≤ βL∥w∥         + 2 max{0, ∥w∥ − R} .
γ                  2          s+1   γ                     2


Now analogously to the proof of Lemma 31 of Chewi et al. (2024), we compare the partition functions,
arguing through the intermediate quantity ∫ exp(−V̂ (w) − δ∥w∥2 )dw:

      ∫ exp(−V̂ (w) − δ∥w∥ )dw 1                ∫ exp(−V̂ (w) − δ∥w∥ )dw
                                  2                                                          2                         d/2
                                                                            βL + γ/2
                              ≥ exp(−4δ M̂ 2 ),                          ≤(          )                                       .
          ∫ exp(−V̂ (w))dw     2                                d/2            δ
                                                       ( π )                 βL+γ/2

Taking δ =     1
                   and rearranging the above gives
             4M̂ 2

                                                       ⃗ +2+           d
                             R∞ (π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) ≤ βL + βF (0)                ln(4M̂ 2 (βL + γ/2)).
                                                                       2
For the first upper bound, we do the same steps with V in place of V̂ . The first upper bound still holds, and
the second two inequalities comparing the partition functions still hold, except M̂ is replaced by M instead.
Taking δ = 4M  1
                 2 , we obtain the first inequality.                                                        ∎

Remark 44 For an upper bound on M and M̂ , note if F is L-smooth and dissipative, that is ⟨w, ∇F (w)⟩ ≥
m∥w∥2 − b for m, b > 0, then following the notation from Theorem 12, Cauchy-Schwartz gives that
                                                             b + d/β
                                                M2 ≤ S ≤             = O(1).
                                                                m
The bound on S follows from Raginsky et al. (2017). If F is dissipative with parameters m, b it is easy to
check F̂ is also dissipative with the same parameters, so we also have the same upper bound on M̂ . Notice
also for F = ∥w∥α and β = Ω(d) that M = O(1). Therefore, we believe it is reasonable to suppose the right
hand side of the above two lines is Õ(β) for β = Ω(d).21
Remark 45 As will be clear in the following proof, it is also possible to replace each instance of w with
w − w⋆ for a fixed w⋆ ∈ W ⋆ , if we know such a w⋆ . Our initialization then changes to Gaussian initialization
centered at w⋆ . This can be done to give somewhat better bounds, but we do not pursue it for simplicity.
                                                                                                    ′
Lemma 46 Suppose F satisfies Assumption D.1. Taking π0 (w) ∝ exp(−2∥w∥2s3 ) where s′3 = max(s3 +
2 , r + 1), we have
1

                                           KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ), KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) ≤ Õ(dβ).
21. Since we are in the low temperature setting corresponding to optimization, the norm is a β factor smaller than in the standard
    sampling setting.


                                                               55
                                                          C HEN S RIDHARAN




Here µ̂β comes from Theorem 3, Lytras and Mertikopoulos (2024); it is defined explicitly in our proof of
Theorem 12.
Proof. First notice by Assumption D.1, we can check that for some L1 , L2 > 0, we have F (w) ≤
                                                             ′
L1 ∥w∥2s3 +1 + L2 . Thus F (w), F (w) + βη ∥w∥2r+2 ≤ L1 ∥w∥2s3 + L2 where s′3 = max(s3 + 12 , r + 1). Now
we adopt the proof of Lemma 5, Raginsky et al. (2017). Analogously to how C.11 was derived there, we have

                             KL(π0 ∣∣µβ ) ≤ log∥π0 ∥∞ + log Λ + β ∫               π0 (w)F (w)dw,                                   (54)
                                                                             Rd

where Λ denotes the partition function of µβ . We upper bound each part of the above sum:
    • The partition function: By the second part of Assumption 3.2, we have

                                      Λ=∫             e−βF (w) dw
                                                Rd

                                        ≤ eβ supw∈B(w⋆ ,R) F (w) ∫
                                                                                          ⋆
                                                                                e−βr2 ∥w−w ∥ dw
                                                                          Rd
                                                                            d/2
                                                                  2π
                                        = eβ supw∈B(w⋆ ,R) F (w)         (βr2 )−d Γ(d)
                                                                Γ(d/2)
                                                                             √
                                           β supw∈B(w⋆ ,R) F (w) 4π
                                                                     d/2
                                                                         ⋅ dd π
                                        ≤e                      ⋅               .
                                                                     (βr2 )d
      Here Γ(⋅) denotes the Gamma function. We evaluated the integral by Lemma 8.5 of Chen et al. (2024),
      and used straightforward properties of Γ(⋅) in the above.
                                                                 ′
    • The ∞ norm: Since π0 (w) ∝ exp(−2∥w∥2s3 ), it follows that its normalizing constant is

                                                ′               2π d/2   1 − d−2′   d                     π d/2
                 Z=∫          exp(−2∥w∥2s3 )dw =                       ⋅ ′ 2 2s3 Γ( ′ ) ≥                                d−2
                                                                                                                               .
                         Rd                                    Γ(d/2) 2s3          2s3                                     ′
                                                                                                  2π 1/2 s′3 dd/2 2 2s3
      The computation of this integral follows from analogous steps as in Lemmas 5.1 and 8.5, Chen et al.
      (2024) (there the result is stated for a particular range on s′3 , but this is not needed). It follows that for
      all w ∈ Rd ,
                                                                                                           2s′3
                                                                                          d     d2
                        log π0 = −2∥w∥    2s
                                                    − log Z ≤ − log Z ≤ log(2s′3 π 1/2 ) + log(                     ).
                                                                                              2           π

                                                           ′
    • The last term: Since F (w) ≤ L1 ∥w∥2s3 + L2 ,
                                                                                                        2s′3
                  ∫ d π0 (w)F (w)dw ≤ ∫ d π0 (w)F (w)dw ≤ L1 ∫ d π0 (w)∥w∥                                     dw + L2 .
                    R                                 R                               R

      By Jensen’s Inequality, we have
                                         2s′3                               ′                                   ′
                        ∫ d π0 (w)∥w∥           = Eπ0 [log exp{∥w∥2s3 }] ≤ log Eπ0 [exp{∥w∥2s3 }].
                         R

      Let Z denote the normalizing constant of π0 , as in the above. Note by choice of π0 ,
                                                       ′        1          2s′
                                Eπ0 [exp(∥w∥2s3 )] =              ∫ exp(∥w∥ 3 − 2∥w∥ 3 )dw
                                                                                    2s′
                                                                Z
                                                                1
                                                               = ∫ exp(−∥w∥2s3 )dw
                                                                               ′

                                                                Z

                                                                     56
           O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




                                                           2π d/2
                                                           Γ(d/2) ⋅ 2s′3 Γ( 2s′3 )
                                                                     1       d
                                                                                              ln 2⋅ d−2
                                                    =                   d−2
                                                                                         =e         2s′
                                                                                                     3    .
                                                        2π d/2    1 − 2s′3
                                                        Γ(d/2) ⋅ 2s′3 2    Γ( 2sd′ )
                                                                                 3


      Here, we evaluated the above integral analogously to how we computed Z. Putting all this together
      yields
                                                              d−2
                                   ∫ d π0 (w)F (w)dw ≤ L1 ⋅ ′ + L2 .
                                     R                         s3

Putting all these steps together yields

      KL(π0 ∣∣µβ )
      ≤ log∥π0 ∥∞ + log Λ + β ∫       π0 (w)F (w)dw
                                   Rd
                                                                                     1   1
                          d     d2  2s′3                      ⎛ 4π 2 + 2d d ⎞         d−2
      ≤ log(2s′3 π 1/2 ) + log(       ) + β sup F (w) + d log                 + β(L1 ⋅ ′ + L2 )
                           2        π      w∈B(w⋆ ,R)         ⎝ βr2 ⎠                  s3
      = Õ(dβ).

The calculation for KL(π0 ∣∣µ̂β ) follows from an analogous argument, using (54). We just replace F (w) by
F (w) + βη ∥w∥2r+2 , and thanks to the definition of s′3 , all the bounds above go through.             ∎

Lemma 47 We can construct a χ(w) ∈ [0, 1] such that:
    • χ ≡ 0 on B(w⋆ , R) and χ ≡ 1 on B(w⋆ , R + 1)c .
    • χ(w) is differentiable to all orders.
    • ∥∇χ(w)∥, ∥∇2 χ(w)∥op ≤ B for some universal constant B > 0.

    • ⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ 0.
Proof. The construction is to let
                             ⎧
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪0 ∶ ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪1 ∶ ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ R + 1
                      χ(w) = ⎨
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                                          −      1
                                                        2
                             ⎪
                                                  ⋆
                             ⎪
                             ⎪
                                        e (∥w−w ∥−R)
                                                                    ∶ R < ∥w − w⋆ ∥ < R + 1.
                             ⎪
                             ⎩e
                               −
                                 (∥w−w
                                      1
                                       ⋆ ∥−R)2
                                               +e
                                                 −        1
                                                    1−(∥w−w ⋆ ∥−R)2



Clearly χ ∈ [0, 1] and also the first property is satisfied. The second property is satisfied because χ̃(x) =
     − 1                                                                                                      1
    e x2
 − 1    − 1
               is infinitely differentiable on (0, 1), and χ̃(0) = 0, χ̃(1) = 1. In particular, on (0, 1), e− x2 and
e x2 +e 1−x2
     1
 −
e  1−x2 are both infinitely differentiable, which can be verified by a straightforward induction argument, and
their sum is lower bounded by a constant [0, 1]. Therefore, the quotient χ̃(x) is infinitely differentiable.
Therefore, χ̃ interpolates between 0 and 1 on (0, 1) in an infinitely differentiable way. Because R > 0, the
composition of χ̃ and ∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R is infinitely differentiable, as both these maps are.
For the next two properties, we directly do the calculation. They are both obvious when ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≤ R or
∥w − w⋆ ∥ ≥ R + 1, so we check these two properties when R < ∥w − w⋆ ∥ < R + 1. We first prove the last
property. We do so using the intuitive geometric approach of comparing the angle that ∇χ(w) and ∇F (w)
make with w − w⋆ , and showing the sum of their angles is at most π2 .

                                                          57
                                                                   C HEN S RIDHARAN




First, by Assumption 3.2, we have for R + 1 > ∥w − w⋆ ∥ > R that

                                        ⟨w − w⋆ , ∇F (w)⟩    r1 F (w)
                                                          ≥               ≥ 0.
                                       ∥w − w ∥∥∇F (w)∥ ∥w − w⋆ ∥∥∇F (w)∥
                                              ⋆


This means
                                                                                                      π
                                                 θ⟨∇F (w), w − w⋆ ⟩ ≤ cos−1 (0) =                       .                         (55)
                                                                                                      2
Notice ∇(∥w − w⋆ ∥) = ∥w−w
                       w−w             ⋆
                           ⋆ ∥ . Thus, by Chain Rule, cwe have



 ∇χ(w)
                1
      e (∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 ⋅ (∥w−w2⋆ ∥−R)3 ⋅ ∥w−w
       −                                w−w              ⋆
                                            ⋆∥
  =                 1                      1
           e (∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 + e 1−(∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2
            −                  −
                1                  1                                                              1
                                                                                                              −2(∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)
      e (∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 (e (∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 ⋅ (∥w−w2⋆ ∥−R)3 ⋅ ∥w−w ⋆∥ + e
                                                                   1−(∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 ⋅                   ⋅ w−w )
       −                   −                            w−w                     ⋆         −                                   ⋆
                                                                                    (1−(∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2 )2 ∥w−w⋆ ∥
  +                                                               1                        1              2
                                                                                                                                   .
                                                    (e                      +e                        )
                                                        −                        −
                                                             (∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2            1−(∥w−w⋆ ∥−R)2



Thus,
                                                                                               w − w⋆
                                               ∇χ(w) = p̃(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) ⋅                              ,
                                                                                              ∥w − w⋆ ∥
where                                                                       1         1               1
                                                                        e− x2 (e− x2 ⋅ x23 + e− 1−x2 ⋅ (1−x 2 )2 )
                                                    1
                                                e− x2 ⋅ x23
                                                                                                         −2x
                               p̃(x) =          1              1    +                     1           1
                                           e− x2 + e− 1−x2                           (e− x2 + e− 1−x2 )2
is just a scalar. In Lemma 48, we prove p̃(x) ≥ 0 for all x ∈ [0, 1], therefore

                                                    p̃(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R)          2
                        ⟨∇χ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩ =                            ∥w − w⋆ ∥ = ∥∇χ(w)∥∥w − w⋆ ∥.
                                                        ∥w − w⋆ ∥

Thus, the vectors ∇χ(w), w − w⋆ are collinear and point in the same direction:

                                                             θ⟨∇χ(w), w − w⋆ ⟩ = 0.                                               (56)

Combining (56) and (55), it is clear that θ⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≤ π2 , hence ⟨∇χ(w), ∇F (w)⟩ ≥ 0.
For the third property, we clearly only need to check it when ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ∈ [R, R + 1]. The above calculation
verifies it directly for the gradient Euclidean norm, as it shows that

                                           ∥∇χ(w)∥ = p̃(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) ≤ sup p̃(t).
                                                                                               t∈(0,1)

We conclude this part for the gradient, noting p̃ is a univariate function with no explicit d dependence, which
can be extended to be bounded and differentiable to all orders on [0, 1] (because limt→0 e−1/t t1p = 0 for all
p < ∞, and similarly for the limits to 1). For the Hessian operator norm, applying Chain Rule to the above
shows
                                                                1
           ∇2 χ(w) = p̃′ (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) ⋅                               (w − w⋆ )(w − w⋆ )T
                                                        ∥w − w⋆ ∥2
                                                                                   1
                                            + p̃(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) ⋅                         Id
                                                                                ∥w − w⋆ ∥

                                                                            58
         O PTIMIZATION , I SOPERIMETRIC I NEQUALITIES , AND S AMPLING VIA LYAPUNOV P OTENTIALS




                                                                                          1                1
                                     − p̃(∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) ⋅                                          ⋅             (w − w⋆ )(w − w⋆ )T .
                                                                              ∥w − w ∥        ⋆ 2       ∥w − w⋆ ∥

The same rationale as before justifies that p̃′ (⋅) is a univariate function with no explicit d dependence, which
can be extended to be bounded and differentiable to all orders on [0, 1]. Recalling ∥w − w⋆ ∥ ∈ (R, R + 1), it
follows that p̃′ (∥w − w⋆ ∥ − R) is upper bounded by universal constant supt∈(0,1) p̃′ (t) < ∞. Using the fact
that
                                                                               2
                                   ∥(w − w⋆ )(w − w⋆ )T ∥op ≤ ∥w − w⋆ ∥
when R + 1 > ∥w − w⋆ ∥ > R, we obtain

                                                  ∥w − w⋆ ∥2                                            1               ∥w − w⋆ ∥2
              ∥∇2 χ(w)∥op ≤ sup p̃′ (t) ⋅                                  + sup p̃(t) ⋅                  + sup p̃(t) ⋅
                              t∈(0,1)             ∥w − w⋆ ∥              2
                                                                              t∈(0,1)                   R t∈(0,1)       ∥w − w⋆ ∥3
                            ≤ sup p̃ (t) + 2 sup p̃(t).
                                         ′
                              t∈(0,1)                     t∈(0,1)

The last step follows as we have R ≥ 1 without loss of generality. The proof is complete.                                                 ∎
Lemma 48 For x ∈ [0, 1], we have
                                                                     1            1                     1
                                                               e− x2 (e− x2 ⋅ x23 + e− 1−x2 ⋅ (1−x 2 )2 )
                                         1
                                    e− x2 ⋅ x23
                                                                                                −2x
                        p̃(x) =      1            1        +                              1             1            ≥ 0.
                                  e− x2 + e− 1−x2                                 (e− x2 + e− 1−x2 )2

Proof. Simplifying, it is enough to show that
                           2 − 12          1          1   2        1       −2x
                               (e x + e− 1−x2 ) + e− x2 ⋅ 3 + e− 1−x2 ⋅            ≥ 0.
                           x 3                           x              (1 − x2 )2
         √
If x ≤   2 , that is x ≤ 2 , then notice x3 ≥ (1−x2 )2 , which proves the above. Thus from now on suppose
          2           2  1               1       x
    √
x ≥ 22 . Rewrite the above desired inequality as
                                         1         1        1          x           1
                                             (2e− x2 + e− 1−x2 ) −            e− 1−x2 ≥ 0
                                         x 3                       (1 − x )
                                                                         2  2
                                                                     1                1                     1
                                  ⇐⇒ (1 − x2 )2 (2e− x2 + e− 1−x2 ) ≥ x4 e− 1−x2
                                                                 1                                  1
                                  ⇐⇒ 2(1 − x2 )2 e− x2 ≥ (2x2 − 1)e− 1−x2
                                             1        1         2x2 − 1
                                  ⇐⇒ e 1−x2 − x2 ≥                         .
                                                               2(1 − x2 )2

           2 − x2 ≥ 0 since 2x ≥ 1, thus by series expansion, it suffices to show
         1     1              2
Notice 1−x

                           1    1 1    1    1 2 1      1    1 3    2x2 − 1
                   1+         −  +  (     −   ) +  (      −   ) ≥             .
                        1 − x2 x2 2 1 − x2 x2     6 1 − x2 x2     2(1 − x2 )2
Explicitly expanding the above, because 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, this is equivalent to the inequality
              3               2                                          3                          2
6x6 (1 − x2 ) +6x4 (1 − x2 ) (2x2 − 1)+(2x2 − 1) +3 (2x2 − 1) x2 (1 − x2 )−3x6 (1 − x2 ) (2x2 − 1) ≥ 0
          √
for x ∈ [ 22 , 1]. Replacing x2 by x, the left hand side of the above expands to

                             h(x) = −6x6 + 36x5 − 69x4 + 65x3 − 33x2 + 9x − 1.

                                                                             59
                                                C HEN S RIDHARAN




We want to show h(x) ≥ 0 for x ∈ [ 12 , 1]. This can be directly checked by computer, but we also give a proof
by hand. Noting h( 12 ), h′ ( 21 ), h′′ ( 12 ) ≥ 0, it is enough to show h′′′ (x) ≥ 0 on [ 21 , 1], or equivalently

                                                                            1
                              h3 (x) ∶= −120x3 + 360x2 − 276x + 65 ≥ 0∀x ∈ [ , 1].
                                                                            2
However differentiating
                √       and applying the quadratic formula, we can check h3 (x) attains a minimum value on
[ 12 , 1] at x = 1 −   30 ≈ 0.517, and that this minimum value is strictly positive. This completes the proof. ∎
                       7




                                                         60
