The Singular Optimality of Distributed
Computation in LOCAL
Fabien Dufoulon #
Lancaster University, UK

Gopal Pandurangan #
University of Houston, TX, USA

Peter Robinson #
Augusta University, GA, USA

Michele Scquizzato #
University of Padova, Italy

       Abstract
It has been shown that one can design distributed algorithms that are (nearly) singularly optimal,
meaning they simultaneously achieve optimal time and message complexity (within polylogarithmic
factors), for several fundamental global problems such as broadcast, leader election, and spanning
tree construction, under the KT0 assumption. With this assumption, nodes have initial knowledge
only of themselves, not their neighbors. In this case the time and message lower bounds are Ω(D)
and Ω(m), respectively, where D is the diameter of the network and m is the number of edges, and
there exist (even) deterministic algorithms that simultaneously match these bounds.
    On the other hand, under the KT1 assumption, whereby each node has initial knowledge of
itself and the identifiers of its neighbors, the situation is not clear. For the KT1 CONGEST model
(where messages are of small size), King, Kutten, and Thorup (KKT) showed that one can solve
several fundamental global problems (with the notable exception of BFS tree construction) such as
broadcast, leader election, and spanning tree construction with Õ(n) message complexity (n is the
network size), which can be significantly smaller than m. Randomization is crucial in obtaining this
result. While the message complexity of the KKT result is near-optimal, its time complexity is Õ(n)
rounds, which is far from the standard lower bound of Ω(D). An important open question is whether
one can achieve singular optimality for the above problems in the KT1 CONGEST model, i.e.,
whether there exists an algorithm running in Õ(D) rounds and Õ(n) messages. Another important
and related question is whether the fundamental BFS tree construction can be solved with Õ(n)
messages (regardless of the number of rounds as long as it is polynomial in n) in KT1 .
    In this paper, we show that in the KT1 LOCAL model (where message sizes are not restricted),
singular optimality is achievable. Our main result is that all global problems, including BFS tree
construction, can be solved in Õ(D) rounds and Õ(n) messages, where both bounds are optimal up
to polylogarithmic factors. Moreover, we show that this can be achieved deterministically.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Distributed algorithms; Mathematics
of computing → Probabilistic algorithms; Mathematics of computing → Discrete mathematics

Keywords and phrases Distributed algorithms, round and message complexity, BFS tree construction,
leader election

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.OPODIS.2024.26

Funding Fabien Dufoulon: Part of this work was done while visiting the University of Padova,
partially supported by the “National Group for Scientific Computing” (GNCS-INdAM).
Gopal Pandurangan: Supported in part by ARO Grant W911NF-231-0191 and NSF grant CCF-
2402837.
Peter Robinson: Supported in part by National Science Foundation (NSF) grant CCF-2402836.
Michele Scquizzato: Supported in part by the Italian National Center for HPC, Big Data, and
Quantum Computing.
             © Fabien Dufoulon, Gopal Pandurangan, Peter Robinson, and Michele Scquizzato;
             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
28th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2024).
Editors: Silvia Bonomi, Letterio Galletta, Etienne Rivière, and Valerio Schiavoni; Article No. 26; pp. 26:1–26:17
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
26:2   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


           1   Introduction and Overview
       The efficiency of distributed algorithms is traditionally measured by their time and message
       complexities. The time complexity is the number of rounds in the algorithm, whereas the
       message complexity is the total amount of messages sent during its execution. Distributed
       algorithms that separately optimize for either the number of rounds or the total amount of
       messages have been studied extensively; more recently, researchers have designed several
       algorithms that are simultaneously (near) optimal with respect to both measures: such
       algorithms are called singularly optimal [39], and are the focus of this paper.

       Singular Optimality in KT0 . In the KT0 model (i.e., Knowledge Till radius 0), also called
       the clean network model [41], where nodes have initial local knowledge of only themselves
       (and not of their neighbors), it has been established that one can obtain (near) singularly
       optimal distributed algorithms, i.e., algorithms that have simultaneously optimal time and
       message complexity up to polylogarithmic factors, for many fundamental global problems1
       such as leader election, broadcast, Spanning Tree (ST), Minimum Spanning Tree (MST),
       minimum cut, and approximate shortest paths (under some conditions) [34, 40, 17, 26].
       For problems such as leader election, broadcast, and ST, it has been shown that one can
       design a singularly optimal algorithm in the KT0 model that takes Õ(m) messages (m is
       the number of edges of the network, and Õ(·) suppresses logarithmic factors) and O(D)
       rounds (D is the network diameter); both are tight (up to a polylog(n) factor where n is the
       number of nodes) due to matching lower bounds that hold even for Monte Carlo randomized
       algorithms [34]. In addition, MST also admits a singularly optimal algorithm [40, 17] with
                                                                 √
       message complexity Õ(m) and round complexity Õ(D + n) (both bounds are tight up to
       polylogarithmic factors). The singular optimality of MST in the KT0 model also implies the
       singular optimality of many other problems, such as approximate minimum cut and graph
       verification problems [12].

       KT1 Model and the KKT Result. On the other hand, in the KT1 model (i.e., Knowledge
       Till radius 1), in which each node has initial knowledge of itself and the identifiers2 of its
       neighbors, singular optimality of all the above fundamental problems is wide open. The KT1
       model arises naturally in many settings, e.g., in networks where nodes know the identifiers of
       their neighbors (as well as other nodes), e.g., on the Internet, where a node knows the IP
       addresses of other nodes. Similarly, in models such as the Congested Clique [27] and the
       k-machine model [32, 28], it is natural to assume that each processor knows the identifiers
       of all other processors. For the KT1 CONGEST model (where messages are of small size,
       typically O(log n)), King, Kutten, and Thorup (henceforth, KKT) [31] showed that one
       can solve several fundamental global problems (with the notable exception of BFS tree
       construction) such as broadcast, leader election, and spanning tree construction in message
       complexity of Õ(n) (n is the network size) which can be significantly smaller than m. (This
       is in contrast to the KT0 model where Ω(m) is a lower bound of the message complexity.)
       Randomization is crucial in obtaining this result, and the algorithm is not comparison-based.3


       1
         These problems require traversing the entire network to compute their solution and hence take Ω(D)
         rounds, where D is the network diameter.
       2
         We stress that only knowledge of the identifiers of the neighbors is assumed, not other information such
         as the degree of the neighbors.
       3
         Comparison-based algorithms can operate on identifiers only by comparing them, i.e., given two IDs,
         one can only determine whether one is less, greater, equal to the other.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                          26:3


We note that Awerbuch, Goldreich, Peleg, and Vainish [2] show that Ω(m) is a message lower
bound for MST even in the KT1 CONGEST model, for all deterministic algorithms (even
non-comparison based) and all randomized (even Monte Carlo) comparison-based algorithms.
The KKT result breaks the Ω(m) message barrier in KT1 CONGEST by using a randomized
non-comparison-based technique that uses node IDs as inputs to hash functions.
    While the message complexity of the KKT result is near-optimal (as Ω(n) is a lower
bound on the message complexity even in KT1 – see, e.g., [38]), their round complexity is
Õ(n), which is far from the standard lower bound of Ω(D) for the leader election, broadcast,
and ST problems. An important open question is whether one can achieve singular optimality
for the above problems in the KT1 CONGEST model, i.e., whether there exists an algorithm
running in Õ(D) rounds and Õ(n) messages. Another important and related question is
whether the fundamental BFS tree construction can be solved in Õ(n) messages (regardless
of the number of rounds as long as it is a polynomial in n) in KT1 .
    Similarly, for the MST problem, the KKT algorithm also showed that one can achieve
Õ(n) message complexity, but it is not time-optimal – it can take significantly more than
        √
Θ̃(D + n) rounds, which is a time lower bound for MST that applies even for Monte Carlo
randomized algorithms [12]. In subsequent work, Mashreghi and King [35] presented a trade-
                                                                                 1+ϵ
off between messages and time for MST: a Monte Carlo algorithm that uses Õ( n ϵ log log n)
messages and runs in O(n/ϵ) time for any 1 > ϵ ≥ log log n/ log n. This algorithm also takes
Ω(n) time. Hence another natural and fundamental open question is whether we can design
an MST algorithm in the KT1 CONGEST model that is singularly optimal, i.e., runs in
        √
Θ̃(D + n) rounds, while using Θ̃(n) messages. We note that a singularly optimal algorithm
for such a problem is far from certain. Robinson [43] showed a message complexity lower
bound for constructing a (2k − 1)-spanner in the KT1 CONGEST model, which implies that
obtaining singularly optimal algorithms for graph spanners of O(n1+1/k+ϵ ) edges, for any
constant ϵ > 0, is impossible in polynomial time. However, for many fundamental graph
problems, including broadcast, ST, leader election, and MST, the quest for singularly optimal
algorithms is still unresolved.

Time-Message Tradeoffs in KT1 . Gmyr and Pandurangan [24] presented several results
that show that tradeoffs between time and messages in the KT1 CONGEST model are
possible for various fundamental problems. (See also the related results of [19].) The
time-message tradeoff results are based on a uniform and general approach which involves
constructing a sparsified spanning subgraph of the original graph – called a danner (i.e.,
“diameter-preserving spanner”) – that trades off the number of edges with the diameter of the
sparsifier. A key ingredient of this approach is a distributed randomized algorithm that, given
a graph G and any δ ∈ [0, 1], with a high probability constructs a danner that has diameter
Õ(D + n1−δ ) and Õ(min{m, n1+δ }) edges in Õ(n1−δ ) rounds while using Õ(min{m, n1+δ })
messages, where n, m, and D are the number of nodes, edges, and the diameter of the input
graph G, respectively. Using a danner, they show that the leader election, broadcast, and
ST problems can be solved in Õ(D + n1−δ ) rounds using Õ(min{m, n1+δ }) messages for any
δ ∈ [0, 1]. Another important consequence of the danner construction is that the MST and
connectivity problems can be solved in Õ(D + n1−δ ) rounds using Õ(min{m, n1+δ }) messages
for any δ ∈ [0, 0.5]. In addition to getting any desired tradeoff (by plugging in an appropriate
δ), one can get a time-optimal algorithm by choosing δ = 0.5, which results in a distributed
                                       √
MST algorithm that runs in Õ(D + n) rounds and uses Õ(min{m, n3/2 }) messages. (Note
that this result is time-optimal but not message-optimal.) While these results improve over
prior bounds in the KT1 CONGEST model [31, 35, 2], they do not answer the question of
whether singularly optimal algorithms exist for fundamental global problems in the KT1
CONGEST model, nor do they show that the tradeoff bounds are tight.

                                                                                                   OPODIS 2024
26:4   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


       Singularly Optimality of Local Problems. The work of Bitton et al. [7] is the most similar
       in spirit to this work and raises and answers the same questions but for local problems. By
       local problems, we mean problems with t-round algorithms for small t (say, polylogarithmic
       in n) in the LOCAL model. In particular, they ask the following question: Given a LOCAL
       algorithm that runs in t rounds, is it possible to design an algorithm that takes O(t) rounds
       while sending only O(n1+ϵ ) messages for an arbitrarily small constant ϵ > 0? They point
       out that this question can be resolved if one can construct an α-spanner of G with O(1)
       stretch and O(n1+ϵ ) edges in O(1) rounds sending O(n1+ϵ ) messages. They also point out
       that, despite the extensive literature on distributed spanner construction algorithms, it is
       not known whether such a LOCAL spanner construction algorithm exists.
           They then present message-reduction schemes for LOCAL algorithms under the KT1
       assumption4 that preserve their asymptotic time complexity. They point out that the gossip-
       based algorithms of [8, 25] imply that a t-round algorithm in the LOCAL model can be
       transformed into an algorithm in the LOCAL model that runs in O(t log n + log2 n) rounds
       and O(nt log n + n log2 n) messages. Then they show how to transform a t-round LOCAL
       algorithm into an O(t)-round algorithm that uses O(tn1+ϵ ) messages for an arbitrarily small
       constant ϵ > 0. We refer to [7] for more details.
           An implication of the work of [8, 25] is that local problems admit (nearly) singularly optimal
       algorithms. For example, fundamental local problems such as MIS (Maximal Independent
       Set), coloring, and maximal matching admit O(log n)-round algorithms, and hence one can
       design algorithms for these problems that run in O(log2 n) rounds and O(n log2 n) messages
       in KT1 LOCAL. It is important to point out that the above results do not help in designing
       singularly optimal algorithms for global problems, which require Ω(D) rounds. This is the
       focus of this paper.

       Open Questions. The motivating question underlying this work is understanding the status
       of various fundamental global problems in the KT1 model – whether they are singularly
       optimal or exhibit trade-offs (and, if so, to quantify the trade-offs). In particular, an
       important open question is whether one can design a randomized (non-comparison-based)
       algorithm for broadcast or for leader election that takes Õ(D) time and Õ(n) messages in the
       KT1 CONGEST model. Also, King et al. [31] ask whether it is possible to construct an ST in
       o(n) rounds with o(m) messages. As mentioned earlier, algorithms that are message-optimal,
       i.e., taking Õ(n) messages, take O(n) rounds. The situation is also wide open from a lower
       bound point of view: no lower bound is known on one measure conditional on the other
       measure being optimal. In particular, even o(n)-rounds message-optimal algorithms are not
       known.
            Another important and related question is whether the fundamental BFS tree construction
       can be solved in Õ(n) messages (in polynomial number of rounds) in KT1 . We note that the
       polynomial rounds restriction is necessary since the KKT result has an important implication
       for the KT1 CONGEST model in general. Using this result, one can show that any problem
       can be solved in the KT1 CONGEST model using Õ(n) messages, provided exponentially
       many rounds are allowed [43]. This algorithm uses the KKT result to first construct a
       spanning tree and uses the “time encoding” trick to upcast the entire graph topology up the
       tree. In the “time encoding” trick, clock ticks are used to encode information, and a node
       can convey a lot of information by being silent for many clock ticks and then sending a bit
       at an appropriately chosen clock tick.


       4
           Actually, their results also hold in a somewhat weaker model where edges have unique IDs which are
           known to both endpoints.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                           26:5


    The main question that we address in this paper is whether singularly optimal algorithms
for the above-mentioned fundamental global problems are possible in the KT1 LOCAL model
(where the size of a message is not restricted). Surprisingly, the answer is yes! Note that this
is not obvious. In particular, the KKT algorithm to construct a spanning tree (even) in the
LOCAL model takes Õ(n) rounds in the worst case. On the other hand, one can construct a
BFS tree and aggregate the entire topology in O(D) rounds which is time optimal, but it is
not known how to construct a BFS tree in Õ(n) messages in KT1 LOCAL.


1.1    Distributed Computing Model
As is standard, the communication network is modeled as an undirected graph G = (V, E),
n = |V |, m = |E|. Nodes in the graph can thus be viewed as processors or machines, and
each node has a unique ID drawn from a space whose size is polynomial in n. The undirected
edges model communication links. We assume the synchronous communication model, where
both computation and communication proceed in lockstep, i.e., in discrete time steps called
rounds. In the CONGEST model we allow only small message sizes (typically logarithmic in
n, the number of nodes) to be sent per edge per round, whereas in the LOCAL model the
message size is unrestricted. In each round of the synchronous model, each node (i) receives
all messages sent to it in the previous round, (ii) performs arbitrary local computation based
on the information it has, and (iii) sends a message to each of its neighbors in the graph.
    For an algorithm A in the synchronous model (whether LOCAL or CONGEST), its round
complexity is the number of rounds it takes to finish and produce output, and its message
complexity is the total number of messages sent by all nodes throughout the algorithm.
    The CONGEST and LOCAL models come in two standard versions, depending on the
type of initial knowledge available to nodes. In the KT0 (Knowledge Till radius 0 ) model,
also called the clean network model [41], nodes have initial knowledge of only themselves and
do not know anything about their neighbors (e.g., IDs of neighbors). In the KT1 model, each
node has initial knowledge of itself and the IDs of its neighbors. So in the KT1 model, a little
knowledge about neighbors comes for free. Both KT0 and KT1 have been used extensively
in the distributed computing literature for several decades. From a round complexity point
of view, it is unnecessary to distinguish between the KT0 and KT1 versions because it takes
just one round for nodes to gather IDs of all neighbors. However, this distinction turns out
to be quite critical for message complexity as discussed earlier.


1.2    Our Results and Techniques
Our Main Result. Our main result is that singular optimality is achievable in the KT1
LOCAL model for global problems. This partially answers the central motivating question
raised above and shows that unrestricted message sizes allow one to solve various global
problems in a singularly optimal fashion in KT1 . Specifically, we show that all global problems,
including the key BFS tree construction problem, can be solved in Õ(D) rounds and Õ(n)
messages, where both bounds are optimal up to polylogarithmic factors. Furthermore, we
show this can be achieved deterministically. We also note that, as mentioned earlier, due
to a result of [2], any algorithm (even randomized) that breaks the Ω(m) message lower
bound has to be non-comparison based in KT1 CONGEST. In contrast, our algorithms are
comparison-based thus showing that the Ω(m) message lower bound of [2] does not apply to
KT1 LOCAL.
    Although our results (detailed below) do not answer the question of whether singular
optimality is possible in KT1 CONGEST, they give several insights into the complexity of
solving problems under the KT1 assumption.


                                                                                                    OPODIS 2024
26:6   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


       Singularly Optimal Algorithms. We present two singularly optimal algorithms, one ran-
       domized and one deterministic, for solving the BFS tree construction problem, our main
       technical contribution. Using the BFS tree construction, we show how to solve several other
       problems, including leader election. The two algorithms have similar complexities but follow
       two different approaches, illustrating the power of KT1 LOCAL.


       A Local Approach. In the first approach (cf. Section 3), we build a BFS tree in the usual
       “level-by-level” fashion starting from the root node. This clearly takes O(D) rounds. However,
       if done naively, this BFS exploration from level i to level i + 1 (root is level 0) takes a number
       of messages proportional to the number of edges between the two levels as well as the edges
       between nodes in level i. This leads to O(m) message complexity overall, where m is the
       total number of edges.
           To obtain Õ(n) message complexity instead, a crucial idea is to use a sparse neighborhood
       cover to ensure that the number of messages needed to grow the BFS tree from level i to
       level i + 1 is essentially (up to the O(log n) factor) proportional to the number of BFS tree
       edges between the levels. Importantly, we show that sparse neighborhood cover construction
       (which is done as a preprocessing step) itself can be done singularly optimally in O(log3 n)
       rounds and O(n log3 n) messages in KT1 LOCAL (cf. Section 2.3). We refer to Section 3 for
       details regarding how the cover is useful in avoiding sending unnecessary messages through
       non-BFS tree edges. This approach is randomized since we use the sparse neighborhood cover
       construction algorithm due to Elkin [16], which is randomized. We modify this algorithm to
       use Õ(n) messages (we note that the message complexity of the original implementation is
       Õ(m) [16]). As noted at the end of Section 3, we could have also used a deterministic cover
       construction scheme. However, this has a significantly higher (in terms of polylog factors)
       message and time complexities compared to the randomized algorithm and a more efficient
       deterministic algorithm that uses a global approach (described below).
           The main feature of the local approach algorithm is that BFS tree construction can be
       done in a fashion where each node needs to know information only from its local neighborhood.
       Specifically, the cover construction algorithm and the subsequent BFS exploration can be
       implemented in such a way that each node needs to know the topology information of nodes
       (including its IDs and state information) of only its O(log n) neighborhood (cf. Section 3).


       A Global Approach. Our second algorithm (cf. Section 4) for BFS tree (which is also
       deterministic) uses a different approach. It first uses a deterministic gossip-based algorithm
       due to Haeupler [25] to construct a sparse spanning subgraph H of the original graph G.
           In gossip, each node, in each round, can send at most one message (of arbitrary size) to
       one neighbor. Gossip-based communication is very lightweight (only O(n) messages are sent
       by all nodes in a round) and has been studied extensively [30]. Here we use a result due to
       Haeupler which showed that each node can (locally) broadcast a message to all nodes within
       a distance k in O(k log n + log2 n) rounds in the KT1 LOCAL model [25]. Let the edges used
       in the Haeupler algorithm to send messages constitute the subgraph H. We show that H
       has only O(n log n) edges and is a O(log n)-spanner, i.e., all distances in H between each of
       pair of nodes are at most a O(log n) factor of the (true) distance in G [41]. In particular, the
       property we need is that the diameter of H is O(D log n) where D is the diameter of G. Once
       H is built, one can simply do a usual flooding-based BFS tree construction (from the given
       source node) in H as in the KT0 CONGEST model (e.g., see [41]). Since H has O(n log n)
       edges and O(D log n) diameter, these determine the same message and time complexities
       respectively for the BFS tree construction in H.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                        26:7


    Once a BFS tree TH has been constructed in H, we use it to collect the entire topology of
G at the root of TH by convergecasting. In the LOCAL model, this takes O(D log n) rounds
and O(n log n) messages. Since the root has the entire topology, it can construct a BFS
tree on G locally, and then broadcast the solution to all nodes in O(D log n) and O(n log n)
messages using the BFS tree of H.
    This approach to BFS construction is “global” since the root needs the entire graph’s
topology information.

Leader Election. Both approaches enable one to solve leader election efficiently in KT1
LOCAL as well. If we allow randomization (cf. Section 3), we can start with Θ(log n)
candidates (this can be achieved by each node becoming a candidate with probability
Θ(log n/n)). Then each of the candidates can run the BFS tree construction algorithm in
parallel to elect a leader among the Θ(log n) candidates (e.g., the one with the highest ID).
   In the deterministic setting (cf. Section 4), we simply run a deterministic leader election
algorithm of Kutten et al. [34] on the O(log n)-spanner H of G constructed earlier.

Global Problems. In both approaches, one can solve any global problem (i.e., a problem
that requires Ω(D) rounds) in KT1 LOCAL in a singularly optimal fashion, i.e., in Õ(D)
rounds and Õ(n) messages, as follows. Once a leader is elected and a BFS tree is built, one
can collect the entire topology by convergecasting it to the root in O(D) rounds and using
Õ(n) messages. The root solves the problem locally and broadcasts the solution with the
same time and message bounds.

Summary of Results. To summarize, we present the following results.
  A distributed randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that constructs a BFS tree (given a
  designated root node) in time O(D log n + log3 n) and using O(n log3 n) messages in the
  KT1 LOCAL model.
  A distributed deterministic algorithm that constructs a BFS tree (given a designated root
  node) in time O(D log n + log2 n) and using O(n log2 n) messages in the KT1 LOCAL
  model. While we note that the bounds for the deterministic algorithm for BFS are better
  than the corresponding randomized algorithm, the deterministic algorithm follows the
  global approach where the root node learns information about the entire topology, unlike
  the randomized algorithm that follows a local approach where nodes learn information
  only within their O(log n)-radius neighborhood.
  A distributed randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that elects a leader in time O(D log n +
  log3 n) and using O(n log4 n) messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.
  A distributed deterministic algorithm that elects a leader in time O(D log2 n + log2 n)
  and using O(n log2 n) messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.
  All global problems, including broadcast, MST, shortest paths, minimum cut, etc., can
  be solved in the above (leader election) randomized and deterministic time and message
  bounds, respectively.

1.3    Other Related Work
In the KT1 model, the early work of Awerbuch et al. [2] studied time-message trade-offs for
broadcast. King et al. [31] surprisingly showed that the basic Ω(m) message lower bound that
holds in the KT0 model for various problems such as leader election, broadcast, MST, and
more [34] does not hold in the KT1 model by showing a randomized Monte Carlo algorithm
to construct an MST (which also holds for leader election and broadcast) in Õ(n) messages



                                                                                                 OPODIS 2024
26:8   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


       and in Õ(n) time. Their algorithm uses the powerful randomized technique of graph sketching
       to identify edges going out of a cut efficiently, without probing all the edges in the cut; this
       crucially helps in reducing the message complexity. In contrast, our work shows that graph
       sketching is not necessary to obtain Õ(n) message complexity in KT1 LOCAL.
           There has also been work in understanding the message complexity of local problems
       such as MIS, coloring, and maximal matching in KT0 and KT1 . In the KT0 CONGEST
       model, Pai et al. [37] showed that any MIS algorithm requires Ω(n2 ) messages. The same
       quadratic lower bound was shown to hold for (∆ + 1)-coloring [38] and also for maximal
       matching [15]. These lower bounds are all tight, to within a logarithmic factor, since Luby’s
       algorithm solves these problems using Õ(m) messages.
           In contrast, the message complexity of these problems is largely unknown in the KT1
       CONGEST model. Pai et al. [38] showed an Ω(n2 ) lower bound for comparison-based
       algorithms for MIS, (∆ + 1)-coloring, and maximal matching in this model. However, whether
       one can obtain an o(m)-message algorithm is open for arbitrary algorithms. It is worth
       noting that a quadratic lower bound for comparison-based algorithms does not constitute
       strong evidence that the problem may have a quadratic lower bound in general. For example,
                                                                                                    √
       it was shown that (∆ + 1)-coloring can also be solved using Õ(n1.5 ) messages in Õ(D + n)
       rounds in the KT1 CONGEST model [38].
           The quest for singularly optimal distributed algorithms has also been investigated in the
       asynchronous setting [36, 33, 14] and with more relaxed assumptions on the nodes’ initial
       knowledge [29].
           Recently there has been a lot of interest in designing awake or energy-efficient algorithms
       for various problems in the LOCAL, CONGEST, and radio network models – see, e.g.,
       [10, 6, 13, 20, 18, 9, 11, 22, 1] and references therein. In these works, the goal is to minimize
       the number of rounds a node is active (when it could be sending/receiving messages).
       It might be interesting to study singular optimality in the context of awake or energy-
       efficient algorithms, where the goal is to simultaneously minimize the message, round, and
       awake/energy complexities.

        2     Message-Efficient Auxiliary Primitives
       We first provide several primitives that play a crucial role in our randomized singularly
       optimal BFS KT1 LOCAL algorithm (see Section 3). In particular, the singularly optimal
       sparse neighborhood cover construction in Subsection 2.3 may be of independent interest.

       2.1    Cluster Communication
       We give some message-efficient primitives for cluster communication: first within a cluster,
       then with nodes outside. We assume each cluster has an associated (spanning) cluster tree,
       whose root and edges are (distributedly) known to the network.
           Communication within the cluster can be done using standard broadcast and convergecast.
       In the broadcast operation, the root holds a message (unlimited in size, as we are in KT1
       LOCAL) and sends it to its children in the cluster tree. These children in turn send the same
       message to their children, until it reaches the leaves of the cluster tree and terminates. The
       convergecast is essentially the reverse operation, where each node contains some (possibly
       unique) message and sends it to its parent. That parent waits until it receives one message per
       child, then concatenates its children’s messages (without running into bandwidth constraint
       as we are in KT1 LOCAL) and sends that combined message to its own parent. Once the
       root node receives messages from all of its children, the operation terminates. The runtime
       and message complexity are straightforward to bound in the KT1 LOCAL model:
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                          26:9


▶ Proposition 1. The broadcast and convergecast operations, over some cluster C with a
cluster tree of depth d, respectively take d rounds and use |C| messages in KT1 LOCAL.

     For some cluster, say C, to communicate message-efficiently with its immediate neighbors
(i.e., nodes outside C but with a neighbor in C), it suffices to augment the cluster tree with
just enough additional edges to ensure it also spans all of these immediate neighbors – which
we call the outer boundary nodes. These edges can be computed as follows. First, the cluster
convergecasts using the (original) cluster tree; each cluster node’s message contains its ID
and that of all its neighbors, known due to the KT1 assumption. When the convergecast
terminates, the root knows the IDs of all cluster nodes as well as the IDs of both endpoints of
all edges incident to any cluster node. In particular, the root knows which edges lead out of
the cluster. With that information, the root computes a minimal outgoing edge set: an edge
set such that each node in the outer boundary of C is the endpoint of exactly one edge in
the set. (In some cases, we can even ask for the lexicographically first minimal outgoing edge
set: for each node in the outer boundary, its incident edge in that set is the lexicographically
first edge among its incident edges leading to C.) Finally, the root broadcasts that minimal
outgoing edge set over the (original) cluster tree. Cluster nodes add any edge in the minimal
outgoing edge set to its (distributed representation) of the augmented cluster tree (and the
other endpoints of these edges are also informed). After which, it is easy to see that the
broadcast and convergecast operations on the augmented cluster tree allow the cluster C to
broadcast messages to, or convergecast messages from, its outer boundary. Similarly to the
previous primitive, the runtime and message complexity are straightforward to bound in the
KT1 LOCAL model:

▶ Proposition 2. Let C be some cluster with a cluster tree of depth d. Then, computing the
augmented tree, as well as broadcast and convergecast over that augmented tree of C (i.e.,
over C and the outer boundary B), takes O(d) rounds and O(|C| + |B|) messages in KT1
LOCAL.

2.2    Naive BFS Exploration
The above-described message-efficient cluster communication primitives give a naive but
message-efficient primitive for BFS exploration, rooted in some node r, up to some small
depth h ≥ 1, say h = Õ(1). Let us describe this primitive, called BFSExploration, in more
detail. A cluster (with a corresponding cluster tree) is built around the root r in h phases,
one layer per phase. In phase i ∈ [1, h], the cluster computes an augmented cluster tree
and broadcasts a BFS exploration message (containing the ID of the cluster’s root) over the
augmented tree. Cluster nodes follow the broadcast protocol but otherwise ignore the BFS
exploration message, whereas the outer boundary nodes join the BFS tree upon receiving
a BFS exploration message – the edge along which they receive that message is the edge
leading to their parent in the BFS tree.

▶ Proposition 3. Let C be the cluster obtained via BFSExploration for some h ≥ 1. Then,
BFSExploration takes O(h2 ) rounds and uses O(|C| · h) messages.

Proof. For any i ≥ 1, phase i starts with a cluster tree of depth i, computes its augmented
tree and broadcasts an exploration message over it. By Proposition 2, this takes O(i) rounds
and O(|C|) messages (as no node ever leaves the cluster). The statement follows.          ◀

   This naive BFS exploration algorithm uses few messages when h is small, say Õ(1),
and thus builds a BFS tree message-efficiently for small diameter graphs. However, in
general graphs, both its round complexity and message complexity are too high. In the


                                                                                                   OPODIS 2024
26:10   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


        next subsection we use that naive algorithm to obtain sparse neighborhood covers, and
        these covers in turn allow us to obtain (near) singularly-optimal BFS algorithms in the KT1
        LOCAL model.

        2.3    Randomized Sparse Neighborhood Cover Computation
        Sparse neighborhood covers, defined next, were introduced in [5] and have found various
        applications in distributed computing such as in routing and in the design of efficient
        synchronizers. Here, they play a crucial role within our singularly-optimal BFS algorithm
        (see Section 3). Below, we define sparse neighborhood covers.

        ▶ Definition 4. A sparse (κ, W )-neighborhood cover of a graph is a collection C of trees,
        each called a cluster, with the following properties.
           (Depth property) For each tree τ ∈ C, depth(τ ) = O(W · κ).
           (Sparsity property) Each vertex v of the graph appears in Õ(κ · n1/κ ) different trees τ ∈ C.
           (Neighborhood property) For each vertex v of the graph there exists a tree τ ∈ C that
           contains the entire W -neighborhood of vertex v.

            Next, we give a randomized, message-efficient algorithm, called CoverConstruction, for
        computing a sparse neighborhood cover in KT1 LOCAL – i.e., Õ(n) message complexity. We
        do so by a simple modification of the distributed (randomized) cover construction due to
        Elkin [16]. Note that this modification is necessary, since the cover construction given in [16]
        uses Ω(m) messages, even in KT1 LOCAL (which is considered message-inefficient here).
            Let us briefly describe the distributed (randomized) cover construction of Elkin [16].
        The algorithm runs in κ phases, each of O(κ · n1/κ log n · κW ) rounds. Initially, nodes are
        uncovered. Then, in each phase i ∈ [1, κ], a well-chosen number of uncovered vertices initiate
        a BFS exploration of depth 2((κ − i) + 1)W , each such exploration forming a cluster of the
        cover. (The property of the BFS exploration primitive ensures the depth property of the
        cover, while the judicious choice of the number of sources per phase ensures the sparsity
        property – see Lemma 5 next.) Nodes that join such a cover, within at most 2(κ − i)W hops
        of the root, becomes covered; indeed, its W -hop neighborhood is contained in that cluster,
        and hence in the cover, thus satisfying its neighborhood property.
            CoverConstruction modifies the above algorithm as follows: the (message-inefficient) naive
        BFS exploration primitive used in that algorithm is replaced with our (message-efficient)
        BFSExploration primitive. It follows that most properties of distributed (randomized)
        cover construction due to Elkin [16] directly translate over to the modified version. In
        particular, the correctness of CoverConstruction follows directly. Additionally, it also holds
        for CoverConstruction that with high probability, the maximum degree of the constructed
        cover is small (see Lemma 5); in other words, each vertex appears in a small number of
        clusters of the cover, in fact in O(κ · n1/κ log n) of them. This last property will be the
        key to bounding the message complexity of our CoverConstruction algorithm, along with
        Proposition 3.

        ▶ Lemma 5 (Corollary A.6 in [16]). The sparse neighborhood cover C computed by CoverCon-
        struction satisfies the following: with high probability, for every vertex v ∈ V , |{C ∈ C | v ∈
        C}| = O(κ · n1/κ log n).

        ▶ Lemma 6. There exists a distributed randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that constructs
        (with high probability) a (κ, W )-sparse neighborhood cover in time O(κ3 W 2 ) and using
        O(n · κ · n1/κ log n · κW ) messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                         26:11


Proof. The correctness (with high probability) follows from that of Elkin’s algorithm. Next,
we bound the round complexity. Each phase runs BFS explorations up to 2κW hops. By
Proposition 3, these BFS explorations take O((κW )2 ) rounds. This amounts, over κ phases,
to O(κ3 W 2 ) rounds. As for the message complexity, it suffices to note that messages are
only sent during the BFS explorations, and those are of depth at most 2κW . By Proposition
3, the BFS exploration that computes some cluster C uses O(|C|κW ) messages. By Lemma
5, each node is contained in at most O(κ · n1/κ log n) clusters of the cover (over all phases).
Hence, if C is the computed cover, then C∈C |C| = O(n · κ · n1/κ log n) and thus the message
                                       P

complexity of CoverConstruction is O(n · κ · n1/κ log n · κW ).                             ◀


 3     Singularly-Optimal BFS using Sparse Neighborhood Covers
We provide a BFS tree construction algorithm (called BFSConstruction) that takes Õ(D)
rounds and Õ(n) messages in KT1 LOCAL. This is the first singularly-optimal BFS algorithm
in KT1 LOCAL, and the main difficulty lies in obtaining Õ(n) message complexity without
blowing up the runtime (say, to linear in n or more). The improved message complexity is
obtained using sparse neighborhood covers, which can be computed using CoverConstruction
(see Subsection 2.3) for example. Note that sparse neighborhood covers were previously
used in asynchronous BFS tree construction algorithms [4, 3] for synchronization purposes,
whereas we instead use them in a synchronous setting to reduce messages (which is new to
the best of our knowledge).
    We now describe our BFSConstruction algorithm. A BFS tree is built around some
(initially given) root node r ∈ V , layer by layer. First, nodes build a (κ, 2)-cover of G, for
some well-chosen κ = Θ(log n). After which, the BFS tree is built in (up to) D phases, each of
O(log n) rounds. In each phase, each node neighboring the current BFS tree receives exactly
one message and joins the BFS tree; this adds a layer to the BFS tree in a message-efficient
manner. We do this by computing a (lexicographically-first) minimal outgoing edge set (see
Subsection 2.1) of the current BFS tree (or cluster), and sending BFS exploration messages
via this edge set.
    More concretely, in phase i ≥ 1, frontier nodes (i.e., on layer i − 1) of the current BFS
tree (or cluster) compute the lexicographically-first minimal outgoing edge set Oi in two
stages. The first stage takes 2κ = O(log n) rounds, during which all frontier nodes ping each
cluster of the cover they belongs to: that is, they send a message to their parent, who in turn
sends it to their parent, and so on, ensuring the messages is sent all the way up to the root
of the (cover) cluster’s tree. (Note that this is enough time for the message to reach the root,
since each cover cluster tree has depth 2κ.) The second stage takes 6κ = O(log n) rounds,
during which the root of the cover cluster broadcasts a message to all nodes which then starts
a convergecast; nodes in the tree convergecast their ID, whether they are in the BFS, and
the information about their incident edges (that is, the IDs of the two endpoints) and upon
termination of the convergecast, the root broadcasts all of the aggregated information to all
nodes in the tree. Once these two stages are over, or in other words, once some frontier node
v has received the aggregated information from all cover clusters it belongs to, node v knows
its 2-hop neighborhood information as well as which node within that neighborhood is in the
BFS tree. That information is sufficient for v to know which of its incident edges belongs to
the lexicographically-first minimal outgoing edge set Oi of the current BFS tree (or cluster).

▶ Theorem 7. There exists a distributed randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that constructs
a BFS tree (given a designated root node) in time O(D log n + log3 n) and using O(n log3 n)
messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.



                                                                                                   OPODIS 2024
26:12   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


        Proof. We start with the correctness. We claim that in each phase i ≥ 1, the lexicographically-
        first minimal outgoing edge set Oi is correctly (and distributedly) computed. The correctness
        of the BFS tree computation follows straightforwardly from that claim. Let us prove the
        claim now. Each frontier node (say v) obtains its 2-hop neighborhood information due to the
        neighborhood property of the (κ, 2)-cover: one of the cover v is contained in also contains
        all nodes in the 2-hop neighborhood of v. Then, v pings this cover cluster tree (and others)
        during phase i, and during the second stage, the information of v’s 2-hop neighborhood
        (including which nodes are in the BFS) is gathered and then sent to v. (Note that sufficient
        runtime is given to the two stages by Proposition 1, and although v receives different messages
        from the different cover cluster trees it belongs to, it can simply take the message containing
        the most information on v’s 2-hop neighborhood.) From this information, v can compute
        which incident edge is in the lexicographically-first minimal outgoing edge set: for each
        neighbor w of v, such that w is not in the BFS, v computes the lexicographically-first incident
        edge to w with a BFS endpoint, and whether that edge is incident to v.
            The round complexity is straightforward; computing the (κ, 2)-sparse neighborhood cover
        takes O(log3 n) rounds by Lemma 6, and the O(D) phases each take O(log n) rounds. We
        now bound the message complexity. First, computing the (κ, 2)-sparse neighborhood cover
        uses O(n log3 n) messages by Lemma 6. As for the BFS tree computation, we separate
        messages into two types: the BFS exploration messages, and the messages sent over the cover
        cluster trees (for the pinging, broadcasts and convergecast). The former travel only along
        minimal outgoing edge sets, which guarantees each non-root node receives such a message
        once, joins the BFS and never receives such a message again. Thus over all phases, at most
        n BFS exploration messages are sent. For the latter, we first claim that we can bound the
        number of convergecasts and broadcasts executed per cover cluster tree over the algorithm
        by O(log n). Indeed, each cluster cover tree has diameter O(log n) due to our choice of κ,
        and thus its vertices can be contained in at most O(log n) layers of the BFS tree. Moreover,
        messages are sent over a cover cluster tree in a given phase if and only if one of its nodes is a
        frontier node (due to the pinging behavior) in that phase. As such, messages are sent over
        a given cover cluster tree during at most O(log n) phases, and within each such phase at
        most O(1) convergecasts and broadcasts are executed, thus proving the claim. (In the above
        counting, we use the fact that the pinging operation sends less messages than a convergecast.)
        Given the claim, Proposition 1 and since each node belongs to O(log2 n) different cover
        cluster trees by Lemma 5, the message complexity due to the second type of messages is
        O(n log3 n).                                                                                   ◀

            The above (near) singularly-optimal BFS algorithm can be transformed into a randomized
        leader election algorithm via an additional Θ(log n) factor in the message complexity as
        follows. Assuming nodes have some good estimate (i.e., within a constant factor) of the
        network size n, Θ(log n) candidates are picked uniformly at random. Then, these candidates
        each start an independent execution of the above BFS algorithm, and messages of different
        executions are differentiated by simply adding to the messages the candidate’s ID.

        ▶ Corollary 8. There exists a distributed randomized Monte Carlo algorithm that elects a
        leader in time O(D log n + log3 n) and using O(n log4 n) messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.

            Note also that the above (near) singularly-optimal BFS algorithm can be made determin-
        istic, but at the cost of higher logarithmic factors in both time and message complexities. We
        leave out the details however, because the deterministic solution given in the subsequent sec-
        tion is strictly more efficient in both time and message complexities. Instead, we give a brief
        sketch. The crucial point is that the randomized sparse neighborhood cover construction given
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                             26:13


in Section 2.3 is the only randomized component used in the above BFS construction. We
can replace it with a message-efficient deterministic sparse neighborhood cover construction
to obtain a message-efficient deterministic BFS construction algorithm. More concretely, one
can combine the (O(log3 n), W )-sparse neighborhood cover construction of [21] (that takes as
parameter any positive integer W ) with the simulation of [8, 25] (as described in more detail
in both Sections 1 and 4). Doing so gives a deterministic (O(log3 n), W )-sparse neighborhood
cover construction algorithm that takes O(W log11 n) rounds and O(n log11 n) messages, and
such that each cluster tree has depth O(log3 n) and each edge appears in at most O(log4 n)
cluster trees. Moreover, if used in the above BFS construction algorithm, the resulting time
and message complexities are respectively O(D log3 n + log11 n) and O(n log11 n).


 4     Deterministic Singularly-Optimal BFS via a Global Approach
We now give an alternative approach by leveraging results from gossip algorithms. In contrast
to the KT1 LOCAL model, communication in the gossip model is much more restricted: In
each round, a node may activate only a single link to some neighbor and the nodes may
perform bidirectional exchange of messages (of arbitrary size) over this link. Note that it is
possible that multiple nodes may activate a link to some node u in the same round.
    Even though a gossip algorithm sends only O(n) messages per round, it was nevertheless
shown in [8] that there is a O(log3 n)-round randomized algorithm that allows all nodes to
exchange information with all of their neighbors, which is known as 1-local broadcast. That
is, each node holds some piece of information (a “rumor”) initially, and the goal of 1-local
broadcast is for each node to learn all rumors of its neighbors in the network. Subsequently,
[25] gave a deterministic algorithm that achieves an improved upper bound of O(log2 n)
rounds for 1-local broadcast. While there are results for solving broadcast efficiently when
restricting ourselves to well-connected networks (see [23]), we point out that [8] and [25]
work in arbitrary networks and both crucially rely on the KT1 assumption.
    In the algorithm of [25], each node v keeps track of the set Rv of neighbors from which it
has not yet received the rumor, and v also keeps track which links it has activated so far
(and in which order) in a set Ev . The algorithm proceeds in iterations and, at the start of
iteration i, each node v in parallel activates a link to some arbitrary node in Rv (assuming
Rv ̸= ∅) and adds this link (u, v) as its i-th link li to Ev . Then, over the next i rounds, v
exchanges rumors by activating the links li , . . . , l1 , i.e., in reverse order in which they were
added to Ev . Afterwards, v again exchanges all rumors by activating the links l1 , . . . , li
once more (this time in chronological order). The above two batches of link activations are
repeated once more in the same iteration to ensure that the information acquired by the
nodes is symmetric in the sense that u received v’s rumor if and only if v also received u’s
rumor, thus yielding a total round complexity of 4i rounds in iteration i. [25] shows that
the algorithm terminates in O(log n) iterations, resulting in a time complexity of O(log2 n)
rounds.
    We now show that the algorithm of [25] implies the existence of a multiplicative O(log n)-
spanner [42], which is a sparse subgraph H of the network G where, for each edge {u, v} ∈
G \ H there exists a path of length O(log n) in H.

▶ Lemma 9. There is a deterministic gossip algorithm that terminates in O(log2 n) rounds
and constructs a O(log n)-spanner H with O(n log n) edges, such that each node knows which
of its incident edges are in H.




                                                                                                       OPODIS 2024
26:14   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


        Proof. We define H as the union of the links added to Ev , for each node v. Since the
        algorithm terminates in O(log n) iterations, it follows that the set of activated links Ev of
        each node v is of size O(log n), which implies the claimed upper bound on the number of
        edges in H.
           It is shown in [25] that a node can exchange rumors with all its neighbors by activating
        the links in H according to the schedule in the last iteration of the algorithm. As mentioned
        above, the number of rounds in iteration i is 4i, and hence the last iteration takes O(log n)
        rounds. In other words, the edges of H ensure the existence of a path of length O(log n)
        between v and each one of its neighbors, which shows that H is a spanner with stretch
        O(log n).                                                                                  ◀


            To construct a BFS tree on the network G, we first initiate the construction of a BFS tree
        TH on H by executing the simple flooding-based algorithm starting at the designated root
        node s. According to Lemma 9, this takes O(D log n) rounds and the number of messages
        sent is O(|E(H)|) = O(n log n). Then, we convergecast the entire topological information of
        each node starting at the leaves in TH up to the root s, thus enabling s to locally compute a
        BFS tree T on G. Finally, s broadcasts the topological information of T over the edges of TH ,
        which ensures that each node learns its parents and children in T . Since the broadcast and
        convergecast on TH both take O(D log n) rounds and O(n log n) messages, the complexity
        of constructing a BFS tree is dominated by the cost of constructing the spanner H, which
        yields the following:

        ▶ Theorem 10. There exists a deterministic algorithm that constructs a BFS tree from a
        designated source in time O(D log n + log2 n) and using O(n log2 n) messages in the KT1
        LOCAL model.

            If, instead of constructing a BFS tree, our goal is to elect a unique leader among the
        nodes, we leverage the deterministic KT0 CONGEST leader election algorithm of [34], which,
        on general networks requires O(D log n) rounds and O(m log n) messages. When executing
        this algorithm on the spanner H instead, Lemma 9 yields the following result:

        ▶ Corollary 11. Leader election can be solved deterministically in O(D log2 n + log2 n) rounds
        and O(n log2 n) messages in the KT1 LOCAL model.


         5     Conclusion

        In this paper, we fully resolve the complexity of distributed computation in the KT1 LOCAL
        model, showing that singularly optimal algorithms can be achieved for global problems. A
        question that we leave open is whether any problem that admits a O(t)-round algorithm in
        the LOCAL model, for any t ≤ D, can be solved in Õ(t) rounds and Õ(n) messages in KT1
        LOCAL? In particular, the question is whether we can design singularly optimal algorithms
        for any problem in KT1 LOCAL. This work answers this question for t = D.
            Another interesting question is whether one can improve the complexities of our KT1
        LOCAL algorithms. In particular, can we obtain an O(D)-round algorithm for a BFS tree
        (or leader election and broadcast) that uses Õ(n) messages?
            Finally, a major open question is whether singular optimality is possible for global
        problems in the KT1 CONGEST model.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                        26:15


     References
 1   John Augustine, William K. Moses Jr., and Gopal Pandurangan. Awake complexity of
     distributed minimum spanning tree. In Proceedings of the 31st International Colloquium
     on Structural Information and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO), pages 45–63, 2024.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-031-60603-8_3.
 2   Baruch Awerbuch, Oded Goldreich, David Peleg, and Ronen Vainish. A trade-off between
     information and communication in broadcast protocols. J. ACM, 37(2):238–256, 1990. doi:
     10.1145/77600.77618.
 3   Baruch Awerbuch, Boaz Patt-Shamir, David Peleg, and Michael Saks. Adapting to asyn-
     chronous dynamic networks (extended abstract). In Proceedings of the 24th Annual ACM Sym-
     posium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 557–570, 1992. doi:10.1145/129712.129767.
 4   Baruch Awerbuch and David Peleg. Network synchronization with polylogarithmic overhead.
     In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
     pages 514–522, 1990. doi:10.1109/FSCS.1990.89572.
 5   Baruch Awerbuch and David Peleg. Sparse partitions. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 503–513, 1990.
 6   Leonid Barenboim and Tzalik Maimon. Deterministic logarithmic completeness in the dis-
     tributed sleeping model. In Proceedings of the 35th International Symposium on Distributed
     Computing (DISC), pages 10:1–10:19, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2021.10.
 7   Shimon Bitton, Yuval Emek, Taisuke Izumi, and Shay Kutten. Message reduction in the
     LOCAL model is a free lunch. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Symposium on
     Distributed Computing (DISC), pages 7:1–7:15, 2019. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2019.7.
 8   Keren Censor-Hillel, Bernhard Haeupler, Jonathan Kelner, and Petar Maymounkov. Global
     computation in a poorly connected world: fast rumor spreading with no dependence on
     conductance. In Proceedings of the 44th annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
     (STOC), pages 961–970, 2012. doi:10.1145/2213977.2214064.
 9   Yi-Jun Chang, Varsha Dani, Thomas P. Hayes, Qizheng He, Wenzheng Li, and Seth Pettie.
     The energy complexity of broadcast. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Symposium on Principles
     of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 95–104, 2018. doi:10.1145/3212734.3212774.
10   Soumyottam Chatterjee, Robert Gmyr, and Gopal Pandurangan. Sleeping is efficient: MIS
     in O(1)-rounds node-averaged awake complexity. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
     Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 99–108, 2020. doi:10.1145/3382734.
     3405718.
11   Varsha Dani and Thomas P. Hayes. How to wake up your neighbors: Safe and nearly optimal
     generic energy conservation in radio networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International
     Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), pages 16:1–16:22, 2022. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.
     DISC.2022.16.
12   Atish Das Sarma, Stephan Holzer, Liah Kor, Amos Korman, Danupon Nanongkai, Gopal
     Pandurangan, David Peleg, and Roger Wattenhofer. Distributed verification and hardness
     of distributed approximation. SIAM J. Comput., 41(5):1235–1265, 2012. doi:10.1137/
     11085178X.
13   Fabien Dufoulon, William K. Moses Jr., and Gopal Pandurangan. Distributed MIS in
     O(log log n) awake complexity. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 135–145, 2023. doi:10.1145/3583668.3594574.
14   Fabien Dufoulon, Shay Kutten, William K. Moses Jr., Gopal Pandurangan, and David Peleg.
     An almost singularly optimal asynchronous distributed MST algorithm. In Proceedings of
     the 36th International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), pages 19:1–19:24, 2022.
     doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2022.19.
15   Fabien Dufoulon, Shreyas Pai, Gopal Pandurangan, Sriram V. Pemmaraju, and Peter
     Robinson. The message complexity of distributed graph optimization. In Proceedings
     of the 15th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS), pages 41:1–41:26, 2024.
     doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2024.41.




                                                                                                  OPODIS 2024
26:16   The Singular Optimality of Distributed Computation in LOCAL


        16   Michael Elkin. A faster distributed protocol for constructing a minimum spanning tree. Journal
             of Computer and System Sciences, 72(8):1282–1308, 2006. doi:10.1016/J.JCSS.2006.07.002.
        17   Michael Elkin. A simple deterministic distributed MST algorithm with near-optimal time and
             message complexities. J. ACM, 67(2):13:1–13:15, 2020. doi:10.1145/3380546.
        18   Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, and Ioan Todinca. Energy-efficient
             distributed algorithms for synchronous networks. In Structural Information and Communication
             Complexity (SIROCCO), pages 482–501, 2023. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-32733-9_21.
        19   Mohsen Ghaffari and Fabian Kuhn. Distributed MST and broadcast with fewer messages,
             and faster gossiping. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Symposium on Distributed
             Computing (DISC), pages 30:1–30:12, 2018. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2018.30.
        20   Mohsen Ghaffari and Julian Portmann. Distributed MIS with low energy and time complexities.
             In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
             pages 146–156, 2023. doi:10.1145/3583668.3594587.
        21   Mohsen Ghaffari and Anton Trygub. A near-optimal deterministic distributed synchronizer.
             In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
             pages 180–189, 2023. doi:10.1145/3583668.3594598.
        22   Mohsen Ghaffari and Anton Trygub. A near-optimal low-energy deterministic distributed
             SSSP with ramifications on congestion and APSP. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium
             on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 401–411, 2024. doi:10.1145/3662158.
             3662812.
        23   George Giakkoupis. Tight bounds for rumor spreading in graphs of a given conductance. In
             Proceedings of the 28th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science
             (STACS), 2011.
        24   Robert Gmyr and Gopal Pandurangan. Time-message trade-offs in distributed algorithms. In
             Proceedings of the 32nd International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), pages
             32:1–32:18, 2018. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2018.32.
        25   Bernhard Haeupler. Simple, fast and deterministic gossip and rumor spreading. J. ACM,
             62(6):47:1–47:18, 2015. doi:10.1145/2767126.
        26   Bernhard Haeupler, D. Ellis Hershkowitz, and David Wajc. Round- and message-optimal
             distributed graph algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Symposium on Principles of
             Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 119–128, 2018. doi:10.1145/3212734.3212737.
        27   James W. Hegeman, Gopal Pandurangan, Sriram V. Pemmaraju, Vivek B. Sardeshmukh, and
             Michele Scquizzato. Toward optimal bounds in the congested clique: graph connectivity and
             MST. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
             (PODC), pages 91–100, 2015. doi:10.1145/2767386.2767434.
        28   Khalid Hourani, Hartmut Klauck, William K. Moses Jr., Danupon Nanongkai, Gopal Pan-
             durangan, Peter Robinson, and Michele Scquizzato. Distributed algorithms for large-scale
             graphs. CoRR, abs/1311.6209, 2023.
        29   Hongyan Ji and Sriram V. Pemmaraju. Towards singular optimality in the presence of
             local initial knowledge. In Proceedings of the 31st International Colloquium on Structural
             Information and Communication Complexity (SIROCCO), pages 300–317, 2024. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-031-60603-8_17.
        30   David Kempe, Alin Dobra, and Johannes Gehrke. Gossip-based computation of aggregate
             information. In Proceedings of the 44th Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
             (FOCS), pages 482–491, 2003. doi:10.1109/SFCS.2003.1238221.
        31   Valerie King, Shay Kutten, and Mikkel Thorup. Construction and impromptu repair of
             an MST in a distributed network with o(m) communication. In Proceedings of the 2015
             ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 71–80, 2015. doi:
             10.1145/2767386.2767405.
        32   Hartmut Klauck, Danupon Nanongkai, Gopal Pandurangan, and Peter Robinson. Dis-
             tributed computation of large-scale graph problems. In Proceedings of the 26th An-
             nual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 391–410, 2015. doi:
             10.1137/1.9781611973730.28.
F. Dufoulon, G. Pandurangan, P. Robinson, and M. Scquizzato                                          26:17


33   Shay Kutten, William K. Moses Jr., Gopal Pandurangan, and David Peleg. Singularly near
     optimal leader election in asynchronous networks. In Proceedings of the 35th International
     Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 209, pages 27:1–27:18, 2021. doi:
     10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2021.27.
34   Shay Kutten, Gopal Pandurangan, David Peleg, Peter Robinson, and Amitabh Trehan. On
     the complexity of universal leader election. J. ACM, 62(1), 2015. doi:10.1145/2699440.
35   Ali Mashreghi and Valerie King. Time-communication trade-offs for minimum spanning tree
     construction. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Distributed Computing
     and Networking (ICDCN), 2017.
36   Ali Mashreghi and Valerie King. Broadcast and minimum spanning tree with o(m) messages
     in the asynchronous CONGEST model. Distributed Comput., 34(4):283–299, 2021. doi:
     10.1007/S00446-020-00387-Y.
37   Shreyas Pai, Gopal Pandurangan, Sriram V. Pemmaraju, Talal Riaz, and Peter Robinson.
     Symmetry breaking in the congest model: Time- and message-efficient algorithms for ruling
     sets. In Proceedings of the 31st International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC),
     pages 38:1–38:16, 2017. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2017.38.
38   Shreyas Pai, Gopal Pandurangan, Sriram V. Pemmaraju, and Peter Robinson. Can we break
     symmetry with o(m) communication? In Proceedings of the 2021 Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 247–257, 2021. doi:10.1145/3465084.3467909.
39   Gopal Pandurangan, Peter Robinson, and Michele Scquizzato. A time- and message-optimal
     distributed algorithm for minimum spanning trees. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM
     Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 743–756, 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.
     3055449.
40   Gopal Pandurangan, Peter Robinson, and Michele Scquizzato. A time- and message-optimal
     distributed algorithm for minimum spanning trees. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 16(1):13:1–13:27,
     2020. doi:10.1145/3365005.
41   David Peleg. Distributed Computing: A Locality-Sensitive Approach. Society for Industrial
     and Applied Mathematics, 2000.
42   David Peleg and Alejandro A Schäffer. Graph spanners. Journal of graph theory, 13(1):99–116,
     1989. doi:10.1002/JGT.3190130114.
43   Peter Robinson. Being fast means being chatty: The local information cost of graph spanners.
     In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages
     2105–2120, 2021. doi:10.1137/1.9781611976465.126.




                                                                                                    OPODIS 2024
