Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded
Treedepth
Fedor V. Fomin #
University of Bergen, Norway

Pierre Fraigniaud #
IRIF, Université Paris Cité and CNRS, Paris, France

Pedro Montealegre #
Universidad Adolfo Ibañez, Santiago, Chile

Ivan Rapaport #
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile

Ioan Todinca #
LIFO, Université d’Orléans, France
INSA Centre-Val de Loire, Orléans, France

      Abstract
We establish that every monadic second-order logic (MSO) formula on graphs with bounded treedepth
is decidable in a constant number of rounds within the CONGEST model. To our knowledge, this
marks the first meta-theorem regarding distributed model-checking. Various optimization problems
on graphs are expressible in MSO. Examples include determining whether a graph G has a clique
of size k, whether it admits a coloring with k colors, whether it contains a graph H as a subgraph
or minor, or whether terminal vertices in G could be connected via vertex-disjoint paths. Our
meta-theorem significantly enhances the work of Bousquet et al. [PODC 2022], which was focused
on distributed certification of MSO on graphs with bounded treedepth. Moreover, our results can be
extended to solving optimization and counting problems expressible in MSO, in graphs of bounded
treedepth.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Distributed algorithms; Theory of
computation → Verification by model checking

Keywords and phrases proof-labeling schemes, local computing, CONGEST model

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.DISC.2024.25

Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03321 [28]

Funding Fedor V. Fomin: the research leading to these results has received funding from the
Research Council of Norway via the project BWCA (grant no. 314528).
Pierre Fraigniaud: partially supported by the ANR projects DUCAT (ANR-20-CE48-0006), and
QuData (ANR-18-CE47-0010).
Pedro Montealegre: P.M. has received funding from FONDECYT 1230599.
Ivan Rapaport: I.R. has received funding from FB210005, BASAL funds for centers of excellence
from ANID- Chile, and FONDECYT 1220142.


 1      Introduction
Distributed decision [12, 30, 31] and distributed certification [32, 43, 51] are two comple-
mentary fields of distributed computing, closely associated with distributed fault-tolerant
computing [3, 19, 50]. Both fields are addressing the problem of checking whether a dis-
tributed system is in a legal state with respect to a given specification, or not. We examine
this problem in the classical context of distributed computing in networks, under the standard
            © Fedor V. Fomin, Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, and Ioan Todinca;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
38th International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2024).
Editor: Dan Alistarh; Article No. 25; pp. 25:1–25:20
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
25:2   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


       CONGEST model [60]. Recall that this model assumes networks modeled as simple connected
       n-node graphs, in which every node is provided with an identifier on O(log n) bits that is
       unique in the network. Computation proceeds synchronously as a sequence of rounds. At
       each round, every node sends a message to each of its neighbors in the graph, receives the
       messages sent by its neighbors, and performs some individual computation. A crucial point
       is that messages are restricted to be of size O(log n) bits. While this suffices to transmit
       an identifier, or a constant number of identifiers, transmitting large messages may require
       multiple rounds, typically Θ(k/ log n) rounds for k-bit messages.


       Distributed Decision
       Given a boolean predicate Π on graphs, e.g., whether the graph is H-free for some fixed
       graph H, a decision algorithm for Π takes as input a graph G = (V, E), and outputs whether
       G satisfies Π or not. Specifically, every node v receives as input its identifier id(v), and, after
       a certain number of rounds of communication with its neighbors, it outputs accept or reject,
       under the constraint that G satisfies Π if and only if the output of each of the nodes v ∈ V
       is accept. In other words,

          G |= Π ⇐⇒ ∀v ∈ V (G), output(v) = accept.

       Some predicates are easy to decide locally, i.e., in a constant number of rounds. A canonical
       example is checking whether the (connected) graph G is regular, for which one round suffices.
       However, other predicates cannot be checked locally, with canonical example checking whether
       there is a unique node of degree 3 in the network. Indeed, checking this property requires
       Ω(n) rounds in networks of diameter Θ(n), as two nodes of degree 3 may be at arbitrarily
       large distances in the graph. Another example of a difficult problem is checking whether
                                                                                                   √
       the graph is C4 -free, i.e., does not contain a 4-cycle as a subgraph, which requires Ω̃( n)
       rounds [13]. One way to circumvent the difficulty of local checkability, i.e., to address graph
       predicates requiring a large number of rounds for being decided, is to consider distributed
       certification.


       Distributed Certification
       A certification scheme for a boolean predicate Π is a pair prover-verifier (see [19] for more
       details). The prover is a centralized, computationally unbounded, non-trustable oracle. Given
       a graph G = (V, E), the prover assigns a certificate c(v) ∈ {0, 1}⋆ to each node v ∈ V . These
       certificates are forged by the prover using the complete knowledge of the graph G. The
       verifier is a distributed 1-round algorithm. Each node v takes as sole input its identifier id(v)
       and its certificate c(v). In particular, for distributed decisions, v is unaware of the graph G.
       Every node v just exchanges once its identifier and certificate with its neighbors, and then it
       must output accept or reject.
            The certification scheme is correct if the following two conditions hold. The completeness
       condition states that if G satisfies Π, then the oracle can provide the nodes with certificates
       that they all accept. The soundness condition says that if G does not satisfy Π, then no
       matter the certificates assigned by the oracle to the nodes, at least one of them rejects. That
       is, the role of the verifier is to check that the collection of certificates assigned to the nodes
       by the prover is indeed a global proof that the graph satisfies the predicate. In other words,

          G |= Π ⇐⇒ ∃c : V (G) → {0, 1}⋆ : ∀v ∈ V (G), output(v) = accept.
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                25:3


The main measure of complexity of a certification scheme is the maximum size of the
certificates assigned by the prover to the nodes on legal instances, i.e., for graphs G satisfying
the given predicate. Ideally, to be implemented in a single round under the CONGEST model,
the certificates should be of size O(log n) bits. Interestingly, many graph properties can
be certified with such short certificates, including acyclicity [51], planarity [25], bounded
genus [17, 26], etc. On the other hand, basic graph properties require large certificates,
including diameter 2 vs. 3 (requiring Ω̃(n)-bit certificates [8]), non-3-colorability (requiring
                                                           √
Ω̃(n2 )-bit certificates [43]), C4 -freeness (requiring Ω̃( n)-bit certificates [13]), etc. The
following question was thus raised, under different formulations (see, e.g., [20]): What are
the graph properties that admit certification schemes with O(log n)-bit certificates, or, to the
least, certificates of polylogarithmic size? Answering this question requires formalizing the
notion of “graph predicate”.

Monadic Second-Order Logic
Recall that, in the first-order logic (FO) of graphs, a graph property is expressed as a
quantified logical sentence whose variables represent vertices, with predicates for equality
(=) and adjacency (adj). An FO formula is therefore constructed according to the following
set of rules, where x and y are vertices, and φ and ψ are FO formulas:

   x = y | adj(x, y) | φ ∨ ψ | φ ∧ ψ | ¬φ | ∃xφ | ∀xφ.

As an example, triangle-freeness can be formulated as
                                                                 
   φ = ¬∃x1 ∃x2 ∃x3 adj(x1 , x2 ) ∧ adj(x2 , x3 ) ∧ adj(x3 , x1 ) .

The formula above assumes simple graphs (i.e., no loops nor multiple edges). If the graphs
may have loops, then one should add the predicate ¬(xi = xj ) to the formula for every i ̸= j.
    The monadic second-order logic (MSO) extends FO by allowing quantification on sets
of vertices and edges, with the incidence predicate inc(v, e) indicating whether vertex v
is incident to edge e, and the membership (∈) predicate. For instance, acyclicity can be
formulated as
                                                                               
    φ = ¬∃X ̸= ∅ ∀x ∈ X ∃y1 ∈ X ∃y2 ∈ X ¬(y1 = y2 ) ∧ adj(x, y1 ) ∧ adj(x, y2 ) .

Note that X ̸= ∅ can merely be written as ∃x ∈ X. Note also that acyclicity cannot be
expressed in FO as the length of the potential cycle is unbounded, from which it follows that
one cannot quantify on vertices only for expressing acyclicity, because one does not know
how many vertices should be considered. On the other hand, since FO can express properties
                                                                                 √
such as C4 -freeness, which, as mentioned before, requires certificates on Ω̃( n) bits, there
is no hope of establishing a meta-theorem about FO regarding compact certification in all
graphs. Nevertheless, a breakthrough in the theory of distributed certification was recently
obtained by Bousquet, Feuilloley, and Pierron [20], who showed that every MSO predicate
admits a distributed certification scheme with O(log n)-bit certificates in the family of graphs
with bounded treedepth.

Algorithmic Meta-Theorems
A vibrant line of research in sequential computing is the development of algorithmic meta-
theorems. According to Grohe and Kreutzer [45], algorithmic meta-theorems assert that
certain families of algorithmic problems, typically defined by some logical and combinatorial



                                                                                                     DISC 2024
25:4   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


       conditions, can be solved efficiently under some suitable definition of this term. Such theorems
       play an essential role in the theory of algorithms as they reveal a profound interplay between
       algorithms, logic, and combinatorics. One of the most celebrated examples of a meta-theorem
       is Courcelle’s theorem, which asserts that graph properties definable in MSO are decidable
       in linear time on graphs of bounded treewidth [10]. For an introduction to this fascinating
       research area, we refer to the surveys by Kreutzer [52] and Grohe [44].
           Bousquet, Feuilloley, and Pierron in [20] introduced the exploration of algorithmic meta-
       theorems in distributed computing. Their primary result in this direction is that any MSO
       formula can be locally certified on graphs with bounded treedepth using a logarithmic
       number of bits per node, which represents the golden standard in certification. This
       theorem has numerous consequences for certification – for more details, we refer to [20].
       Notably, the FO property C4 -freeness, and the MSO property non-3-colorability, which both
       necessitate certificates of polynomial size in general, can be certified with just O(log n)-bit
       certificates in graphs of bounded treedepth. Bousquet et al.’s result has been extended to
       more comprehensive classes of graphs, including graphs excluding a small minor [6], as well
       as graphs of bounded treewidth, and graphs of bounded cliquewidth. However, this extension
       comes at the cost of slightly larger certificates, of O(log2 n) bits, as seen in [34] and [33],
       respectively.
           With significant advances in developing meta-theorems for distributed certification, there’s
       a notable absence of similar results for distributed decision. It prompts a natural question:
       could such results be obtained for the round-complexity of CONGEST? More concretely,
       the fundamental inquiry that remains unaddressed by Bousquet et al.’s paper, and by the
       subsequent works regarding distributed certification of MSO predicates is:


          Question. What is the round-complexity in CONGEST of deciding MSO formulas in
          graphs of bounded treedepth?


          A first step in answering this question was proposed in [59] where it is stated that, in any
       graph class of treedepth at most d, for every fixed connected graph H, H-freeness can be
       decided in O(1) rounds in CONGEST. In this paper, we offer a comprehensive answer to the
       question. To elucidate our results, we first need to define the treedepth of a graph.


       Treedepth
       For any non-negative integer d, a (connected) graph G has treedepth at most d if there exists
       a rooted tree T spanning the vertices of G, with depth at most d, such that, for every edge
       {u, v} in G, u is an ancestor of v in T , or v is an ancestor of u in T , see Fig. 1. The treedepth
       of a graph G, denoted by td(G), is the smallest d for which such a tree exists.
           The class of graphs with bounded treedepth, i.e., of treedepth d for some fixed d ≥ 0, has
       strong connections with minor-closed families of graphs. Specifically, for any family F of
       graphs closed under taking graph minors, the graphs in F have bounded treedepth if and only
       if F does not include all the paths [58]. Similarly, the graphs with bounded treedepth have a
       finite set of forbidden induced subgraphs, and any property of graphs monotonic with respect
       to induced subgraphs can be tested in polynomial time on graphs of bounded treedepth [58].
       Computing the treedepth of a graph is NP-hard, but since treedepth is monotonic under
       graph minors, it is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) [36]. Last but not least, MSO and FO
       have the same expressive power in graph classes of bounded treedepth [14].
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25:5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0         9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1           8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
G:
<latexit sha1_base64="TC0EmnMTOTFOVRfQqcCRa+TK09Y=">AAAB6XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKLzwFPegxinlAEsLspDcZMju7zMwKYckfePGgiFf/yJt/4yTZgyYWNBRV3XR3+bHg2rjut5NbWl5ZXcuvFzY2t7Z3irt7dR0limGNRSJSTZ9qFFxizXAjsBkrpKEvsOEPbyZ+4wmV5pF8NKMYOyHtSx5wRo2VHm6vusWSW3anIIvEy0gJMlS7xa92L2JJiNIwQbVueW5sOilVhjOB40I70RhTNqR9bFkqaYi6k04vHZMjq/RIEClb0pCp+nsipaHWo9C3nSE1Az3vTcT/vFZigstOymWcGJRstihIBDERmbxNelwhM2JkCWWK21sJG1BFmbHhFGwI3vzLi6R+UvbOy2f3p6XKdRZHHg7gEI7BgwuowB1UoQYMAniGV3hzhs6L8+58zFpzTjazD3/gfP4AHFeNGQ==</latexit>




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2         4   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4               8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3         5       7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3       5       7       9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 1 Embedding of a graph G into a tree T of depth 6.


1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Our Results
We prove that, for every MSO formula φ, there is an algorithm A that, for every n-node
graph G, decides whether G |= φ in O(22td(G) ) rounds in the CONGEST model. That is, the
round-complexity of A depends only on the treedepth of the input graph, and on the MSO
formula, i.e., it does not depend on the size n of the graph. Thus A performs a constant
number of rounds in any class of graphs with bounded treedepth. In particular, deciding
non-3-colorability can be done in O(1) rounds in graphs of bounded treedepth, in contrast to
general graphs, for which deciding non-3-colorability requires a polynomial number of rounds
by [43].
    Our meta-theorem is essentially the best that one may hope regarding distributed model
checking MSO formulas in a constant number of rounds in CONGEST. Indeed, the FO
predicate “there is at least one vertex of degree > 2” requires Ω(n) rounds to be checked
in this class. Hence our theorem cannot be extended to graphs of bounded treewidth or
bounded cliquewidth, actually not even to bounded pathwidth, and not even to the class
P ∪ B where P is the set of all paths, and B is the set of all graphs composed of a path to
which is attached a claw at one of its endpoints.
    We also consider distributed model checking of labeled graphs. For instance, one can
check whether a given set of vertices is a feedback vertex set, i.e., whether the graph obtained
by removing this set of vertices is acyclic. For such a predicate, it is sufficient to add a unary
predicate to the logical structure used to mark the nodes, say mark(x) = true means that
vertex x is in the set. Using this unary predicate, φ can express the fact that there are no
cycles in G passing only trough nodes x for which mark(x) = f alse. As another example, the
fact that a graph is properly 2-colored can be expressed using two unary boolean predicates
red and blue, as
                                                                                               
                                                                                           
  φ = ∀x red(x)∨blue(x) ∧ ∀x, y ¬ adj(x, y)∧ (red(x)∧red(y))∨(blue(x)∧blue(y)                      .

Since we also deal with MSO, we can also label edges. For instance, one can check whether a
given set of edges forms a spanning tree. Indeed, it is sufficient to introduce a unary predicate
used to mark the edges: mark(e) = true means that edge e is in the set. As for feedback
vertex set, using this unary predicate, φ can express the fact that the set of marked edges is
a spanning tree (i.e., every node is incident to at least one marked edge, and any two vertices
are connected by a path of marked edges). We show that deciding MSO formulas on labeled
graphs of bounded treedepth can be done in O(1) rounds in the CONGEST model.
    More generally, we also consider the optimization variants of decision problems expressible
in MSO on graphs of bounded treedepth. For instance, an independent set can be expressed
as an MSO formula with a free variable S, such as φ(S) = ∀x ∈ S ∀y ∈ S ¬adj(x, y). Then,



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DISC 2024
25:6   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


       maxφ, i.e., maximum independent set, consists in, given any graph G = (V, E), finding the
       largest set S ⊆ V such that G |= φ(S). We show that, for every MSO formula φ(S) with
       free variable S ⊆ V or S ⊆ E, there is an algorithm for graphs of bounded treedepth solving
       maxφ (and minφ) in a constant number of rounds in the CONGEST model. This constant is
       of the form O(g(td(G), φ)) for some function g. Thanks to the expressive power of MSO, our
       results yield algorithms with a constant number of rounds in the CONGEST model on graphs
       of bounded treedepth for numerous popular optimization problems including minimum vertex
       cover, minimum feedback vertex set, minimum dominating set, maximum independent set,
       maximum induced forest, maximum clique, maximum matching, minimum spanning tree,
       Hamiltonian cycle, cubic subgraph, planar subgraph, Eulerian subgraph, Steiner tree, disjoint
       paths, min-cut, minor and topological minor containment, rural postman, k-colorability,
       edge k-colorability, partition into k cliques, and covering by k cliques. We also extend our
       results to counting problems, such as counting triangles or perfect matchings. Due to space
       restriction we only present in details in this article the distributed model checking result,
       for unlabeled graphs. For the optimization and counting variants, and the general case of
       labeled graphs, we refer to the full paper [28].
            Finally, we briefly discuss some applications of our results to much larger classes of graphs,
       namely graphs of bounded expansion (see [58] for an extended introduction). Graphs of
       bounded expansion include planar graphs, and more generally, all classes of graphs defined
       from excluding minor. It was shown [59] that, for every class G of graphs with bounded
       expansion, and every positive integer p, there is an algorithms performing in O(log n) rounds
       under the CONGEST model that partitions the vertex set V of any graph G = (V, E) ∈ G into
       f (p) parts V1 , . . . , Vf (p) such that every collection Vi1 , . . . , Viq of at most p parts, 1 ≤ q ≤ p,
       {i1 , . . . , iq } ⊆ {1, . . . , f (p)}, induces a (not necessarily connected) subgraph of G with
       treedepth at most p. The function f solely depends on the considered class G of bounded
       expansion. The vertex partitioning V1 , . . . , Vf (p) is called a low treedepth decomposition
       with parameter p. Plugging in our techniques into this framework, we show that, for every
       connected graph H, H-freeness can be decided in O(log n) rounds under the CONGEST
       model in any class of graphs with bounded expansion. This result was claimed in [59] with
       no proofs. We provide that claim with a complete formal proof.

       1.2     Other Related Work
       The quest for efficient (sublinear) algorithms for solving classical graph problems in the
       CONGEST model dates back to the seminal paper by Garay, Kutten and Peleg [38], where an
       algorithm for constructing an MST was designed. Since then, a long series of problems have
       been addressed, such as connectivity decomposition [7], tree embeddings [41] k-dominating
       set [53], stiener trees [54], min-cut [40, 56], max-flow [39], shortest path [47, 55], among others.
       Additionally, algorithms tailored to specific classes of networks have also been developed:
       DFS for planar graphs [42], MST for bounded genus graphs [46], MIS for networks excluding
       a fixed minor [9], etc.
           Distributed certification is a very vivid topic, and many results have appeared since the
       survey [21]. A handful of recent papers considered approximate variants of the problem,
       a la property testing [15, 16, 22]. In particular, it was shown that every monotone (i.e.,
       closed under taking subgraphs) and summable (i.e., stable by disjoint union) property Π
       has a compact approximate certification scheme in any proper minor-closed graph class [18].
       Other recent contributions dealt with augmenting the power of the verifier in certification
       schemes, which includes tradeoffs between the size of the certificates and the number of
       rounds of the verification protocol [24], randomized verifiers [35], quantum verifiers [29],
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                25:7


and several hierarchies of certification mechanisms, including games between a prover and
a disprover [1, 23], interactive protocols [11, 49, 57], and even zero-knowledge distributed
certification [2], and distributed quantum interactive protocols [37].


 2     Treedepth and treewidth
Throughout the paper, trees (or forests) are considered as rooted. The depth of a tree is the
number of vertices of a longest path from the root to a leaf. The depth of a forest is the
maximum depth among its trees. Let us recall the definition of the treedepth. The interested
reader can refer to the book of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [58] for further insights.

▶ Definition 1 (treedepth). The treedepth of a graph G = (V, E) is the minimum depth of
a forest T = (V, F ) on the same vertex set as G, such that, for any edge {u, v} of G, one
of the endpoints is an ancestor of the other in the forest T . Such a forest T is also called
elimination forest of G.

    Observe that if G is connected then the forest T in the definition above is actually a
tree. Also, Definition 1 does not require the forest T to be a subgraph of G. The following
statement is an alternative, equivalent definition for treedepth. This recursive definition
implicitly provides a recursive construction of an elimination tree.

▶ Lemma 2 ([58]). The treedepth of a graph G is:
          
          1
          
                                                                   if G has a unique vertex,
   td(G) = 1 + minv∈V (G) td(G − v)                                 if G is connected,
          
          max{td(C) | C is a connected component of G}
          
                                                                    otherwise.

On the other hand, tree decompositions and treewidth of graphs were introduced by Robertson
and Seymour [61].

▶ Definition 3 (treewidth). A tree decomposition of a graph G = (V, E) is a pair (T, B)
where T = (I, F ) is a tree, and B = {Bi , i ∈ I} is a collection of subsets of vertices of G,
called bags, such that the following conditions hold:
    For every vertex of G, there exists some bag containing this vertex;
    For every edge e of G there is some bag containing both endpoints of e;
    For every v ∈ V , the set {i ∈ I : v ∈ Bi } of bags containing v forms a connected subgraph
    of T .
The width of a tree decomposition is the maximum size of a bag, minus one. The treewidth
of a graph G, denoted by tw(G), is the smallest width of a tree decomposition of G.

    It is known [58] that the treedepth of a graph is at least its treewidth. Given an elimination
tree T of a graph G, we can define a canonical tree decomposition associated to this same
tree, such that the width of the decomposition corresponds to the depth of T , minus one.
The following lemma is a straightforward consequence of the definitions of elimination trees
and of tree decompositions.

▶ Lemma 4 (canonical tree decomposition). Let T = (V, F ) be an elimination tree of depth d
of a graph G = (V, E). Let us associate to each node u of T a bag B(u) containing u and all
the ancestors of u in T . Then T = (V, F ), and the corresponding set of bags (Bu )u∈V , form
a tree-decomposition of G, of width d − 1.



                                                                                                     DISC 2024
25:8   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


          For instance, the treedepth of an n-vertex path Pn is exactly ⌈log(n + 1)⌉ (see, e.g., [58]).
       The treedepth of a graph does not increase when we delete some of its edges or vertices. Thus
       graphs of treedepth d have no paths on 2d vertices. This observation yields the following
       lemma.

       ▶ Lemma 5. Let T = (V, F ) be an elimination tree of a graph G = (V, E) with F ⊆ E. Then
       the depth of T is at most 2td(G) .

       Proof. Let d = td(G). Assume, for the purpose of contradiction, that T has depth larger
       than 2d . It follows that the longest path P in T from its root to a leaf contains at
       least 2d vertices. The path P is also a path in G, so the treedepth of P is at most the
       treedepth of G, i.e., at most d. This is a contradiction with the fact that, for n-node paths,
       td(Pn ) = ⌈log(n + 1)⌉.                                                                     ◀

           3   Tree decompositions and w-terminal recursive graphs
       Courcelle’s theorem [10] states that any property expressible in MSO can be decided in linear
       (sequential) time on graphs of bounded treewidth. We use an alternative proof of Courcelle’s
       theorem, by Borie, Parker, and Tovey [5]. Indeed, this proof provides us with an explicit
       dynamic programming strategy, which will be used in our distributed protocol.
           Graphs of bounded treewidth can also be defined recursively, based on a graph grammar.
       Let w be a positive integer. A w-terminal graph is a triple (V, W, E) where G = (V, E) is a
       graph, and W ⊆ V is a totally ordered set of at most w distinguished vertices. Vertices of W
       are called the terminals of the graph, and we denote by τ (G) the number of its terminals.
       As the terminal set W is totally ordered, we can refer to the rth terminal, for 1 ≤ r ≤ w.
       Moreover, since vertices are given distinct identifiers in CONGEST, one can view W as
       ordered by these identifiers.
           The class of w-terminal recursive graphs is defined, starting from w-terminal base graphs,
       by a sequence of compositions, or gluings. A w-terminal base graph is a w-terminal graph
       of the form (V, W, E) with W = V . A composition f acts on two1 w-terminal graphs, and
       produces a new w-terminal graph, as follows (see Figure 2 for an example2 , for w = 2).
           The graph G = f (G1 , G2 ) is obtained by, first, making disjoint copies of the two graphs
       G1 and G2 , and, second, “gluing” together some terminals of G1 and G2 . In the gluing
       operation, each terminal of G1 is identified with at most one terminal of G2 . Formally, the
       gluing performed by f is represented by a matrix m(f ) having τ (G) ≤ w rows, and two
       columns, with integer entries in {0, . . . , τ (G)}. At row r of the matrix, mr,c (f ) indicates
       which terminal of each graph Gc , c ∈ {1, 2} is identified to the rth terminal of graph G.
       If mr,c (f ) = 0, then no terminal of Gc is identified to terminal r of G (in particular, if
       mr,1 (f ) = mr,2 (f ) = 0, then the rth terminal of G is a new vertex; Nevertheless, this
       situation will not occur in our construction). Every terminal of Gc is identified to at most
       one terminal of G, i.e., each non-zero value in {1, . . . , τ (Gc )} appears at most once in the
       column c of m(f ).
           A simple but crucial observation is that the number of possible different matrices, and
       hence of different composition operations f , is bounded by a function of w. Indeed the size
       of each matrix is at most 2w, and each entry of the matrix is an integer between 0 and w.


       1
         The definition of [5] considers composition operations of arbitrary arity, i.e., they consider gluing on
         three or more graphs simultaneously, and they also consider a special gluing, on a single graph which
         allows to “forget” some terminals. Technically, all these operations can be replaced by operations of
         arity 2, and we only use arity 2 for the sake of simplifying the presentation.
       2
         The figure is borrowed from [33] with the agreement of the authors.
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                    25:9


                                                            1       2
                                                                           f (·, ·)
                                            a       b       c       d

                                
                        2    1
            m(f ) =                             1       2
                        0    2                                  f (·, ·)              1   2
                                        a       b       c
                                                                                      c   d




                                                1       2                  1      2
                                                a       b                  b      c

   Figure 2 Paths as 2-terminal recursive graphs.




                                                     ≤i
   Figure 3 Tree-decompositions: graphs Gu , G=i
                                              u and Gu .




    The class of w-terminal recursive graphs is exactly the class of graphs of treewidth at
most w − 1 (see, e.g., Theorem 40 in [4]).
    Let us briefly describe how a tree-decomposition of width w − 1 of a graph G can be
transformed into a description of G as a w-terminal recursive graph. This construction
will be crucial for efficiently deciding MSO properties of graph G. Let T = (I, F ) be a
tree-decomposition of G = (V, E) with bags of size at most w. The terminals correspond to
the root bag. For every node u of T , we use the following notations, depicted in Figure 3:
    Tu is the subtree of T rooted at u;
    Bu is the bag of node u, and Gbase
                                    u    = (G[Bu ], Bu ) is the w-terminal recursive base graph
    induced by bag Bu ;
    Vu is the union of all bags of Tu , and Gu = (G[Vu ], Bu ) is the w-terminal graph induced
    by Vu , with Bu as set of terminals.

     Let us now show that Gu is indeed a w-terminal recursive graph. This is clear when u is
a leaf, since, in this case, Gu = Gbase  u   is a base graph. Assume that u is not a leaf, and let
v1 , . . . , vq be the children of node u in T . The ordering of the children is arbitrary, but fixed.
Let us introduce two new families of w-terminal recursive graphs as follows. Both are having
Bu as set of terminals, and, for every i ∈ {1 . . . , q}:
     G=i u = G[Bu ∪ Vvi ], and
     G≤i u = G[Bu ∪ Vv1 ∪ · · · ∪ Vvi ].




                                                                                                         DISC 2024
25:10   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


                                                                       base
        Observe that G=i
                      u is obtained by gluing Gvi with the base graph Gu    . More precisely,
                                      base
             G=i
              u = f(Bvi ,Bu ) (Gvi , Gu ),                                                               (1)

        where the gluing operation f (Bvi , Bu ) glues the terminals of Bvi ∩ Bu of Gvi to the corre-
        sponding terminals of Bu , and the new set of terminals is Bu . Also, for all i ∈ {1, . . . , q − 1},
        G≤i+1
          u    is obtained by gluing G≤i
                                       u and Gu
                                                 =i+1
                                                        using the gluing function f(Bu ,Bu ) (which is the
        identity function on |Bu | terminals), that is:

             G≤i+1
              u    = f(Bu ,Bu ) (G≤i   =i+1
                                  u , Gu    ).                                                           (2)

        By construction, we get Gu = G≤q
                                      u .


         4      MSO logic and Courcelle’s theorem
        Recall that, using monadic second-order (MSO) logic formulas on graphs, we can express
        graph properties such as “G is not 3-colorable” or “G contains no triangles”. In order to
        solve optimization problems, we also consider MSO formulas with a free variable. That is,
        we consider formulas of the form φ(S) where S is a set of vertices, or a set of edges. The
        corresponding optimization problem aims at finding a set S with maximum (or minimum,
        depending on the context) size satisfying G |= φ(S). We may even assume that the vertices,
        or edges of the input graph G = (V, E) have polynomial weights, that is the weight assignment
        w : V ∪ E → Z satisfies that, for every x ∈ V ∪ E, w(x) can be encoded with O(log n) bits.
        The problem maxφ then consists in computing the set S with maximum weight satisfying
        G |= φ(S). In this framework we can express problems like maximum (weighted) independent
        set, minimum (weighted) dominating set, or minimum-weight spanning tree (MST).

        4.1     Regular Predicates, Homorphism Classes, and Composition
        To start, let us first consider closed formulae only, i.e., with no free variable, and formulas
        with just one free (edge or vertex) set variable. (Further extensions are discussed in Section 6,
        with applications to labeled graphs and counting.) Using closed formulae, we can refer
        to graph predicates P(G), and, using formulas with free variables, we can refer to graph
        predicates P(G, X), where X denotes a subset of vertices or a subset of edges of G. For each
        possible assignment of X with corresponding values, P is either true or false.
            Any composition operation f over two w-terminal recursive graphs G1 = (V1 , W1 , E1 ),
        and G2 = (V2 , W2 , E2 ) naturally extends to a composition over pairs (G1 , X1 ), and (G2 , X2 ).
        If G = f (G1 , G2 ), we denote by ◦f the composition over pairs. More precisely,
                                     
            ◦f (G1 , X1 ), (G2 , X2 ) = (G, X),

        the operation being valid only under some specific conditions. Let us consider the case when
        X1 and X2 are vertex-set variables. For each terminal t of G, if terminals from both G1 and
        G2 were mapped to t, say, terminals t1 ∈ W1 and t2 ∈ W2 , then either t1 ∈ X1 and t2 ∈ X2 ,
        or t1 ̸∈ X1 and t2 ̸∈ X2 . The set X is interpreted as the union of X1 and X2 , by identifying
        pairs of terminal vertices t1 ∈ X1 and t2 ∈ X2 that have been mapped on a same terminal
        of G. For edge-sets, the set X can also be seen as the union of two sets X1 and X2 , up to
        gluing the vertices specified by f . We refer to [5] for a description of the gluing operation,
        and of the interpretation of the values of the variables.

        ▶ Definition 6 (regular predicate). A graph predicate P(G, X) is regular if, for any value w,
        we can associate to w
           a finite set C of homomorphism classes,
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                25:11


   an homomorphism function h, assigning to each w-terminal recursive graph G, and to
   any subset X of vertices or edges of G, a class h(G, X) ∈ C, and
   an update function ⊙f : C × C → C for each composition operation f ,
such that:
1. If h(G1 , X1 ) = h(G2 , X2 ) then P(G1 , X1 ) = P(G2 , X2 );
2. For any two w-terminal recursive graphs G1 and G2 , and any two sets X1 and X2 ,
                                                             
       h ◦f (G1 , X1 ), (G2 , X2 ) = ⊙f h(G1 , X1 ), h(G2 , X2 ) .

    A class c ∈ C is said to be an accepting class if there exists (G, X) such that h(G, X) = c,
and P(G, X) is true. By definition, the predicate P holds for every (G′ , X ′ ) such that
h(G′ , X ′ ) = c. A non accepting class c is called a rejecting class. The same definitions applies
to predicates P(G), with no free variables.

Remark. Without loss of generality, we may assume that, in Definition 6, the class c =
h(G, X) with G = (V, W, E) encodes the intersection of X with G[W ]. Indeed, since W is of
constant size, if X is a vertex-set, then we can add the set of all the ranks of the elements in
Xj ∩ W , with respect to the totally ordered set W , to the class c. And if Xj is an edge-set,
then we can store each edge of Xj contained in G[W ] as the pair of ranks of its endpoints.
In particular, we can assume that we are given a function Selected(c, W ) which, given a class
c, and a set of terminals W , returns the unique intersection of X with the vertices, or the
edges, of G[W ].

▶ Theorem 7 ([5]). Any predicate P(G, X) expressible by an M SO formula φ(X) is regular.
Moreover, given the formula φ(X) and a parameter w, one can compute the set of classes C, the
update functions ⊙f over all possible composition operations f , as well as the homomorphism
classes h(G, X) for all base graphs G, and all possible values of variable X. (The same holds
for predicates P(G) corresponding to closed formulas φ.)

   Let us emphasize that the width parameter w, and the formula φ in Theorem 7 are
constants. Thereofore, the set of homomorphism classes C is of constant size, and can be
computed, as well as functions ⊙f and homomorphism classes of base graphs, in constant
time. This constant just depends on w and on φ.

4.2    Sequential Model-Checking and optimization
We have all ingredients to describe the sequential model-checking algorithm on graphs of
bounded treewidth, that we will later use for designing our distributed protocol. In a nutshell,
the algorithm proceeds by dynamic programming, from the leaves of the decomposition-tree
to the root. When considering a node u, the program deals with the graph Gu induced
by all bags in the subtree rooted at u, which is viewed as a w-terminal recursive graph
with labels Bu . The program computes the homomorphism class of h(Gu ) using merely the
homomorphism classes of its children, the bags of its children, and the subgraph of G induced
by the bag of u.

▶ Lemma 8 (bottom-up decision). Let P(G) be a regular predicate on graphs, corresponding
to a formula φ with no free variables. Let G be a graph, and let T = (I, F ) be a tree-
decomposition of G with bags {Bu | u ∈ I}. Let u be a node of the tree decomposition, with
children v1 , . . . , vq for q ≥ 0. The homomorphism class of h(Gu ) can be computed using only
Gbase
  u , the values of Bvi and h(Gvi ) for all i ∈ {1, . . . , q}.




                                                                                                      DISC 2024
25:12   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


        Proof. Observe that h(Gbase    u ) can be computed directly by Theorem 7. In particular this
        settles the case when u is a leaf. If u is an internal node, then, for each i = 1, . . . , q, we
                                                                   base
        can compute h(G=i     u ) using Bvi , Bu , h(Gvi ) and h(Gu ) as follows. By Equation 1, we have
          =i                        base
        Gu = f(Bvi ,Bu ) (Gvi , Gu ). Since Bvi and Bu are known, one can construct the function
        f(Bvi ,Bu ) , and, thanks to Theorem 7, one can retrieve the function ⊙f(Bv ,Bu ) . By Definition 6,
                                                                                       i
                                               base
        h(G=iu ) = ⊙f(Bvi ,Bu ) (h(Gvi ), h(Gu )). Since the parameters on the right-hand side of the
        equality are known, one can compute h(G=i         u ).
            Let us now show how to compute the values h(G≤i                              ≤1     =1
                                                                      u ). For i = 1, Gu = Gu , and thus
        h(G≤1               =1                                                ≤i
             u ) = h(Gu ). For every i ≥ 2, one can compute h(Gu ) using Bu , h(Gu
                                                                                                  ≤i−1
                                                                                                       ), and
                                                  ≤i               ≤i−1
             =i
        h(Gu ). Indeed, by Equation 2, Gu = f(Bu ,Bu ) (Gu              , Gu ), so again we have h(G≤i
                                                                           =i
                                                                                                        u ) =
        ⊙f(Bu ,Bu ) (h(G≤i−1
                          u    ), h(G=i
                                     u   )), and all parameters on the  right-hand side  have been computed
        previously.
            Eventually, since Gu = Gu≤q , we get h(Gu ) = h(G≤q      u ).                                   ◀

           Algorithm 1 simultaneously presents the model-checking of regular predicates on graphs,
        and the optimization protocol for predicates on graphs and sets.
           For the decision problem, we simply compute bottom-up, for each node u, the class of
        h(Gu ) using Lemma 8. At the root r, the algorithm accepts if h(Gr ) is an accepting class.

              Algorithm 1 Sequential decision for regular property P on graph G.
        Require: tree decomposition T = (VE , FT ) of width w − 1 of G ; formula φ and the
           corresponding homomorphism classes C, homomorphism function h on base graphs,
           composition functions ⊙f                                         ▷ See Theorem 7

         1: Bottom-up phase on tree T , computes h(Gu ) for each node u :
         2: for each node u of T from the bottom to the root do
         3:    let v1 , . . . , vq be the children of u in T    ▷ These nodes have been treated before u
         4:    Compute h(Gu ) from Gbase      u  , Bvi and  h(Gvi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ q using Lemma 8
         5: end for

         6: Decision at the root r :
         7: Return true if h(Gr ) is an accepting class, otherwise return false.


            A similar result can be obtained for regular predicates P(G, X), over (polynomially
        weighted) graphs and vertex sets. In order to compute the maximum or minimum weight
        set X such that P(G, X) holds, we can compute by dynamic programming, at each node u
        of the decomposition tree, a table OPT(Gu ) with |C| entries, one for each homomorphism
        class c ∈ C of P, where OPT(Gu )[c] corresponds to the optimum size of a partial solution set
        Xu such that P(Gu , Xu ) = c. This solution Xu is obtained by glueing partial solutions over
        the children nodes of u, and function Selected is used to avoid overcounting vertices in the
        intersection of partial solutions; see the full version of the paper [28] for complete details.


         5       Distributed construction of the elimination tree
        Our CONGEST protocol constructing an elimination tree of depth smaller than 2d for graphs
        of treedepth at most d is depicted in Algorithm 2. A similar approach was previously used
        in in [59] for so-called small treedepth decompositions (see also Section 7 of this article).
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                            25:13


   Algorithm 2 CONGEST algorithm computing an elimination tree of G in O(22d ) rounds.
Require: Protocol leader(G = (V, E), U ) with a set U ⊆ V of distinguished vertices (i.e.,
    each vertex knows whether it belongs to U ). After O(diam(G)) CONGEST rounds, each
    vertex u will know leader(u), the minimum identifier in the component of G[U ] containing
    u.
 1: Apply leader on all vertices of G
 2: Let r be the unique node such that r = leader(r)           ▷ Unique since G is connected
 3: Set parent(r) = r                                               ▷ r is the root of the tree
 4: Mark vertex r                      ▷ Marked vertices are those already placed in the tree
 5: Set depth(r) = 1
 6: for step i = 2 to D = 2d − 1 do
 7:     // At step i we identify the nodes of T of depth i
 8:     Apply leader on all unmarked vertices of G                             ▷ O(2d ) rounds
 9:     Each unmarked vertex u broadcasts (leader(u), u) to its neighbours        ▷ One round
10:     for each marked vertex v of depth i do                          ▷ All in a same round
11:        for each ℓ among values leader(u) received by v do
12:            v picks the corresponding u(ℓ) of minimum id ▷ u(ℓ) is a new node of depth i
13:            v adds u(ℓ) to the list of its children
14:            v sends to u(ℓ) a message with its id indicating that it becomes its parent.
15:        end for
16:     end for
17:     for each vertex u that receives such a message from some v do ▷ All in a same round
18:        u sets parent(u) = v, depth(u) = i and marks itself
19:     end for
20: end for
21: if some vertex u is still unmarked then
22:     u rejects because td(G) > d            ▷ G contains a path with more than D vertices
23: end if



▶ Lemma 9. Let G = (V, E) be the (connected) input network, and let d ≥ 1 be an integer.
There exists an algorithm performing in O(22d ) rounds in CONGEST that outputs either an
elimination tree T = (T, F ) of G with depth at most 2d , or reports that td(G) > d. In the
former case, each node u ∈ V knows its parent and its children in the tree T at the end of
the algorithm, as well as the depth of T .

Proof. Algorithm 2 constructs an elimination tree following the same approach as Lemma 2,
in a greedy manner: in a nutshell, it computes a depth-first search tree of G, heavily relying
on the fact that, if G is of treedepth at most d, then all its paths are of length at most
2d . Since G is connected, it starts with a root vertex v = r (chosen arbitrarily), and then
constructs elimination trees of G∖v, by treating each component separately. The components
of G ∖ v are identified by their leader with the smallest node’s identifier of the component.
Each unmarked node eventually knows its leader (Instruction 8). For a component with
leader ℓ, we choose as root of the component a vertex that is adjacent to v (Instruction 12).
In particular, every edge of the tree is also an edge of G (see Instruction 14).
    The construction preserves the following invariant. The tree constructed after step i is
an elimination tree of the subgraph induced by the marked vertices. Moreover, for each
connected component of unmarked vertices, its outgoing edges are solely incident to a path
from the root and a vertex v of depth i. In particular, at the end, T is an elimination tree



                                                                                                  DISC 2024
25:14   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


        of G. Furthermore, T is a subtree of G. Therefore, by Lemma 5, if td(G) ≤ d then the
        depths of T is smaller than 2d as requested, and the algorithm marks all vertices in less
        than 2d phases. Consequently, if some vertices remain unmarked after this many rounds
        (Instruction 21), we correctly assert that td(G) > d.
            Regarding the round-complexity, observe that, at each step, there is a call to Algorithm
        leader on the set of unmarked nodes (see, e.g., [48] for a detailed description of a leader-
        election algorithm). Its round complexity is O(diam(G)). The diameter of G is O(2td(G) ),
        and thus is it at most O(2d ) (we can adapt algorithm leader such that, if it does not succeed
        in O(2d ) rounds, then it rejects, which is correct as, in this case, td(G) > d).           ◀

        ▶ Lemma 10. Let G = (V, E) be the input network, and let us assume that an elimination
        tree T = (F, V ) of depth smaller than 2d has been constructed as in Lemma 9. There is a
        CONGEST algorithm constructing the canonical tree decomposition (T, (Bu )u∈V ) in O(2d )
        rounds. At the end of the algorithm, each node u knows its bag Bu as well as the graph G[Bu ]
        induced by the bag.

        Proof. The algorithm proceeds top-down. For each round i = 1, . . . , D = 2d − 1, every node
        u at depth i computes Bu and G[Bu ]. Observe that when u is the root, Bu is a singleton so
        G[Bu ] is trivial. If u is not the root, then u has received Bv and G[Bv ] from its parent v.
        Observe that Bu = Bv ∪ {u} and the edges of G[Bu ] are the edges of G[Bv ], plus the edges
        incident to u. Therefore, node u is able to compute the information from its parent, and to
        transmit it to its children.                                                               ◀

         6     Distributed model checking and optimization
        We have now all ingredients to prove our main result.

        ▶ Theorem 11 (Distributed decision and optimization).
          For any closed MSO formula φ, there exists an algorithm which, for any n-node graph G,
          and any d ≥ 0, decides whether G |= φ, or reports “large treedepth” if td(G) > d, running
          in O(22d ) rounds in the CONGEST model.
          For any MSO formula φ(S) with a free variable S representing a vertex-set, or an edge-set,
          there exists an algorithm which, for any n-node graph G, and any d ≥ 0, selects a set
           S of maximum weight satisfying G |= φ(S), or reports “large treedepth” if td(G) > d,
          running in g(d, φ) rounds in the CONGEST model for some function g.

        Proof. By Lemmas 9 and 10, one can construct a canonical tree decomposition T = (V, F )
        of G = (V, E), with bags {Bu | u ∈ V } of width at most 2d (or correctly reject because
        td(G) > d), in O(22d ) rounds. Moreover each node u knows its parent parent(u), its bag Bu ,
        the graph G[Bu ], and its depth in T . By construction, the tree T is a subgraph of G. It
        remains to show that, based on these elements, one can implement the sequential algorithm
        (cf. Algorithm 1) in CONGEST.
            Let us first consider model-checking of a closed formula φ. We describe how the bottom-up
        phase, and the decision at the root in Algorithm 1 can be implemented in depth(T ) rounds.
        Let us consider all steps j ∈ {1, . . . , depth(T )}, where each step consists of a single round.
        At step j, all nodes u of depth k = depth(T ) − j + 1 can compute the homomorphism
        classes h(Gu ) in parallel (k decreases from depth(T ) to 1), and can send the results of this
        computation to their parents. Indeed, if u of depth k is a leaf, then it has all information
        needed to compute h(Gu ) already, because it only needs to know graph Gbase    u    = G[Bu ] (see
        Instruction 4 of Algorithm 1, and Lemma 8). If u it is not a leaf, then it also needs the bags
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                               25:15


Bvi , and the homomorphism classes h(Gvi ) from all its children vi , {1, . . . , q}. But, at step
j, node u has precisely already received these information from its children, who have sent
them at the previous step j − 1. The decision at the root can be performed at round 1. The
root accepts or rejects depending on its homomorphism class, as in Algorithm 1, and all
other nodes accept. Therefore, if G |= S, then all nodes accept, otherwise the root rejects.
Note that each message consists of a homomorphism class, thus the size of the messages
is a constant. More precisely, messages are of size log |C| bits, where C denotes the set of
homomorphism classes for property φ and treedepth at most 2d .
    For the optimization version, due to space restriction the details are given in the full
version [28]. In a nutshell, the bottom up phase computes at each node u a table OPT(Gu )
of size C which, for each homomorphism class c ∈ C, stores the size of the optimal partial
solution Su corresponding to that class. Therefore the round complexity depends on the size
of this table OPT, which is upper bounded by some function g depending on d and formula φ.
A top-down phase is needed in order to mark the vertices of the global optimal solution. ◀

 7     Applications to H-freeness for graphs of bounded expansion
For the many alternative definitions of graphs of bounded expansion, we refer to the book of
Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez in [58]. In terms of applications, we simply recall that the
class of planar graphs, and, more generally, every class of graphs excluding a fixed minor,
are classes of graphs of bounded expansion. It is known that graphs of bounded expansion
admit so-called low treedepth decompositions.

▶ Theorem 12 ([58]). Let G be a class of graphs of bounded expansion. There is a function
f : N → N such that, for every integer p > 0, and every graph G = (V, E) ∈ G, the vertex set
of G can be partitioned into at most f (p) parts V1 , . . . , Vf (p) such that the union of any q
parts, 1 ≤ q ≤ p, induces a subgraph of G with treedepth at most q.

    A partition satisfying the property of Theorem 12 is called a low treedepth decomposition
of G for parameter p. Interestingly, low treedepth decompositions can be efficiently computed
in CONGEST, i.e., each vertex can compute the index i ∈ {1, . . . , f (p)} of the part to which
it belongs.

▶ Theorem 13 ([59]). For every graph class G with bounded expansion, and every positive
integer p, a low treedepth decomposition of G for parameter p can be computed in O(log n)
rounds in CONGEST.

    The constant hidden in the big-O notation in the statement of Theorem 13 depends
on the class G and on the parameter p, and it is quite huge. The proof of Theorem 13 is
sophisticated, but the algorithm is actually quite simple. It is merely based on the fact
that graphs with bounded expansion have bounded degeneracy, and on the use of standard
distributed tools for approximating the degeneracy of a graph in CONGEST. Combining
Theorem 11 with Theorem 13, we can establish the following.

▶ Corollary 14. Let G be a class of graphs with bounded expansion, and let H be a connected
graph. Deciding H-freeness for graphs in G can be achieved O(log n) rounds under the
CONGEST model.

Proof. The algorithm works as follows. Let p be the number of vertices of H. First, compute
a low treedepth decomposition V1 , . . . , Vf (p) of the input graph G = (V, E) into f (p) parts
for parameter p using Theorem 13. Then, for every non-empty set I ⊆ [f (p)] with |I| ≤ p,



                                                                                                     DISC 2024
25:16   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


        let GI = G[∪i∈I Vi ] be the graph induced by the parts Vi , i ∈ I. Note that there are at most
          f (p)
            p   such subsets I, that is, a constant number of choices for I. Also observe that if a
        copy of H exists in graph G, then this copy of H belongs to at least one of the graphs GI .
        Indeed, this holds for every set I of at most p parts Vi such that each of the p vertices of the
        copy of H is contained in some part Vi . Informally, we “guess” the colors of the copies of
        H, and I must contain these at most p colors. It is therefore sufficient to run the algorithm
        in Theorem 11 on each graph GI in parallel, and to reject if one of the parallel executions
        finds a copy of H. This is doable because (1) GI is of treedepth at most p, (2) if a copy
        of H exists, then it will be found in a connected component of GI , thanks to the fact that
        H is connected, and (3) the property “GI is H-free” can be expressed as an MSO formula
        (actually, even as an FO formula), with p variables, one for each vertex of H. For instance,
        for a graph H = (VH , EH ) with VH = {1, 2, . . . , p}, we can use the formula
                                                                                    
                                            ^                       ^
              φH = ¬∃x1 , x2 , . . . , xp     adj(xi , xj ) ∧         ¬adj(xi , xj ) .
                                     {i,j}∈EH                  {i,j}∈E
                                                                    / H


        Thus the algorithm rejects if and only if the input graph contains a copy of H, as desired.   ◀

             In particular, Corollary 14 proves that H-freeness can be solved in O(log n) rounds in
        planar graphs under CONGEST. In contrast, for arbitrary graphs, even C4 -freeness requires
            √
        Ω( n) rounds, and, for every p ≥ 2, there are O(p)-vertex graphs H for which H-freeness
        requires Ω(n2−1/p ) rounds [27]. Note that H-freeness can be considered in the usual sense
        (i.e., the input graph does not contain any copy of H as an induced subgraph), but also in
        the mere sense that there are no copies of H as a (non necessarily induced) subgraphs, by a
        straightforward adaptation of the MSO formula describing the problem.

         8     Conclusion
        In this paper, we established a meta-theorem about MSO formulas on graphs with bounded
        treedepth within the CONGEST model. Treedepth plays a fundamental role in the theory of
        sparse graphs of Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [58]. In particular, decomposing a graph
        in graphs of bounded treedepth is the crucial step in deriving a linear-time model-checking
        algorithm for FO on graphs of bounded expansion in the sequential computational model.
        Graphs of bounded expansion contain bounded-degree graphs, planar graphs, graphs of
        bounded genus, graphs of bounded treewidth, graphs that exclude a fixed minor, etc. Model-
        checking for FO on graphs of bounded expansion cannot be achieved in the CONGEST
        model since, as we already mention, checking an FO predicate as simple as “there is at least
        one vertex of degree > 2” requires Ω(n) rounds in n-node trees. Nevertheless, there might
        exist some fragments of FO that could be tractable on graphs of bounded expansion in the
        distributed setting. It would be interesting to identify the exact boundaries of intractability
        in this context, regarding both distributed decision, and distributed certification. An initial
        step in this direction was taken by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez in [59], resulting in a
        distributed algorithm for computing a low treedepth decomposition of graphs of bounded
        expansion, running in O(log n) rounds under CONGEST. As we illustrated, this results allows
        to efficiently decide FO-expressible decision problems (such as H-freeness, for H connected)
        for classes of graphs with bounded expansion, in O(log n) rounds. We restate the open
        question of [59]: Given a local FO formula φ(x), i.e., a formula where φ(x) depends on a
        fixed-radius neighborhood of vertex x only, can we mark all vertices satisfying φ in O(log n)
        rounds?
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                                 25:17


     References
 1   Alkida Balliu, Gianlorenzo D’Angelo, Pierre Fraigniaud, and Dennis Olivetti. What can be
     verified locally? J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 97:106–120, 2018. doi:10.1016/J.JCSS.2018.05.004.
 2   Aviv Bick, Gillat Kol, and Rotem Oshman. Distributed zero-knowledge proofs over networks.
     In 33rd ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 2426–2458, 2022.
     doi:10.1137/1.9781611977073.97.
 3   Lélia Blin, Laurent Feuilloley, and Gabriel Le Bouder. Optimal space lower bound for
     deterministic self-stabilizing leader election algorithms. Discret. Math. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
     25:1–17, 2023. doi:10.46298/DMTCS.9335.
 4   Hans L. Bodlaender. A partial k-arboretum of graphs with bounded treewidth. Theoretical
     Computer Science, 209(1-2):1–45, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(97)00228-4.
 5   Richard B. Borie, R. Gary Parker, and Craig A. Tovey. Automatic generation of linear-time
     algorithms from predicate calculus descriptions of problems on recursively constructed graph
     families. Algorithmica, 7(5&6):555–581, 1992. doi:10.1007/BF01758777.
 6   Nicolas Bousquet, Laurent Feuilloley, and Théo Pierron. Local certification of graph decompo-
     sitions and applications to minor-free classes. In 25th International Conference on Principles
     of Distributed Systems (OPODIS), volume 217 of LIPIcs, pages 22:1–22:17. Schloss Dagstuhl –
     Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2021.22.
 7   Keren Censor-Hillel, Mohsen Ghaffari, and Fabian Kuhn. Distributed connectivity decompo-
     sition. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing,
     pages 156–165, 2014. doi:10.1145/2611462.2611491.
 8   Keren Censor-Hillel, Ami Paz, and Mor Perry. Approximate proof-labeling schemes. Theor.
     Comput. Sci., 811:112–124, 2020. doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2018.08.020.
 9   Yi-Jun Chang. Efficient distributed decomposition and routing algorithms in minor-free
     networks and their applications. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Distributed Computing, pages 55–66, 2023. doi:10.1145/3583668.3594604.
10   Bruno Courcelle. The monadic second-order logic of graphs. I. Recognizable sets of finite
     graphs. Inf. Comput., 85(1):12–75, 1990. doi:10.1016/0890-5401(90)90043-H.
11   Pierluigi Crescenzi, Pierre Fraigniaud, and Ami Paz. Trade-offs in distributed interactive
     proofs. In 33rd International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 146 of
     LIPIcs, pages 13:1–13:17. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:
     10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2019.13.
12   Atish Das Sarma, Stephan Holzer, Liah Kor, Amos Korman, Danupon Nanongkai, Gopal
     Pandurangan, David Peleg, and Roger Wattenhofer. Distributed verification and hardness
     of distributed approximation. SIAM J. Comput., 41(5):1235–1265, 2012. doi:10.1137/
     11085178X.
13   Andrew Drucker, Fabian Kuhn, and Rotem Oshman. On the power of the congested clique
     model. In 33rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages
     367–376, 2014. doi:10.1145/2611462.2611493.
14   Michael Elberfeld, Martin Grohe, and Till Tantau. Where first-order and monadic second-order
     logic coincide. ACM Trans. Comput. Log., 17(4):25, 2016. doi:10.1145/2946799.
15   Gábor Elek. Planarity can be verified by an approximate proof labeling scheme in constant-time.
     J. Comb. Theory, Ser. A, 191:105643, 2022. doi:10.1016/J.JCTA.2022.105643.
16   Yuval Emek, Yuval Gil, and Shay Kutten. Locally restricted proof labeling schemes. In 36th
     International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 246 of LIPIcs, pages
     20:1–20:22. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2022. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.
     DISC.2022.20.
17   Louis Esperet and Benjamin Lévêque. Local certification of graphs on surfaces. Theor. Comput.
     Sci., 909:68–75, 2022. doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2022.01.023.
18   Louis Esperet and Sergey Norin. Testability and local certification of monotone properties
     in minor-closed classes. In 49th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and




                                                                                                       DISC 2024
25:18   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


             Programming (ICALP), volume 229 of LIPIcs, pages 58:1–58:15. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
             Zentrum für Informatik, 2022. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ICALP.2022.58.
        19   Laurent Feuilloley. Introduction to local certification. Discret. Math. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
             23(3):1–23, 2021. doi:10.46298/DMTCS.6280.
        20   Laurent Feuilloley, Nicolas Bousquet, and Théo Pierron. What can be certified compactly?
             compact local certification of MSO properties in tree-like graphs. In 41st ACM Symposium on
             Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 131–140, 2022. doi:10.1145/3519270.
             3538416.
        21   Laurent Feuilloley and Pierre Fraigniaud. Survey of distributed decision. Bull. EATCS, 119,
             2016. URL: http://eatcs.org/beatcs/index.php/beatcs/article/view/411.
        22   Laurent Feuilloley and Pierre Fraigniaud. Error-sensitive proof-labeling schemes. J. Parallel
             Distributed Comput., 166:149–165, 2022. doi:10.1016/J.JPDC.2022.04.015.
        23   Laurent Feuilloley, Pierre Fraigniaud, and Juho Hirvonen. A hierarchy of local decision. Theor.
             Comput. Sci., 856:51–67, 2021. doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2020.12.017.
        24   Laurent Feuilloley, Pierre Fraigniaud, Juho Hirvonen, Ami Paz, and Mor Perry. Redun-
             dancy in distributed proofs. Distributed Comput., 34(2):113–132, 2021. doi:10.1007/
             S00446-020-00386-Z.
        25   Laurent Feuilloley, Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, Éric Rémila, and Ioan
             Todinca. Compact distributed certification of planar graphs. Algorithmica, 83(7):2215–2244,
             2021. doi:10.1007/S00453-021-00823-W.
        26   Laurent Feuilloley, Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, Éric Rémila, and
             Ioan Todinca. Local certification of graphs with bounded genus. Discret. Appl. Math., 325:9–36,
             2023. doi:10.1016/J.DAM.2022.10.004.
        27   Orr Fischer, Tzlil Gonen, Fabian Kuhn, and Rotem Oshman. Possibilities and impossibilities
             for distributed subgraph detection. In Christian Scheideler and Jeremy T. Fineman, editors,
             Proceedings of the 30th on Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA
             2018, Vienna, Austria, July 16-18, 2018, pages 153–162. ACM, 2018. doi:10.1145/3210377.
             3210401.
        28   Fedor V. Fomin, Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, and Ioan Todinca.
             Distributed model checking on graphs of bounded treedepth. CoRR, abs/2405.03321, 2024.
             doi:10.48550/arXiv.2405.03321.
        29   Pierre Fraigniaud, François Le Gall, Harumichi Nishimura, and Ami Paz. Distributed quantum
             proofs for replicated data. In 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
             (ITCS), volume 185 of LIPIcs, pages 28:1–28:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für
             Informatik, 2021. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ITCS.2021.28.
        30   Pierre Fraigniaud, Mika Göös, Amos Korman, Merav Parter, and David Peleg. Ran-
             domized distributed decision. Distributed Comput., 27(6):419–434, 2014. doi:10.1007/
             S00446-014-0211-X.
        31   Pierre Fraigniaud, Mika Göös, Amos Korman, and Jukka Suomela. What can be decided
             locally without identifiers? In 32nd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
             (PODC), pages 157–165, 2013. doi:10.1145/2484239.2484264.
        32   Pierre Fraigniaud, Amos Korman, and David Peleg. Towards a complexity theory for local
             distributed computing. J. ACM, 60(5):35:1–35:26, 2013. doi:10.1145/2499228.
        33   Pierre Fraigniaud, Frédéric Mazoit, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, and Ioan Todinca.
             Distributed certification for classes of dense graphs. In 37th International Symposium on
             Distributed Computing (DISC), volume 281 of LIPIcs, pages 20:1–20:17. Schloss Dagstuhl –
             Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2023.20.
        34   Pierre Fraigniaud, Pedro Montealegre, Ivan Rapaport, and Ioan Todinca. A meta-
             theorem for distributed certification. Algorithmica, 86(2):585–612, 2024. doi:10.1007/
             S00453-023-01185-1.
        35   Pierre Fraigniaud, Boaz Patt-Shamir, and Mor Perry. Randomized proof-labeling schemes.
             Distributed Comput., 32(3):217–234, 2019. doi:10.1007/S00446-018-0340-8.
F. V. Fomin, P. Fraigniaud, P. Montealegre, I. Rapaport, and I. Todinca                               25:19


36   Jakub Gajarský and Petr Hlinený. Kernelizing MSO properties of trees of fixed height, and
     some consequences. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 11(1):1–26, 2015. doi:10.2168/LMCS-11(1:
     19)2015.
37   François Le Gall, Masayuki Miyamoto, and Harumichi Nishimura. Distributed quantum
     interactive proofs. In 40th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer
     Science (STACS), volume 254 of LIPIcs, pages 42:1–42:21. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum
     für Informatik, 2023. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.STACS.2023.42.
38   JA Garay, S Kutten, and D Peleg. A sub-linear time distributed algorithm for minimum-weight
     spanning trees. In Proceedings of 1993 IEEE 34th Annual Foundations of Computer Science,
     pages 659–668. IEEE, 1993.
39   Mohsen Ghaffari, Andreas Karrenbauer, Fabian Kuhn, Christoph Lenzen, and Boaz Patt-
     Shamir. Near-optimal distributed maximum flow. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Symposium
     on Principles of Distributed Computing, pages 81–90, 2015.
40   Mohsen Ghaffari and Fabian Kuhn. Distributed minimum cut approximation. In Inter-
     national Symposium on Distributed Computing, pages 1–15. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-642-41527-2_1.
41   Mohsen Ghaffari and Christoph Lenzen. Near-optimal distributed tree embedding. In
     International Symposium on Distributed Computing, pages 197–211. Springer, 2014. doi:
     10.1007/978-3-662-45174-8_14.
42   Mohsen Ghaffari and Merav Parter. Near-optimal distributed dfs in planar graphs. In 31st
     International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC 2017), pages 21:1–21:16. Schloss
     Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2017.21.
43   Mika Göös and Jukka Suomela. Locally checkable proofs in distributed computing. Theory
     Comput., 12(1):1–33, 2016. doi:10.4086/TOC.2016.V012A019.
44   Martin Grohe. Logic, graphs, and algorithms. In Logic and Automata: History and Perspectives,
     in Honor of Wolfgang Thomas, volume 2 of Texts in Logic and Games, pages 357–422.
     Amsterdam University Press, 2008. URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2007/091/.
45   Martin Grohe and Stephan Kreutzer. Methods for algorithmic meta theorems. In Model
     Theoretic Methods in Finite Combinatorics - AMS-ASL Joint Special Session, volume 558,
     pages 181–206. AMS, 2009. URL: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
     10.1.1.395.8282&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
46   Bernhard Haeupler, Taisuke Izumi, and Goran Zuzic. Low-congestion shortcuts without
     embedding. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing,
     pages 451–460, 2016. doi:10.1145/2933057.2933112.
47   Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai. A deterministic almost-
     tight distributed algorithm for approximating single-source shortest paths. In Proceedings
     of the forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 489–498, 2016.
     doi:10.1145/2897518.2897638.
48   Juho Hirvonen and Jukka Suomela. Distributed Algorithms 2020. Aalto University, 2020.
     URL: https://jukkasuomela.fi/da2020/.
49   Gillat Kol, Rotem Oshman, and Raghuvansh R. Saxena. Interactive distributed proofs. In
     37th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 255–264. ACM,
     2018. URL: https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3212771.
50   Amos Korman, Shay Kutten, and Toshimitsu Masuzawa. Fast and compact self-stabilizing
     verification, computation, and fault detection of an MST. Distributed Comput., 28(4):253–295,
     2015. doi:10.1007/S00446-015-0242-Y.
51   Amos Korman, Shay Kutten, and David Peleg. Proof labeling schemes. Distributed Comput.,
     22(4):215–233, 2010. doi:10.1007/S00446-010-0095-3.
52   Stephan Kreutzer. Algorithmic meta-theorems. In Finite and Algorithmic Model Theory,
     volume 379 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 177–270. Cam-
     bridge University Press, 2011. URL: http://www.cs.ox.ac.uk/people/stephan.kreutzer/
     Publications/amt-survey.pdf.




                                                                                                     DISC 2024
25:20   Distributed Model Checking on Graphs of Bounded Treedepth


        53   Shay Kutten and David Peleg. Fast distributed construction of k-dominating sets and
             applications. In Proceedings of the fourteenth annual ACM symposium on Principles of
             distributed computing, pages 238–251, 1995.
        54   Christoph Lenzen and Boaz Patt-Shamir. Improved distributed steiner forest construction.
             In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing, pages
             262–271, 2014. doi:10.1145/2611462.2611464.
        55   Danupon Nanongkai. Distributed approximation algorithms for weighted shortest paths. In
             Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 565–573,
             2014. doi:10.1145/2591796.2591850.
        56   Danupon Nanongkai and Hsin-Hao Su. Almost-tight distributed minimum cut algorithms.
             In International Symposium on Distributed Computing, pages 439–453. Springer, 2014. doi:
             10.1007/978-3-662-45174-8_30.
        57   Moni Naor, Merav Parter, and Eylon Yogev. The power of distributed verifiers in interactive
             proofs. In 31st ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1096–115.
             SIAM, 2020. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975994.67.
        58   Jaroslav Nešetřil and Patrice Ossona de Mendez. Sparsity - Graphs, Structures, and Al-
             gorithms, volume 28 of Algorithms and combinatorics. Springer, 2012. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-642-27875-4.
        59   Jaroslav Nešetřil and Patrice Ossona de Mendez. A distributed low tree-depth decomposition
             algorithm for bounded expansion classes. Distributed Comput., 29(1):39–49, 2016. doi:
             10.1007/S00446-015-0251-X.
        60   David Peleg. Distributed computing: a locality-sensitive approach. SIAM, 2000.
        61   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. III. Planar tree-width. J. Comb. Theory,
             Ser. B, 36(1):49–64, 1984. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(84)90013-3.
