Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic
Formulas
Hervé Fournier #
Université Paris Cité, IMJ-PRG, France

Nutan Limaye #
IT University Copenhagen, Denmark

Guillaume Malod #
Université Paris Cité, IMJ-PRG, France

Srikanth Srinivasan #
Aarhus University, Denmark

Sébastien Tavenas #
Université Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, France


      Abstract
Classical results of Brent, Kuck and Maruyama (IEEE Trans. Computers 1973) and Brent (JACM
1974) show that any algebraic formula of size s can be converted to one of depth Oplog sq with only a
polynomial blow-up in size. In this paper, we consider a fine-grained version of this result depending
on the degree of the polynomial computed by the algebraic formula.
    Given a homogeneous algebraic formula of size s computing a polynomial P of degree d, we show
that P can also be computed by an (unbounded fan-in) algebraic formula of depth Oplog dq and
size polypsq. Our proof shows that this result also holds in the highly restricted setting of monotone,
non-commutative algebraic formulas.
    This improves on previous results in the regime when d is small (i.e., d “ sop1q ). In particular,
for the setting of d “ Oplog sq, along with a result of Raz (STOC 2010, JACM 2013), our result
implies the same depth reduction even for inhomogeneous formulas. This is particularly interesting
in light of recent algebraic formula lower bounds, which work precisely in this “low-degree” and
“low-depth” setting.
    We also show that these results cannot be improved in the monotone setting, even for commutative
formulas.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation Ñ Algebraic complexity theory

Keywords and phrases Algebraic formulas, depth-reduction

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2023.28

Related Version Full Version: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2023/009/

Funding Nutan Limaye: A part of this work was conducted during a research visit funded by
Université Paris Cité in summer 2022.
Srikanth Srinivasan: Supported by start-up package from Aarhus University, and benefited greatly
from a research visit sponsored by the Guest researchers faculty program at Université Paris Cité in
summer 2022.
Sébastien Tavenas: This work is supported by ANR-22-CE48-0007.


 1      Introduction

In this paper, we study a basic question regarding computational tradeoffs between two
resources for the model of algebraic formulas.

           © Hervé Fournier, Nutan Limaye, Guillaume Malod, Srikanth Srinivasan,
           and Sébastien Tavenas;
           licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
38th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2023).
Editor: Amnon Ta-Shma; Article No. 28; pp. 28:1–28:19
                  Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                  Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
28:2   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


           An algebraic formula F for a multivariate polynomial P px1 , . . . , xn q is simply an algebraic
       expression for P made up of nested additions and multiplications. Equivalently, it can be
       defined as a rooted directed tree where the leaves are labelled by variables and internal
       nodes (or gates) compute either linear combinations or products of their children (a formal
       definition can be found in Section 2 below). Unless otherwise stated, we do not bound the
       number of children of a gate (in other words, we consider formulas of unbounded fan-in).
           The two basic computational resources that describe the complexity of an algebraic
       formula F are its size, which is the number of leaves in the underlying tree, and its depth,
       which naturally is the depth of the tree. Polynomials1 that have efficient (i.e., polypnq-sized)
       algebraic formulas form the algebraic complexity class VF. Like its Boolean counterpart NC1 ,
       this is a natural and important complexity class.
           Tradeoffs between size and depth in the setting of formulas and related models of
       computation have been the focus of many previous works, starting from the early 1970s [28,
       3, 4, 31, 25, 17, 21, 23, 1, 12, 29, 9, 11, 7, 15]. We describe a few such results here.

           In the Boolean setting, Spira [28] and independently Khrapchenko (see [32]) showed
           that any Boolean formula of size s can be converted to a Boolean formula of depth
           Oplog sq while keeping the size bounded by sOp1q . These results were replicated in the
           algebraic setting in results of Brent, Kuck and Marayuma [3] and Brent [4]. The constants
           involved in the bounds for the depth and the size were improved in many follow-up
           works [19, 20, 13, 5, 2].
           This question has also been studied for the more general model of algebraic circuits,
           where the underlying tree is replaced by a directed acyclic graph (DAG). A well-known
           result of Valiant, Skyum, Berkowitz and Rackoff [31] showed that an algebraic circuit of
           size s computing a polynomial of degree polypsq can be converted to a circuit of depth2
           Oplog sq and size polypsq. These results were also shown to hold for multilinear 3 circuits
           by Raz and Yehudayoff [23].
           The above results are known to be tight in various settings. In the monotone case4 , Shamir
           and Snir [25] showed the existence of an explicit polynomial P with a polypnq-sized circuit
           such that any circuit of depth oplog nq for P is of superpolynomial size. Similar results
           were obtained in the multilinear case by Raz [21] and Chillara, Limaye and Srinivasan [8]
           (for multilinear circuits and formulas, respectively).
           Beginning with the work of Agrawal and Vinay [1], a recent line of work [12, 29, 9, 11, 7, 14]
           has shown that algebraic circuits and formulas can be converted to formulas of constant
           depth with a sub-exponential blow-up in size. In contrast, our focus in this paper is
           primarily on reducing depth as much as possible while keeping the size bounded by
           polypsq, as in the results listed previously.


       The question
       In this paper, we ask the question of whether stronger depth-reduction results can be proved
       given a bound d on the degree of the polynomial P px1 , . . . , xn q computed by the algebraic
       formula. In general, an algebraic formula of size s can compute a polynomial of degree at
       most s. When d “ s (or d “ sΩp1q ), the above results imply that an algebraic formula F for
       P can be converted to another formula F 1 of depth Oplog dq without significant blow-up in
       size. Does such a result hold for any d (or more specifically, when d “ sop1q )?


       1
         Strictly speaking, we should refer here to infinite sequences of polynomials, but we ignore this distinction.
       2
         In the bounded fan-in case, this would be depth Oplog2 sq instead.
       3
         A circuit or formula is multilinear if each of its gates computes a multilinear polynomial.
       4
         where the underlying field is R and all constants are non-negative, so cancellations do not occur.
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                         28:3


    Note that this question only makes sense for algebraic formulas of unbounded fan-in. If
the fan-in of each gate is bounded by a constant, then any formula of size s must have depth
at least Ωplog sq (and so, Brent, Kuck, and Marayuma’s result [3] is optimal). However, in
many settings (see e.g. the third motivation below), we want a finer analysis of the formula
depth that can be achieved by formulas of unbounded fan-in.

Motivation
While the question is fairly natural in our opinion, there are also many concrete reasons that
lead to this line of inquiry.
   It is easy to see from the proof of Valiant, Skyum, Berkowitz, and Rackoff [31] that any
   algebraic circuit can be depth-reduced to depth Oplog dq with only a polyps, dq blow-up
   in size. So the natural generalization for small degrees is indeed true in the setting of
   algebraic circuits.
   It also follows from previous results that the depth bound of Oplog sq can be improved
   when the degree is d “ oplog sq. This is due to a result of Raz [22]: any formula F for
   a homogeneous polynomial P of degree d can be converted to a homogeneous formula5
   F 1 efficiently. Further, it is easy to see that any homogeneous formula computing a
   polynomial of degree d has depth Opdq “ oplog sq. So, in this regime for the degree,
   standard depth-reduction results can be strengthened.
   Finally, very recent results in algebraic complexity [16] have suggested a way of proving
   lower bounds against low-depth algebraic formulas for computing low-degree polynomials,
   which naturally raises the question of obtaining the best possible depth-reduction results
   in this setting.
   More specifically, Limaye, Srinivasan, and Tavenas [16] showed how to prove lower bounds
   against algebraic formulas (and even circuits) of small depth. Their proof proceeds by
   converting an algebraic formula of size s and depth ∆ to a homogeneous algebraic formula
   of size polypsq and depth Op∆q, and then proving lower bounds against homogeneous
   algebraic formulas of depth Op∆q. An important point regarding the first step is that it
   only works in the “low-degree setting” of d “ Oplog s{ log log sq. The second step proves
   lower bounds against homogeneous formulas of depth up to Oplog log dq.
   To make this proof idea work for general (unbounded-depth) algebraic formulas, we would
   like to be able to homogenize and depth-reduce algebraic formulas as much as possible.
   The aforementioned result of Raz [22] already shows that we can homogenize algebraic
   formulas efficiently in the low-degree setting. So it is natural to investigate the best
   possible depth-reduction for homogeneous algebraic formulas in the low-degree setting.

Results
Our main result is a depth-reduction result for homogeneous formulas that efficiently reduces
the depth to Oplog dq, matching what was already known for algebraic circuits by the result
of [31].
▶ Theorem 1 (Main Result). Let F be a homogeneous algebraic formula of size s computing
a polynomial P of degree d ě 2. Then P is also computed by a homogeneous formula F 1 of
size polypsq and depth Oplog dq. Moreover, if F is monotone and/or non-commutative, then
so is F 1 .

5
    A homogeneous formula is one where each gate computes a homogeneous polynomial. This means that
    the formula does not compute intermediate polynomials of degree larger than d.




                                                                                                      CCC 2023
28:4   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


           Here, a monotone algebraic formula is one that does not exploit cancellations in any way,
       and a non-commutative formula describes a polynomial expression in a domain where the
       input variables do not commute when multiplied with each other (formal definitions are
       given in Section 2). These are both settings in which formula upper bounds are harder to
       prove, and hence the depth-reduction result in this setting implies the result in the standard
       setting. It can also be checked that the depth-reduction procedure above preserves other
       interesting properties of the formula, such as multilinearity and set-multilinearity.
           Using the aforementioned result of Raz that allows us to homogenize algebraic formulas
       in the low-degree setting, we get the following depth-reduction even for inhomogeneous
       formulas.
       ▶ Corollary 2. Let d “ Oplog nq. Then a homogeneous polynomial P defined on n variables
       with degree d ě 2 has an algebraic formula of size polypnq if and only if it has an algebraic
       formula of depth Oplog dq and size polypnq.
           In particular, this means that to prove superpolynomial lower bounds against general
       algebraic formulas in the low-degree setting, it suffices to prove such lower bounds against
       homogeneous algebraic formulas of depth Oplog dq. As far as we know, nothing below the
       trivial Opdq bound was known before for such an implication. This brings us much closer to
       the regime of depths for which we have lower bounds [16].
           The statements are even starker in the non-commutative setting, where it is a long-
       standing problem to prove separations between Algebraic Branching Programs (ABPs) and
       formulas. In recent work [30], it was shown how to prove such a result for depths that are
         ?
       op log dq. The results of this paper show that it suffices to prove such a result for depth
       Oplog dq.6
           Finally, we also show that our results cannot be improved asymptotically in terms of
       depth, unless we use techniques that exploit cancellations in some way.
                                                                                                 ?
       ▶ Theorem 3 (Lower Bound). Let n and d “ dpnq be growing parameters such that dpnq ď n.
       Then there is a monotone algebraic formula F of size at most n and depth Oplog dq computing
       a polynomial P P Frx1 , . . . , xn s of degree at most d such that any monotone formula F 1 of
       depth oplog dq computing P must have size nωp1q .
           It should be noted that a well-known result of Gupta, Kamath, Kayal and Saptharishi [9]
       shows how to exploit cancellations to obtain better depth-reduction results. However, in
       general this does not reduce the depth of a given formula by more than a constant factor
       without incurring a significant blow-up in size.7 As a result, we believe that the above result
       is a strong indication that our depth reduction result is tight up to a constant factor in the
       depth.

           2   Preliminaries
       Basic notation
       Throughout, unless otherwise specified, we work with polynomials over a field F. We will
       work with the multivariate ring of polynomials Frx1 , . . . , xn s or its non-commutative analog
       Fxx1 , . . . , xn y.


       6
         We note that Raz’s result, though only stated for the commutative setting, works just as well in the
         non-commutative case.
       7
         More precisely, the result of [9] shows how to convert a low-degree homogeneous depth-4 formula to
         an inhomogeneous depth-3 formula efficiently. In general, this can be used to reduce the depth of a
         small-depth formula by a multiplicative factor of 2.
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                                28:5


2.1    Algebraic formulas
We start with some brief definitions and results related to algebraic formulas. For much more
about this model, see the standard references [27, 24].

The model
An algebraic formula over the multivariate polynomial ring Frx1 , . . . , xn s is a rooted, directed
tree with edges directed towards the root. Leaves are labelled by variables x1 , . . . , xn or by
the constant 1 and edges by non-zero field constants. Internal nodes (i.e., gates) by ` and ˆ
and compute linear combinations (based on the edge weights) or products of their children.
We will assume, with loss of generality, that if a node α has for child a leaf labelled by 1, then
α is a `-gate and that if a `-gate α has only children labelled by 1, then α is the output of
the formula.8 A non-commutative algebraic formula over the multivariate polynomial ring
Fxx1 , . . . , xn y is defined similarly, with the additional assumption that the children of any
ˆ-gate are linearly ordered, and the corresponding product is computed in this order.
    Unless explicitly stated, the algebraic formulas we consider have unbounded fan-in (i.e., a
gate can have any number of inputs). The size of F will denote the number of leaves,9
the depth of F the longest leaf-to-root path. The product-depth and the sum-depth of F
are defined to be the maximum number of product gates and sum gates encountered on a
leaf-to-root path, respectively.
    A parse tree of a formula F is a subformula of F which corresponds to the way a monomial
is built in the evaluation of F . Parse trees of F can be defined inductively as follows:
    If F has a top `-gate, a parse tree of F is obtained by taking a parse tree of one of its
    children together with the corresponding edge to the root of F ;
    If F has a top ˆ-gate, a parse tree of F is obtained by a taking a parse tree of each of its
    children, together with the incoming edges of the root of F ;
    The only parse tree of a leaf is itself.
The polynomial computed by a parse tree is a single monomial, which is equal to the product
of the variables labelling its leaves, multiplied by the product of the scalars labelling its edges.
The polynomial computed by a formula F is easily seen to be the sum of the monomials
computed by all its parse trees.
    A formula F is called monotone if any monomial computed by a parse tree of F has a
non-zero coefficient in the polynomial computed by F .
    We now recall some well-known results from the literature regarding algebraic formulas.
It should be noted that these results (specifically Theorems 4, 5 and 10 later on) are usually
proved in the general setting of commutative formulas. However, it is easy to see that
the proofs of these results carry over to the monotone, non-commutative setting without
significant change.

Depth-reduction
Classical results [3, 4] show that any algebraic formula of small size can be simulated by one
of small depth and not much larger size. Formally,


8
  This ensures that a formula can compute polynomials with a constant term but forbids using many
  arithmetic operations just to compute constants.
9
  This is within a constant factor of the number of gates, as long as each gate has fan-in at least 2 each
  (which is without loss of generality).




                                                                                                             CCC 2023
28:6   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


       ▶ Theorem 4. Let F be a (non-commutative or commutative) algebraic formula of size s
       computing a polynomial P . Then there is an algebraic formula F 1 of size at most polypsq
       and depth ∆ “ Oplog sq computing P . We may also assume that each gate in F 1 has fan-in
       2. Furthermore, F is homogeneous and/or monotone, then so is F 1 .

       Homogeneity
       Each gate in an algebraic formula has a syntactic degree defined in a natural way. Leaves
       labelled by the constant 1 have syntactic degree 0, leaves labelled with a variable have
       syntactic degree 1, ˆ-gates have a syntactic degree that is the sum of the syntactic degrees of
       their children, and `-gates have a syntactic degree that is equal to the largest of the syntactic
       degrees of their children. The syntactic degree of a formula is defined as the syntactic degree
       of its output. Notice that in a formula the syntactic degree of any gate is bounded by the
       syntactic degree of the formula.
           We will further assume that no gate computes the zero polynomial.
           A formula is homogeneous if each gate in the formula computes a homogeneous polynomial.
       Equivalently, in terms of syntactic degrees, this means that all the children of a sum gate
       have the same syntactic degree.
           Raz [22] showed how to convert a possibly inhomogeneous formula F to a homogeneous
       formula with a relatively small blow-up in size.
       ▶ Theorem 5. Let F be a (non-commutative or commutative) algebraic formula of size s and
       product-depth ∆ computing a polynomial P such that all gates
                                                               ´ `in F have  fan-in 2. Then there
                                                                          ˘¯
       is a homogeneous algebraic formula F 1 of size at most O s ¨ ∆`d`1
                                                                      d      and  product-depth ∆
       computing P . In particular, if ∆ “ Oplog sq and d “ Oplog sq, then the formula F 1 has size
       polypsq.

        3        Main result
       Proof Overview
       While the proof of the main result is fairly short and (in our opinion) clean, we add some
       remarks here to clarify why previous depth-reduction proofs are not applicable in our setting.
          The first attempt in proving Theorem 1 would be to try to use the proof strategy behind
       Theorem 4. Here, we start with a formula F of size s and find a subformula G of size roughly
       s{2 rooted at some gate α of F . It is not hard to show that the polynomial computed by F
       can be written as

             F “ G ˆ H1 ` H2

       where H1 and H2 are also computed by formulas of size s{2.10 We then apply induction
       to these three subformulas to get the result. Unfortunately, this strategy does not use the
       degree of the formula at all, and therefore only yields a formula of depth Oplog sq.
           In the homogeneous setting, it is sometimes more natural to do induction on the degree
       of the underlying formula, in which case G and H1 (in the decomposition above) would be
       subformulas of degree roughly d{2. We get the following recursion on the worst-case size of
       the depth-reduced version of F , which we denote by T ps, dq

             T ps, dq ď T ps1 , d{2q ` T ps ´ s1 , d{2q ` T ps ´ s1 , dq


       10
            Here, for simplicity, we are assuming that F is a commutative formula. In the non-commutative setting,
            we would instead get F “ H11 GH12 ` H2 .
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                     28:7


where s1 denotes the size of G. Unfortunately, in this case, the formulas H1 and H2 could
have size nearly s, resulting in considerable size blow-up. Indeed, when s1 is much smaller
than s (say s1 “ sop1q ), the above recursion only yields T ps, dq “ sOplog dq , which is a
superpolynomial size blow-up.
    It may be possible to interleave recursions with respect to size and depth, but we were
unable to make this work.
    Another possible strategy could be to follow the work of [31] which produces circuits of
the required depth. Unfortunately, the proof of [31] is a memoization procedure, which seems
to yield circuits even when applied to a formula F . Turning the resulting circuit of depth
Oplog dq into a formula seems to increase the size to sΩplog dq .
    The approach we take is somewhat more global than the recursive strategies outlined
above. Our first motivating example is seemingly the worst-case example for depth-reduction:
a comb of depth greater than d with alternating sums and products. More formally, a comb
computes the following polynomial (up to identifying variables).

   Cpxq “ x1 ` px2 ˆ px3 ` px4 ˆ ¨ ¨ ¨ qqq

Note that the above yields a formula of depth greater than d where d is the degree of
the underlying polynomial. However, we observe that such a comb actually computes a
polynomial with only a few monomials, and hence can be written trivially as a depth-2
řś
     -formula without much of a size blow-up.
    Building on this observation, the overall strategy is to decompose the formula into a top
part G, which is a (generalized) comb, whose leaves are subformulas of F to which we will
                                                                 řś
apply the same procedure recursively. We then write G as a          -formula, and replace its
leaves with the depth-reduced versions of the subformulas. This gives the depth-reduced
version of F .
    The correct definition of G is crucial, and somewhat subtle (at least to us), but with the
proper definitions in place, the proof goes through without much trouble.

3.1    Proof of Theorem 1
In this section we prove our main result (Theorem 1). We start by showing a simple
depth-reduction result for the case of skew formulas. A formula is said to be skew if every
multiplication gate in it has at most 1 non-trivial child (i.e., a non-leaf node).
   We will say that a leaf in a skew-formula is a `-leaf if the parent of that leaf is a ` gate
and a ˆ-leaf otherwise. We show that any skew formula can be converted efficiently into a
                         řś
depth-2 formula, i.e., a      -formula.

▶ Lemma 6. Let G be a skew formula with sum-depth δ, wherein all the gates have fan-in 2
and the leaves are labelled by distinct variables. Then the polynomial computed by G is a
multilinear polynomial with at most 2δ monomials. Moreover any variable labelling in G
   a `-leaf,
   or a ˆ-leaf whose sibling is a leaf
appears in exactly one monomial. We will call them the non-duplicable variables.

Proof. We prove this by induction on the depth of the formula. The base case is when the
depth is 0 or 1. In both cases, the statement trivially holds.
   For the induction case, assume that the depth is at least 2. Suppose G “ G1 ` G2 .
The sum-depths of G1 and G2 are at most δ ´ 1. Let f1 , f2 be the multilinear polynomials
computed by G1 , G2 , respectively. We know that the leaves of G are labelled with distinct



                                                                                                  CCC 2023
28:8   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


       variables. Hence, G1 , G2 have the same property and the variable sets labelling the leaves of
       G1 and G2 are disjoint. The depths of G1 and G2 are strictly smaller than the depth of G.
       By the induction hypothesis we have that f1 and f2 have at most 2δ´1 monomials. Moreover,
       any non-duplicable variable in G1 appears in at most one monomial in f1 . Similarly, any
       non-duplicable variable in G2 appears in at most one monomial in f2 . Hence, the polynomial
       computed by G, i.e., f1 ` f2 , has at most 2δ monomials and each non-duplicable variable
       appears in at most one monomial in it.
            Suppose the top gate of G is a ˆ gate. As G is a skew formula it is either x ˆ G1 or
       G1 ˆ x, where x is a variable. In particular since the depth of G is at least two, the variable
       x is duplicable. Let f1 be the multilinear polynomial computed by G1 . By our assumption,
       the variable x does not appear in f1 . The depth of G1 is strictly smaller than G. By the
       induction hypothesis we have that f1 has at most 2δ monomials and any non-duplicable
       variable in G1 appears in at most one monomial. As x can distribute over the monomials of
       f1 , we have that the polynomial computed by G is multilinear with at most 2δ monomials
       and any non-duplicable variable appears in at most one monomial.
           (Note that this can also be seen using parse trees, since the polynomial computed is the
       sum of the monomials computed by the parse trees. The multilinearity is obvious. Note that
       parse trees do not really “branch” at multiplication gates because of the skewness and are
       therefore combs. To build a parse tree starting from the root we will have two choices for
       each addition gate we encounter on the path, and there are at most δ, so we get at most 2δ
       parse trees. The only parse tree containing a given non-duplicable variable is defined by the
       path from the root to this leaf.)                                                            ◀

          If a formula is homogeneous, it implies that for any gate α, the degree of the polynomial
       computed by α coincides with the syntactic degree dα of α. Based on this remark, below we
       prove a stronger statement than Theorem 1. Specifically, Theorem 1 is stated for homogeneous
       formulas. But here, we show a depth-reduction for formulas for which the syntactic degree is
       small.

       ▶ Theorem 7 (Refinement of Theorem 1). Let F be an algebraic formula of size s and of
       syntactic degree dF ě 2. Then P is also computed by a formula F 1 of size polypsq and depth
       Oplog dF q. Moreover, if F is homogeneous, monotone and/or non-commutative, then so
       is F 1 .

       Proof. Let us start with a formula obtained from F after applying Theorem 4. That is,
       we will assume that we have a formula of size polypsq such each gate in it has fan-in 2,
       sum-depth and product-depth are bounded by Oplog sq. For notational simplicity, from now
       on, F will refer to this new formula.
          Let δ be a positive integer. For a formula G of syntactic degree dG ě 1 and sum-depth
       ∆pGq we define a potential function ϕδ pGq as follows.
          #
            ϕδ,1 pGq “ rlogpdG qs
            ϕδ,2 pGq “ r∆pGq{δs

       and let

          ϕδ pGq “ ϕδ,1 pGq ` ϕδ,2 pGq.

          We will show that the potential function bounds the depth of the depth-reduced formula
       that we will construct. We will also use it to bound the size of the resulting formula.
       Specifically, we prove the following lemma.
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                               28:9


▶ Lemma 8. Let δ be a positive integer. Any formula F of fan-in 2, syntactic degree
d ě 1, sum-depth ∆, and size s can be parallelized into a formula F 1 (of arbitrary fan-in)
of product-depth at most ϕδ pF q and size at most s ¨ 2δ logpdq . Further, if F is homogeneous,
monotone and/or non-commutative, so is F 1 .
                                                                                     Q       U
                                                                                       log s
    Since we ensured that the sum-depth is bounded by Oplog sq, taking δ “ log             d and
applying Lemma 8, we get that the final formula F 1 has size at most polypsq and product-depth
at most
              ˆ         R             V˙
                                log d
   ϕδ pF q “ O rlog ds ` logpsq           “ Oplog dq.
                                log s
By collapsing sum gates that feed into other sum gates, we see that the depth of F 1 can be
assumed to be at most twice its product-depth, which is Oplog dq. This thus finishes the
proof of the theorem.                                                                    ◀

    We now prove Lemma 8.

Proof of Lemma 8. For any gate α in F , let Fα denote the subformula rooted at α and dα
be its syntactic degree. We do the proof by induction on ϕδ pF q.
   The base case ϕδ pF q “ 0 trivially holds. Consider the following set of gates of F :
         ␣                                                                        (
    A “ α | α is a not a leaf labelled 1 and ϕδ pFα q ă ϕδ pF q “ ϕδ pFparentpαq q .
For any gate α in A, the induction hypothesis tells us that we can construct a formula
Fα1 of product-depth at most ϕδ pF q ´ 1 and size at most sα ¨ 2δ logpdα q computing the same
polynomial as Fα .
    Let us consider the formula G obtained by replacing these gates from A in F by leaves
(labelled with distinct variables). Notice that for a product-gate β in F , at most one of
its children has syntactic degree larger than dβ {2, where dβ is the syntactic degree of β.
Consequently, G is a skew formula. The other child of β is a ˆ-leaf in G. Moreover, G has
sum-depth at most δ (since ϕδ,2 strictly decreases for gates below).
    Hence, we can use Lemma 6 to simplify G: we get that the polynomial computed by G
is a multilinear polynomial in its leaves and has 2δ monomials. We can then write G as a
      -formula G1 such that each duplicable gate appears in at most 2δ monomials and each
řś

non-duplicable gate in at most 1.
    The new formula F 1 for F is obtained from G1 by replacing each variable leaf, which
corresponds to some gate α in F , by its depth-reduced version Fα1 constructed using the
induction hypothesis above.
    The product-depth of F 1 is bounded by the product-depth of the gates α P A plus the
                                                                       řś
product-depth of G, which is equal to 1 after rewriting it as a              -formula. That is, the
product-depth is at most pϕδ pF q ´ 1q ` 1 “ ϕδ pF q. By construction if G does not contain
leaves labelled by 1, then it is also the case for G1 , otherwise, G1 still has at most one such
leaf. The size of the resulting formula is bounded by
                                       ˜                                    ¸
                   ´                ¯                   ´                  ¯
                                                                              ` 1G’ has a constant leaf .
          ÿ                                     ÿ
                    sα ¨ 2δ logpdα q ` 2δ ¨               sα ¨ 2δ logpdα q
    α non-duplicable                           α duplicable

Notice that if α is duplicable, it must be a ˆ-leaf with its sibling β not a leaf. This means
that dα ď dβ ď d since the syntactic degree is maximal at the root. Hence dα ď d{2 so the
contribution of duplicable gates is bounded by
       ÿ          ´                ¯       ÿ      ´              ¯
               2δ sα ¨ 2δplogpdq´1q ď              sα ¨ 2δ logpdq .
    α duplicable                           α duplicable




                                                                                                            CCC 2023
28:10   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


        The contribution of non-duplicable gates is bounded by
                ÿ
                         sα ¨ 2δ log d
           α non-duplicable

        since any gate in F has syntactic degree at most d. By the choice of A, the subformulas Fα
                        ř
        are disjoint so αPA sα ď s, with strict inequality if G1 has a constant leaf. Hence the size
        of F 1 is bounded by s ¨ 2δ logpdq .
            Finally, it is straightforward to verify that the construction preserves homogeneity,
        monotonicity and/or non-commutativity.                                                    ◀

        ▶ Remark 9. It is easy to note that our depth reduction procedure does not increase the
        syntactic degree of the formula.
           We also observe that putting Theorem 1 together with Theorems 4 and 5 immediately
        implies Corollary 2.

        Proof of Corollary 2. Given a (possibly inhomogeneous) formula F of size s “ polypnq
        computing a polynomial of degree d “ Oplog nq, we first apply standard depth-reduction
        (Theorem 4) to get an equivalent formula F1 of size s1 “ polypnq and depth ∆1 “ Oplog nq
        where each gate has fan-in 2. Applying Raz’s homogenization theorem (Theorem 5) to F1
        yields an equivalent homogeneous formula F2 of size s2 “ polypnq and depth ∆2 “ Oplog nq.
        We can now apply Theorem 1 to F2 to get an equivalent formula F 1 of size s1 “ polypnq and
        depth ∆1 “ Oplog dq.                                                                     ◀

        3.2    Reducing the size blow-up
        We note that the above strategy can be easily adapted to yield a small depth formula of size
        s1 that is nearly linear in the size s of the original formula, at the expense of increasing the
        depth by a large constant.
            The proof is nearly identical to the proof of Theorem 1 above. The new ingredient is a
        near-linear depth-reduction in the setting where there is no bound assumed on the degree
        of the above formula. More precisely, Bshouty, Cleve and Eberly [5] (see also the work of
        Bonet and Buss [2]) showed the following (we sketch Bonet and Buss’ proof in Appendix A
        for completeness).

        ▶ Theorem 10 (Depth-reduction with near-linear size). The following holds for any ε ą 0. Let
        F be a (non-commutative or commutative) algebraic formula of size s computing a polynomial
        P . Then there is an algebraic formula F 1 of size at most s1`ε and depth ∆ “ 2Op1{εq ¨ log s
        computing P . We may also assume that each gate in F 1 has fan-in 2. Furthermore, if F is
        homogeneous and/or monotone, then so is F 1 .

           Using the above result, we can prove the following improved version of our depth-reduction.

        ▶ Theorem 11. Assume that F is a (commutative or non-commutative) formula of size s
        and syntactic degree d ě 1 computing a polynomial P . Then P is also computed by a formula
        F 2 of size at most s1`ε and depth ∆ “ 2Op1{εq ¨ log d. Furthermore, if F is a homogeneous
        and/or monotone formula, then so is F 2 .

        Proof. If d4{ε ě s, then the depth-reduction of Theorem 10 already gives a satisfactory
        solution. Indeed the size is bounded by s1`ε and the depth is bounded by
                              4 Op1{εq
           2Op1{εq log s ď      2      log d ď 2Op1{εq log d.
                              ε
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                     28:11


    So we assume that s ą d4{ε . By first applying Theorem 10 (with ε{2 instead of ε),
we obtain a formula F 1 of size at most s1`ε{2 , depth ∆1 “ 2Op1{εq ¨ log s, and fan-in 2
computing P .
    Now, we apply Lemma 8, while setting δ “ tpε log sq{p2 log dqu. Notice that since ε log s ą
4 log d, it ensures that δ ą pε log sq{p4 log dq ą 1.
    Then the strategy produces a formula F 2 of product-depth at most

                                                                     4 log d
   ϕδ pF 1 q ď ϕδ,1 pF 1 q ` ϕδ,2 pF 1 q ă rlog ds ` 2Op1{εq log s           “ 2Op1{εq log d
                                                                     ε log s

and size at most

   s1`ε{2 ¨ 2δ log d ď s1`ε{2 sε{2 .

This proves the theorem.                                                                       ◀


3.3    Reducing the product fan-ins to 2
It is natural to ask if Theorem 1 can be proved while ensuring that the fan-in of each gate
is bounded by 2, as in Theorem 1 and Theorem 10. This is not possible, as a formula of
fan-in 2 and depth Oplog dq can only compute polynomials on at most polypdq variables,
while formulas of size s may have up to s variables. However, this does not rule out reducing
the fan-in of the product gates to 2. Indeed, the circuit depth-reduction of [31] does exactly
this. We show now that this can also be done for algebraic formulas with bounded syntactic
degree.

▶ Theorem 12. Let F be a (commutative or non-commutative) algebraic formula F of size
s, depth ∆, and syntactic degree d ě 1 computing a polynomial P . Then P can also be
computed by a formula F 1 of size s and depth ∆1 “ Op∆ ` log dq where each product gate
of F 1 has fan-in 2. Furthermore, if F is a homogeneous and/or monotone formula, then so
is F 1 .

   Plugging this in Theorem 7 gives a depth-reduction to formulas of depth Oplog dq and size
polypsq such that all product gates have fan-in at most 2. A similar result can be obtained
with a smaller blow-up in size by combining this statement with Theorem 11.

Proof. It suffices to prove a weaker version of the above theorem where each product gate
has fan-in at most 3. We can then replace each of the products of fan-in 3 by a tree of
product gates of fan-in 2 and size 3. This has the effect of increasing the depth at most by a
factor of 2, which does not affect the overall result.
    So we will prove this slightly weaker version. In this setting, we will aim for a depth
∆1 “ ∆ ` log d.
    This is done by induction on the depth ∆ of the formula. The case of ∆ “ 0 is trivial.
Let F be a formula of depth ∆ ą 0 and syntactic degree d.
    Assume that the output gate of F is a sum gate, and F1 , . . . , Ft are the subformulas of
F of depth ∆ ´ 1. By definition, each Fi has syntactic degree at most d. Applying the
induction hypothesis to each of the Fi yields a formula Fi1 with product gates of fan-in at
most 3. The formula F 1 can then be defined as the sum of these formulas.




                                                                                                   CCC 2023
28:12   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


           Now we come to the main case, which is when the output gate of F is a product gate.
        Assume that F1 , . . . , Ft are the subformulas of F of depth ∆ ´ 1 in the order11 that they
        appear in F . Let di denote the syntactic degree of Fi . Define
                              j
                              ÿ
              m “ mintj |          di ě d{2u.
                             i“1

        Let Fℓ be the formula obtained from F by keeping only the subformulas F1 , . . . , Fm´1 , and
        Fr be the formula obtained by keeping only Fm`1 , . . . , Ft . We use the induction hypothesis
        on Fℓ , Fm , and Fr to get formulas Fℓ1 , Fm
                                                   1
                                                     and Fr1 . Finally, we set

              F 1 “ Fℓ1 ˆ Fm
                           1
                             ˆ Fr1 .

        The size12 of F 1 is the sum of the sizes of Fℓ1 , Fm
                                                            1
                                                              and Fr1 , which is at most s by the induction
        hypothesis. Let ∆1ℓ , ∆1m and ∆1r denote the depths of Fℓ1 , Fm  1
                                                                           and Fr1 respectively. The depth
            1
        of F is

              1 ` maxt∆1ℓ , ∆1m , ∆1r u ď 1 ` maxt∆ ` logpd{2q, ∆ ´ 1 ` log d, ∆ ` logpd{2qu “ ∆ ` log d

        where the second inequality uses the induction hypothesis, and the fact that Fℓ and Fr have
        syntactic degree at most d{2 and Fm has depth at most ∆ ´ 1.                             ◀

         4        Tightness
        Given integers k ě 1 and r ě 2, we will define a polynomial H pk,rq . Intuitively, we want to
        define this polynomial as a standard universal polynomial for formulas. It is composed of
        k-nested inner products, each one of size r. In the following we will drop the superscript in
        H pk,rq and write simply H instead.
            The polynomial H will be defined over the set of p2rqk variables

              txσ,τ | σ P r2sk , τ P rrsk u.

        Let us define recursively polynomials Hu,v for all pu, vq P r2sďk ˆ rrsďk such that |u| “ |v|:

              Hu,v “ xu,v                                             when |u| “ |v| “ k
                     ÿr
              Hu,v “    Hu1,va Hu2,va                                 otherwise.
                       a“1

        The polynomial H is defined as the polynomial Hε,ε . Note that H is a polynomial of degree
        d “ 2k and has rd´1 monomials.
            From its definition, H is computed by a monotone formula M of size p2rqk and depth 2k,
        with a `-gate at the top, alternating layers of `-gates and ˆ-gates, with `-gates of fan-in r
        and ˆ-gates of fan-in 2, and leaves labelled with distinct variables.
            For words u and v over the same alphabet, we write u Ą v if u is a prefix of v. There
        is a natural one-to-one correspondance between prefixes of words of prrs ˆ r2sqk and nodes
        of M , which is the following. Let σ “ σ1 . . . σk P r2sk , and τ “ τ1 . . . τk P rrsk . The word
        τ1 σ1 . . . τk σk corresponds to a path from the root of M to the leaf labelled xσ,τ , while


        11
             The order is important in the non-commutative setting.
        12
             Recall that the size of a formula is the number of its leaves.
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                           28:13


proper prefixes of τ1 σ1 . . . τk σk correspond to internal gates in M along this path. For
ℓ ă k, u “ u1 . . . uℓ P r2sℓ and v “ v1 . . . vℓ P rrsℓ , the node which corresponds to the word
v1 u1 . . . vℓ uℓ is the `-gate of M computing Hu,v .
    The polynomial H is easily seen to be set-multilinear with respect to the sets of variables
tXσ | σ P r2sk u where Xσ “ txσ,τ | τ P rrsk u. This means that each monomial has exactly
one variable from each set Xσ .
                                                                                    pk,rq
▶ Remark 13. For |u| “ |v| “ ℓ ď k, u P r2sℓ and v P rrsℓ , the polynomial Hu,v             is defined
over the set of variables

   Xu,v “ txσ,τ | σ P r2sk , τ P rrsk , u Ą σ, v Ą τ u

and is the polynomial H pk´ℓ,rq (upto renaming of the variables). In particular, its degree is
                     1
d1 “ 2k´ℓ , it has rd ´1 monomials and it is set-multilinear with respect to tXσ | σ P r2sk , u Ą
σu.
    Before proving hardness of H for small-depth monotone formulas, we need to show that
the gates of a monotone formula computing H cannot compute too many monomials. This
is proved in Lemma 15 below.
▶ Proposition 14. Consider two variables xσ,τ and xσ1 ,τ 1 . If xσ,τ xσ1 ,τ 1 appears in a monomial
of H, and if σ and σ 1 have a common prefix of length ℓ ă k, then τ and τ 1 have a common
prefix of length ℓ ` 1.
Proof. Observe that xσ1 ,τ1 . . . xσp ,τp is a monomial of H if and only if these variables form
the leaves of a parse tree of M . As observed above, the root-to-leaf path leading to the
variable xσi ,τi in M is obtained by taking in turn the first letter of τi , the first letter of σi ,
the second letter of τi , etc.
    If the product xσ,τ xσ1 ,τ 1 appears in a monomial of H, it must be possible to complete
the union of the two paths, from the root to xσ,τ and from the root to xσ1 ,τ 1 , into a parse
tree of the formula M .
    If the longest common prefix of τ and τ 1 were of length at most ℓ, then the lowest common
ancestor of xσ,τ and xσ1 ,τ 1 in M would be a `-gate, which is not possible in a parse tree
where each `-gate has a single child.                                                            ◀

▶ Lemma 15. If F is a monotone formula which computes the polynomial H and if α is a
gate of F of degree dα , then the number of monomials of the polynomial computed at gate α
is at most rdα ´1 .
Proof. Since H has rd´1 monomials, the result is true when dα “ d by monotonicity. Assume
now that dα ă d.
   Let

   I “ tσ P r2sk | some variable of Xσ appears in αu.

For u P r2sďk , let Iu “ tσ P r2sk | u Ą σu. Let tu1 , . . . , up u be the set of words w of minimal
length such that Iw Ď I. Then I is the disjoint union ℓPrps Iuℓ . Since dα ă d, I ‰ r2sk so
                                                               Ť

no uℓ is the empty word.
    Consider some ℓ P rps. Let ūℓ be obtained by switching the last letter of uℓ . By minimality
of the length of uℓ , we must have Iūℓ Ę I. Let σ be a word in Iūℓ zI. Since F is monotone
and computes a set-multilinear polynomial, it is a set-multilinear formula and therefore the
polynomial computed at α must be multiplied by some variable xσ,τ . Let vℓ be the prefix of
length |uℓ | of τ . Consider any variable xσ1 ,τ 1 appearing in α such that uℓ Ą σ 1 . Since the
product xσ,τ xσ1 ,τ 1 must appear in a monomial of H by monotonicity, it must be that vℓ Ą τ 1
by Proposition 14.

                                                                                                         CCC 2023
28:14   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


           Any monomial m in the polynomial computed in gate α can be written in a unique way
        m “ m1 ¨ ¨ ¨ mp with mℓ set-multilinear with respect to tXσ | uℓ Ą σu. By the above, mℓ is a
        monomial over the variables Xuℓ ,vℓ of degree |Iuℓ |. By monotonicity, it should be possible to
        complete leaves of M labelled with variables from mℓ into a parse tree of M appearing in H,
        which proves that mℓ is a monomial of Huℓ ,vℓ . There are at most r|Iuℓ |´1 such submonomials
        mℓ by Remark 13. It follows that the number of monomials of the polynomial computed in
        node α is at most
           źp
              r|Iuℓ |´1 ď r|I|´1 “ rdα ´1 .                                                          ◀
           ℓ“1

          We are ready to prove hardness of the polynomial H for monotone computation. We shall
        make use of the following “product lemma”, which comes in different forms in e.g. [27, 10, 24].
        ▶ Lemma 16. A degree-d homogeneous formula F of size s and product-depth ∆ can be written
        as a sum of Opsq polynomials, each of which is a product of Ωp∆d1{∆ q many polynomials of
        positive degree. Moreover, each of these polynomials is computed by some gate in F .
        ▶ Proposition 17. If F is a monotone formula of product-depth ∆ ď log d which computes
                                          1{∆
        H, then its size is at least rΩp∆d q .
        Proof. Let t “ ∆d1{∆ . Since F is monotone, it is homogeneous and by Lemma 16 can be
        written as
                    1
                    ti
                  s ź
                  ÿ
           F “              Fi,j
                  i“1 j“1

        with s1 “ Opsq and ti “ Ωptq for all i, and Fi,j is of degree at least 1 and computed by some
        gate in F .
           Let di,j be the degree of Fi,j . By Lemma 15, each Fi,j computes at most rdi,j ´1 monomials.
                                        śtj
        The number of monomials of i“1         Fi,j is therefore bounded by
           ti
           ź                  řti
                 rdi,j ´1 ď r j“1 di,j ´ti ď rd´t
           j“1
               řti
        since j“1     di,j “ d. It follows that the number of monomials computed by F is at most
        s ¨ rd´t . Since F computes H which has rd´1 monomials, we get s “ rΩptq .            ◀

           We can now get Theorem 3 from the introduction, which is restated here for convenience.

                                                                                           ?
        ▶ Theorem 18. Let n and d “ dpnq be growing parameters such that dpnq ď n. Then
        there is a monotone algebraic formula F of size at most n and depth Oplog dq computing
        a polynomial P P Frx1 , . . . , xn s of degree at most d such that any monotone formula F 1 of
        depth oplog dq computing P must have size nωp1q .
        Proof of Theorem 3. Choose parameters kpnq and rpnq such that P pnq :“ H pk,rq has Θpnq
                                                                                        ?
        variables and degree Θpdq: let k “ log d and r “ 12 n1{ log d . Condition dpnq ď n ensures
        that r ě 2. The polynomial P has a monotone formula of size Opnq and depth Oplog dq. By
        Proposition 17, any monotone formula of product-depth ∆ ď log d computing P has size
                       ˆ            ˙Ωp∆d1{∆ q        ´ 1{∆ ¯
                 1{∆     1 1{ log d                    ∆d
           rΩp∆d q “       n                   “ pn{dq log d
                         2
                     ´ 1{∆ ¯
                    Ω ∆d                                    ?             1{∆
        which is n     log d
                              using the hypothesis dpnq ď       n. Since ∆d
                                                                          log d Ñ `8 when ∆ “ o plog dq
        this bound is nωp1q .                                                                        ◀
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                            28:15


 5      Conclusion and Open questions

In this paper we investigated the possibility of reducing the depth of a formula of size s
computing a polynomial of degree d to Oplog dq while keeping the size sOp1q .
    We showed (Theorem 1) that we can do such a transformation when F is homogeneous.
More generally, Theorem 7 states that we can achieve it as soon as the syntactic degree of F
is polynomially bounded in d.


Structure inside VF
Let us consider a sequence of polynomials pfn q whose number of variables and degree are
bounded polynomially in n (such a family is usually called a p-family, see for example [6]).
We can then consider three classes of such families:
   homFrspnqs “ tpfn q | fn is computed by a homogeneous formula of size polypspnqqu,
   lowSynDegFrspnqs “ tpfn q | fn is computed by a formula of size polypspnqq and of
    syntactic degree polypdegpfn qqu
   lowDepthFrspnqs “ tpfn q | fn is computed by a formula of size polypspnqq and of
    depth Oplog degpfn qqu.

   Clearly, we have the inclusion homFrspnqs Ď lowSynDegFrspnqs. Also, in this paper, we
have shown the inclusion lowSynDegFrspnqs Ď lowDepthFrspnqs. Consequently,

     homFrpolypnqs Ď lowSynDegFrpolypnqs Ď lowDepthFrpolypnqs Ď VF,

and we do not know if these inclusions are strict or not.


The complexity of the Elementary Symmetric Polynomials
A particularly interesting special case of the questions above comes from the example of
the Elementary Symmetric Polynomials. Given parameters d, n with d ď n, recall that the
Elementary Symmetric polynomial Snd px1 , . . . , xn q is the sum of all the multilinear monomials
of degree exactly d. A simple and elegant construction of Ben-Or (see [26]) shows that for any
d, the polynomial Snd has an inhomogeneous formula of depth-3 and size Opn2 q. This puts this
family of polynomials in the class lowDepthFrpolypnqs. Further, Shpilka and Wigderson [26,
Theorem 5.3], showed that Snd has depth-6 formulas of syntactic degree at most polypdq,
putting it in the class lowSynDegFrpolypnqs.
    However, as far as we know, there are no known polypnq-sized homogeneous formulas for
this family of polynomials.13 In fact, under some further restrictions, Hrubeš and Yehudayoff
showed [10] a superpolynomial homogeneous formula lower bound when d “ n{2. Removing
these restrictions would show a separation between homFrpolypnqs and lowSynDegFrpolypnqs.
On the other hand, if indeed the elementary symmetric polynomials have polypnq-sized
homogeneous formulas, then this can be used to argue14 the same for any polynomial
computed by a depth-3 formula of polynomial size, hinting at a possible collapse between
homFrpolypnqs and lowSynDegFrpolypnqs.


13
   A strong form of this was conjectured by Nisan and Wigderson [18], which was subsequently refuted by
   Hrubeš and Yehudayoff [10]. However, this still does not yield polynomial-sized homogeneous formulas
   for all elementary symmetric polynomials.
14
   see e.g. [16, Section III] for the standard argument




                                                                                                          CCC 2023
28:16   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


        Lower bounds for higher-depth formulas
        Due to the recent lower bound results of [16], we know that there is an explicit homogeneous
        polynomial P pXq of degree d on n variables that cannot be computed by any formula of
        size polypnq and depth ε ¨ log log d, for some absolute constant ε ą 0. It turns out that the
        polynomial P is computable by an algebraic branching program and therefore, lies in the
        complexity class called VBP.
            It is known that VF is contained in VBP. However, we do not know whether this
        containment is strict or not. Our lower bound result helps us pose a refined version of this
        question. Specifically, it shows that if the lower bound from [16] can be improved from
        Ωplog log dq to ωplog dq, then we will have separated VF from VBP.
            The fact that our depth reduction carries over to the non-commutative setting, makes
        a compelling case for revisiting the VF vs. VBP question in the non-commutative setting.
        Specifically, a recent result of [30] shows that there is an explicit non-commutative polynomial
        P pXq of degree d on n variables that cannot be computed by any non-commutative formula of
                                     ?                                                           ?
        size polypnq and depth ε ¨ log d. So, improving the lower bound in this case from Ωp log dq
        to ωplog dq would separate VF from VBP in the non-commutative setting.


             References
         1   Manindra Agrawal and V. Vinay. Arithmetic circuits: A chasm at depth four. In proceedings
             of Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 67–75, 2008. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.32.
         2   Maria Luisa Bonet and Samuel R. Buss. Size-depth tradeoffs for boolean formulae. Information
             Processing Letters, 49(3):151–155, 1994. doi:10.1016/0020-0190(94)90093-0.
         3   R. Brent, D. Kuck, and K. Maruyama. The parallel evaluation of arithmetic expressions
             without division. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-22(5):532–534, 1973. doi:10.1109/
             T-C.1973.223757.
         4   Richard P. Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions. Journal of the
             ACM, 21(2):201–206, April 1974. doi:10.1145/321812.321815.
         5   Nader H. Bshouty, Richard Cleve, and Wayne Eberly. Size-depth tradeoffs for algebraic
             formulas. SIAM J. Comput., 24(4):682–705, 1995. doi:10.1137/S0097539792232586.
         6   Peter Bürgisser. Cook’s versus Valiant’s hypothesis. Theoretical Computer Science, 235(1):71–
             88, 2000.
         7   Suryajith Chillara, Mrinal Kumar, Ramprasad Saptharishi, and V. Vinay. The chasm at
             depth four, and tensor rank: Old results, new insights. CoRR, abs/1606.04200, 2016. arXiv:
             1606.04200.
         8   Suryajith Chillara, Nutan Limaye, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Small-depth multilinear formula
             lower bounds for iterated matrix multiplication, with applications. In STACS, volume 96 of
             LIPIcs, pages 21:1–21:15. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.
         9   Ankit Gupta, Pritish Kamath, Neeraj Kayal, and Ramprasad Saptharishi. Arithmetic circuits:
             A chasm at depth 3. SIAM Journal of Computing, 45(3):1064–1079, 2016. doi:10.1137/
             140957123.
        10   Pavel Hrubeš and Amir Yehudayoff. Homogeneous formulas and symmetric polynomials.
             Comput. Complexity, 20(3):559–578, 2011. doi:10.1007/s00037-011-0007-3.
        11   Neeraj Kayal, Chandan Saha, and Ramprasad Saptharishi. A super-polynomial lower bound for
             regular arithmetic formulas. In David B. Shmoys, editor, Symposium on Theory of Computing,
             STOC 2014, New York, NY, USA, May 31 – June 03, 2014, pages 146–153. ACM, 2014.
             doi:10.1145/2591796.2591847.
        12   Pascal Koiran. Arithmetic circuits: The chasm at depth four gets wider. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
             448:56–65, 2012. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2012.03.041.
        13   S Rao Kosaraju. Parallel evaluation of division-free arithmetic equations. In Proceedings of
             the Eighteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 231–239, 1986.
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                         28:17


14   Mrinal Kumar, Rafael Mendes de Oliveira, and Ramprasad Saptharishi. Towards optimal depth
     reductions for syntactically multilinear circuits. In Christel Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis,
     Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi, editors, 46th International Colloquium on Automata,
     Languages, and Programming, ICALP 2019, July 9-12, 2019, Patras, Greece, volume 132
     of LIPIcs, pages 78:1–78:15. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.78.
15   Nutan Limaye, Srikanth Srinivasan, and Sébastien Tavenas. Superpolynomial lower bounds
     against low-depth algebraic circuits. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., TR21-081, 2021.
     URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/081.
16   Nutan Limaye, Srikanth Srinivasan, and Sébastien Tavenas. Superpolynomial lower bounds
     against low-depth algebraic circuits. In 62nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of
     Computer Science, FOCS 2021, Denver, CO, USA, February 7-10, 2022, pages 804–814. IEEE,
     2021. doi:10.1109/FOCS52979.2021.00083.
17   Noam Nisan. Lower bounds for non-commutative computation. In Proceedings of the twenty-
     third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 410–418, 1991.
18   Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Lower bounds on arithmetic circuits via partial derivatives.
     Computational Complexity, 6(3):217–234, 1997. doi:10.1007/BF01294256.
19   Franco P. Preparata and David E. Muller. The time required to evaluate division-free arithmetic
     expressions. Inf. Process. Lett., 3(5):144–146, 1975. doi:10.1016/0020-0190(75)90028-9.
20   Franco P. Preparata and David E. Muller. Efficient parallel evaluation of boolean expression.
     IEEE Trans. Computers, 25(5):548–549, 1976. doi:10.1109/TC.1976.1674647.
21   Ran Raz. Separation of multilinear circuit and formula size. Theory of Computing, 2(1):121–135,
     2006. doi:10.4086/toc.2006.v002a006.
22   Ran Raz. Tensor-rank and lower bounds for arithmetic formulas. Journal of the ACM,
     60(6):40:1–40:15, 2013. doi:10.1145/2535928.
23   Ran Raz and Amir Yehudayoff. Balancing syntactically multilinear arithmetic circuits. Com-
     putational Complexity, 17(4):515–535, 2008. doi:10.1007/s00037-008-0254-0.
24   Ramprasad Saptharishi. A survey of lower bounds in arithmetic circuit complexity. Github
     survey, 2015. URL: https://github.com/dasarpmar/lowerbounds-survey/releases/.
25   Eli Shamir and Marc Snir. On the depth complexity of formulas. Math. Syst. Theory,
     13:301–322, 1980. doi:10.1007/BF01744302.
26   Amir Shpilka and Avi Wigderson. Depth-3 arithmetic circuits over fields of characteristic zero.
     Computational Complexity, 10(1):1–27, 2001.
27   Amir Shpilka and Amir Yehudayoff. Arithmetic circuits: A survey of recent results and open
     questions. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 5:207–388, March 2010.
     doi:10.1561/0400000039.
28   Philip M. Spira. On time hardware complexity tradeoffs for Boolean functions. In Shu Lin,
     editor, Proceedings of the Fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pages
     525–527. Western Periodicals Company, North Hollywood, California, 1971.
29   Sébastien Tavenas. Improved bounds for reduction to depth 4 and depth 3. Information and
     Computation, 240:2–11, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.ic.2014.09.004.
30   Sébastien Tavenas, Nutan Limaye, and Srikanth Srinivasan. Set-multilinear and non-
     commutative formula lower bounds for iterated matrix multiplication. In STOC, pages
     416–425. ACM, 2022.
31   Leslie G. Valiant, Sven Skyum, Stuart J. Berkowitz, and Charles Rackoff. Fast Parallel
     Computation of Polynomials Using Few Processors. SIAM Journal of Computing, 12(4):641–
     644, 1983. doi:10.1137/0212043.
32   SV Yablonskii and VP Kozyrev. Mathematical problems of cybernetics. Information Materials
     of Scientific Council of Akad. Nauk SSSR on Complex Problem “Kibernetika”, 19:3–15, 1968.




                                                                                                       CCC 2023
28:18   Towards Optimal Depth-Reductions for Algebraic Formulas


         A       The Bonet-Buss depth-reduction
        In this section, we give a proof of Theorem 10. This is essentially the same proof as in the
        work of Bonet and Buss [2], but since the results in that paper are only stated for Boolean
        formulas, we give the proof here for completeness.
            We show that for some large enough absolute constant C ą 0, any polynomial P computed
        by a formula F of size s can also be computed by a formula F 1 of size at most s1`ε , depth at
        most 2Op1{εq ¨ log s, and fan-in 2. Further, if F is homogeneous/monotone/non-commutative,
        then so is F 1 . This latter claim will follow directly from the construction.
            We assume here that each gate in F has fan-in 2 to begin with. We can make this
        modification to F in the beginning at the expense of increasing the depth, and without
        increasing the size.
            We prove the claim by induction on the size s of the formula. Let T psq and Dpsq denote
        the maximum size and depth (respectively) of F 1 thus obtained, assuming that F has size at
        most s. Let k “ 2C{ε where C ą 0 is an absolute constant we will choose below. We assume
        throughout that ε ă 1, which is without loss of generality.
            The base case of the formula is when s ď k, in which case the claim is trivial, as any
        formula of size s has depth at most s, which in this case is at most 2C{ε .
            Now, assume that s ą k. In this case, we find a gate α such that the size of the subformula
        Fα rooted at α has size at least s ´ s{k, while the children β and γ of α do not satisfy this
        property. It is easy to observe that there is a unique α with this property. Let ˚ denote the
        operation (either ` or ˆ) labelling α.
            We replace α by a fresh variable y in F to get a formula Fy . Note that Fy has size at
        most s1 “ 2sk . Since Fy has at most one occurrence of y, we can write

             Fy “ A ¨ y ¨ B ` C

        where A is the product of all subformulas that multiply y on the left in F along the path to
        the output, B is similarly the product of all subformulas that multiply y on the right, and C
        is the polynomial computed by Fy when we set y to 0. Clearly, A, B and C have formulas
        FA , FB and FC of size at most s1 . Finally, we get the formula F 1 as in Figure 1.

                                                               `

                                                           ˆ         FC1

                                                     ˆ         FB1

                                               FA1         ˚

                                                     Fβ1       Fγ1

             Figure 1 Constructing F 1 .

           Here, FA1 , FB1 , FC1 , Fβ1 , Fγ1 are the formulas obtained by recursively applying the same
        procedure to FA , FB , FC , Fβ , Fγ .
           We can bound the size and depth of the depth-reduced formula by induction. We have

             Dpsq ď Dps ´ s{kq ` Op1q
H. Fournier, N. Limaye, G. Malod, S. Srinivasan, and S. Tavenas                                   28:19


leading easily to an overall depth bound of Opk log sq “ 2Op1{εq ¨ log s for any choice of the
constant C.
   For the size, we have the following recursion.

   T psq ď         max
                  sβ ,sγ ,s1 :
                                 T psβ q ` T psγ q ` 3T ps1 q
             sβ ,sγ ďsp1´1{kq
                  s1 ď2s{k
              sβ `sγ `s1 ďs

where sβ and sγ are the sizes of Fβ and Fγ respectively. We now use induction to bound
T psq as follows. (We omit the conditions on sβ , sγ and s1 for notational simplicity.)

   T psq ď max s1`ε
                β   ` s1`ε
                       γ   ` 3s1`ε
                               1
             sβ ,sγ ,s1
         ˆ ˆ     ˙˙1`ε ´ ¯       ˆ ˙1`ε
               1        s 1`ε     2s
        ď s 1´        `       `3
               k        k         k


where we used the fact that s1 ď 2s{k and the fact that, using the convexity of the map
x ÞÑ x1`ε , the function s1`ε
                          β   ` s1`ε
                                 γ   is maximized when maxtsβ , sγ u “ s ´ s{k, meaning that
mintsβ , sγ u ď s{k.
    Continuing the computation, we get
                  ˆˆ       ˙                 ˙         ˆ               ˙
              1`ε        1       1        4       1`ε      1       C1
    T psq ď s        1´      ` 1`ε ` 3 1`ε ď s        ¨ 1 ´ ` 1`ε
                         k     k        k                  k k

for some large enough absolute constant C 1 . Setting k “ 2C{ε for a large enough absolute
constant C gives us T psq ď s1`ε , proving the inductive claim.




                                                                                                 CCC 2023
