Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on
Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond
Chi-Ning Chou !
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Peter J. Love !
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
Juspreet Singh Sandhu !
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Jonathan Shi !
Department of Computing Sciences, Bocconi University, Milan, Italy

      Abstract
We introduce a notion of generic local algorithm, which strictly generalizes existing frameworks of
local algorithms such as factors of i.i.d. by capturing local quantum algorithms such as the Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA).
    Motivated by a question of Farhi et al. [arXiv:1910.08187, 2019], we then show limitations of
generic local algorithms including QAOA on random instances of constraint satisfaction problems
(CSPs). Specifically, we show that any generic local algorithm whose assignment to a vertex depends
only on a local neighborhood with o(n) other vertices (such as the QAOA at depth less than ε log(n))
cannot arbitrarily-well approximate boolean CSPs if the problem satisfies a geometric property from
statistical physics called the coupled overlap-gap property (OGP) [Chen et al., Annals of Probability,
47(3), 2019]. We show that the random MAX-k-XOR problem has this property when k ≥ 4 is even
by extending the corresponding result for diluted k-spin glasses.
    Our concentration lemmas confirm a conjecture of Brandao et al. [arXiv:1812.04170, 2018]
asserting that the landscape independence of QAOA extends to logarithmic depth – in other words,
for every fixed choice of QAOA angle parameters, the algorithm at logarithmic depth performs
almost equally well on almost all instances. One of these lemmas is a strengthening of McDiarmid’s
inequality, applicable when the random variables have a highly biased distribution, and may be of
independent interest.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Randomness, geometry and discrete
structures; Mathematics of computing → Probabilistic algorithms; Mathematics of computing →
Combinatorics; Theory of computation → Quantum complexity theory

Keywords and phrases Quantum Algorithms, Spin Glasses, Hardness of Approximation, Local
Algorithms, Concentration Inequalities, Overlap Gap Property

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2022.41

Category Track A: Algorithms, Complexity and Games

Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.06049 [11]

Funding Chi-Ning Chou: Supported by NSF awards CCF 1565264 and CNS 1618026.
Peter J. Love: Supported by NSF STAQ award PHY-1818914 and DARPA ONISQ program award
HR001120C0068.
Juspreet Singh Sandhu: Supported by NSF STAQ award PHY-1818914 and DARPA ONISQ program
award HR001120C0068.
Jonathan Shi: Supported by European Research Council (ERC) award No. 834861.

Acknowledgements We thank Jonathan Wurtz for many insightful discussions about QAOA. We
are grateful to Amartya Shankha Biswas for patiently explaining the factors of i.i.d. framework
to us. We would also like to thank Antares Chen for many invigorating and profound discussions
             © Chi-Ning Chou, Peter J. Love, Juspreet Singh Sandhu, and Jonathan Shi;
                                                                                                       EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                       TC S




49th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2022).
Editors: Mikołaj Bojańczyk, Emanuela Merelli, and David P. Woodruff;
Article No. 41; pp. 41:1–41:20
                     Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
41:2   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


       which culminated as the open problem proposed in Problem 5.1. Lastly, we would like to thank
       Boaz Barak for providing detailed and helpful feedback on a prior version of this manuscript, and
       David Gamarnik for his explanations on the state of the art results in the research area.


        1     Introduction

       Recent developments [3, 26, 16] of noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) devices [40] have
       brought us to the door of near-term quantum computation. As experimentalists can now
       build programmable quantum simulators up to 256 qubits [16], this motivates an important
       theoretical question: what computational advantage can such a NISQ device provide?
           One of the constraints of NISQ devices is the inability to create high-fidelity global
       entanglement. This motivates the study of the power of quantum algorithms that are local.
       A leading candidate in this regime of quantum algorithms is the Quantum Approximate
       Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) [19] at shallow depths. While there have been some recent
       results [29, 5, 33] that formally examine the QAOA algorithm at depth p = 1 or 2, very few
       results exist for super-constant depth QAOA [17, 18].
           Given the imminent quest of demonstrating quantum computational advantage, it is
       important to clarify for what optimization problems can near-term quantum algorithms (such
       as local quantum algorithms) reliably be expected to demonstrate computational advantage.
           We show that local quantum algorithms, a large natural class of NISQ algorithms, are
       obstructed by a geometric property of the solution space known as the coupled Overlap-Gap
       Property [10]. We conjecture that this property is satisfied by most CSPs (Conjecture 5.1).
       Specific problems known to have this property include the diluted k-spin glass Hamiltonian
       (equivalent to a max-cut problem on random k-hypergraphs) [10], independent set on random
       graphs [17], planted clique [25], and many other problems that so far seem to elude efficient
       algorithms and be algorithmically hard [22]. In this manuscript, we also demonstrate that
       the random Max-k-XOR problem has this property (see subsection 2.4).
           Our results lift the continuous coupled interpolation techniques of Chen et al. [10] to the
       generic quantum-inclusive setting, with stronger and more general concentration of measure
       statements about local quantum algorithms, extending the techniques of Farhi et al. [17].
           Critical to our approach is a new definition of local algorithms we term generic local
       algorithms (See subsection 2.1). Previous work relating statistical-physics-derived OGPs to
       local algorithms leveraged the factors of i.i.d. framework for local algorithms, which fails to
       contain local quantum algorithms, as we demonstrate in Proposition 2.3. Our definition of
       generic local algorithms subsumes local quantum and classical algorithms (see Proposition 2.3
       and Proposition 4.3) but still satisfies strong concentration properties (see Theorems 5.3
       and 5.4 in the full version), allowing techniques for local classical algorithms [10] to apply to
       the quantum case. Two of our core technical contributions involve showing that the random
       MAX-k-XOR problem has a coupled Overlap Gap Property (see subsection 2.4) by extending
       the techniques of Chen et al. [10] and deriving a strengthened version of McDiarmid’s
       inequality for highly-biased random variables using a martingale argument (see Lemma 2.7).
           The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In subsection 1.1 we introduce the relevant
       spin glass literature, defining the notion of a diluted k-spin glass; in subsection 1.2 we
       introduce the relevant prior work; in subsection 1.3 we state our main theorems (informally);
       in subsection 1.4 we briefly explain the architecture of our proof and compare our techniques
       with those of Chen et al. [10] and Farhi et al. [17]; in subsection 1.5 we introduce the necessary
       mathematical preliminaries and notation, including the models of CSPs we work with and a
       rigorous defintion of local classical algorithms; in section 2 we state our separation of different
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                         41:3


families of local algorithms and our main concentration lemmas; in section 5 we conclude
by summarizing our results and mentioning many natural open problems closely related to
and/or motivated by our work. Complete proofs and technical details are delegated to the
appendices.


1.1    Diluted k-spin glasses, maximum cuts of sparse hypergraphs, and
       Max-k-XOR
Spin glass theory is a central theoretical framework in statistical physics. The Sherrington-
Kirkpatrick model (SK model) [43] is one of the most well studied mathematical models in the
theory and consists of two variables: spins {σi }i∈[n] and interactions {Ji,j }i,j∈[n] . A spin σi
takes values in {±1} and the interaction Ji,j between two spins σi , σj is a real-valued variable
that captures whether the physical system prefers the two spins to be the same (Ji,j > 0)
or different (Ji,j < 0). The goal is to understand what spin configurations σ ∈ {−1, 1}n
maximize the following quantity (a.k.a. Hamiltonian):
            X
   H(σ) =          Ji,j σi σj .
             i,j


The setting is easily generalized to higher order interactions, i.e., Ji1 ,...,ik acting on k spins,
and this is known as the k-spin model. See [35] for a comprehensive survey.
    There is a natural correspondence between spin glass theory and combinatorial
optimization problems. In a combinatorial optimization problem (e.g., MAX-CUT), a
variable corresponds to a spin and a constraint corresponds to an interaction. Through
this correspondence, the maximization of the above Hamiltonian H(σ) serves as a proxy for
maximizing the number of satisfied constraints in the combinatorial optimization problem.
    A spin glass model additionally specifies a particular distribution on the interactions
{Ji,j } for all i, j ∈ [n]. The quantity of interest is the asymptotic maximum value

                   1
   H ∗ := lim          max H(σ) ,
           n→∞ n        σ

(a.k.a. the ground state energy density), as well as spin configurations σ with H(σ) ≈ H ∗ .
There are many well-studied spin glass models in physics and various mathematical insights
about these have been discovered over the years [12, 14, 42, 37]. For example, for the
SK model [43], Parisi [38] proposed the infamous Parisi Variational Principle to capture
the exact value of H ∗ . This was later rigorously proved by Talagrand [44] and again by
Panchenko [36] in greater generality. These successes give hope to design local algorithms
that simulate the physical system and output a final configuration as an approximation to
the corresponding combinatorial optimization problem.
    While traditional spin glass models consider the underlying non-trivial interactions as
either lying on a certain physically-realistic graph (e.g., the non-zero Ji,j form a 2D-grid)
or being a mean field approximation (for example, where every Ji,j is non-trivial), the
applications in combinatorial optimization often require the underlying constraint graphs to
be sparse and arbitrary. We use two methods of bridging the gap between the two settings:
    By studying the diluted k-spin glass model where one first samples a sparse hypergraph and
    then assigns non-trivial interactions on top of its hyperedges. Intuitively, approximating
    the H ∗ of the diluted k-spin glass corresponds to approximating the maximum cut over
    random sparse hypergraphs. This correspondence is made more precise in Definition 1.5.




                                                                                                       ICALP 2022
41:4   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


          Using the techniques of Gaussian interpolation [27] and Poisson interpolation [21, 10]
          from statistical physics to relate the behavior of random dense spin glass models to
          random sparse CSPs. More specifically, we relate the random Max-k-XOR problem to
          mean-field p-spin glasses (Section 8 in the full version) by modifying the Guerra-Tonnineli
          interpolation used in Chen et al. [10].


          Table 1 A dictionary between spin glass models and combinatorial optimization problems.

                      Spin glass models                       Combinatorial optimization problems
                       Spins σ ∈ {−1, 1}n                         An assignment to boolean variables
                Interactions {Ji1 ,...,ik }i1 ,...,ik ∈[n]           Constraints (i.e., hyperedges)
                       Hamiltonian H(σ)                          Value of an assignment (i.e., valΨ (σ))
                    Ground state energy H ∗                            Optimal value (i.e., valΨ )
               Mean field model (e.g., SK model)             The underlying hypergraph not being a lattice
                    Diluted spin glass model                   The underlying hypergraph being sparse



       1.2     Prior Work
       1.2.1      Constraint-satisfaction problems & hardness for classical
                  algorithms
       CSPs (described formally in Definition 1.4) are a natural class of combinatorial optimization
       problems that have been studied extensively in theoretical computer science [7, 32]. Many
       NP-Complete problems such as k-SAT, k-NAE-SAT, MAX-CUT and k-XOR, can be framed
       as CSPs. Consequently, unless P = N P, finding optimal solutions to these problems is
       infeasible. A natural question then is to understand how well can approximate answers to
       instances of these problems be constructed by efficient algorithms. Under the now widely
       believed Unique Games Conjecture [31], upper bounds on the approximability of CSPs are
       known [30, 41]. These bounds, however, are only worst-case and do not necessarily explicitly
       demonstrate a family of instances of a CSP that are hard to approximate. Additionally,
       they remain conditional on a positive resolution to the Unique Games Conjecture, which is
       still a difficult open problem in the field. In the average-case regime, the goal is to ask how
       well a typical instance of a CSP can be approximated, where the instance is chosen from a
       “natural” distribution over the set of instances. Perhaps surprisingly, great insight has been
       drawn about the algorithmic hardness (or lack thereof) about random instances of many
       CSPs based on work originating in the Statistical Physics community, particularly in Spin
       Glass Theory [34, 21, 39]. This was so because the problem of finding spin configurations of
       particles in many spin glass models that put a system in the ground state could naturally be
       interpreted as a CSP. Various iterative algorithms were proposed to study the problem of
       explicitly finding near-ground states of typical instances of various spin glass models [46, 9].
       It was observed that these algorithms either consistently got better with the number of
       iterations, or hit a threshold which they could not exceed. To understand this, the work
       of Achlioptas et al. [1] studied the solution geometry of the k-SAT problem and found that
       most good solutions were in well separated clusters. Additionally, most variables in a good
       solution could only take a single value (i.e., they were “frozen”). This observation was
       stated as an intuitive reason for the failure of local algorithms on random instances of k-SAT.
       Gamarnik et al. [24] made this more formal and precise by showing that no classical local
       algorithm (described formally as factors of i.i.d., see Definition 1.10) could approximate the
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                    41:5


MAX-IND-SET problem arbitrarily well on sparse random graphs. Critical to their argument
was the fact that all (not most) nearly-optimal solutions to the problem satisfied the Overlap
Gap Property - they were in well separated clusters. In various works that followed up,
many problems have been shown to have near-optimal solutions conform to this solution
geometry and algorithmic hardness for various families of classical algorithms has been
established [10, 23, 22].


1.2.2    The Overlap Gap Property & QAOA
A depth-p QAOA algorithm, abbreviated as QAOAp , applies a length-p sequence of unitaries
to each hyperedge and outputs the measurement result of the final state. The goal of
QAOA is to approximate the optimal solutions on average-case (i.e., random) instances. For
example, the work of Farhi et al. [19] showed that QAOA1 achieved 0.6924-approximation
for MAX-CUT on triangle-free 3-regular graphs while such an approximation ratio was not
then known to be achievable by local classical algorithms.
    Shortly after QAOAp (defined formally in Definition 2.2) was proposed as a way to solve
hard optimization problems and possibly establish quantum computational advantage for
MAX-CUT on 3-regular graphs [19], a local classical algorithm was designed that would
outperform QAOAp on these graphs at depth 1 [29]. Consequently, because of a flurry of
follow up results, QAOA has been shown to be outmatched by local classical algorithms up
to depth 2 [33, 5] for the MAX-CUT problem on d-regular graphs with large girth. In fact,
under the widely-believed conjecture in the Spin-Glass Theory community that the SK model
does not satisfy the Overlap Gap Property [4], an AMP algorithm was recently proposed that
outputs arbitrarily good cuts for large (but constant) degree random regular graphs [2]. To
analyze the performance of QAOAp on a problem that possesses an OGP, Farhi et al. [17]
was established that QAOAp with depth p ≤ ε log(n) could not output independent sets of
size better than .854 times the optimal for sparse random graphs. This work suggested that
the OGP may broadly prove to be an obstacle for QAOAp while it is local as much as it
does for various classical algorithms. However, MAX-IND-SET is not a (maximum) CSP and,
additionally, the prior work [17] does not give an analysis that generalizes to CSPs. Our work
establishes this generalization (see Theorem 1.1) and also immediately positively resolves
the “landscape independence” conjecture of QAOAε log(n) (see Theorem 1.3) proposed by
Brandao et al. [8]. This immediately suggests that quantum advantage is unlikely to be
found up to this depth for CSPs with an OGP, and we conjecture that almost all CSPs will
have an OGP (see subsection 5.1).


1.3     Our results
Our main result establishes that any local quantum algorithm, including QAOAp with
p ≤ ε log(n), is obstructed from arbitrarily approximating any CSP that satisfies a “coupled”
Overlap Gap Property (described in subsubsection 1.5.3). The precise family of CSPs we
will work over will be notated as (k, d)-CSP(f ), where k denotes the number of variables
in a single clause, d denotes the average number of clauses any variable appears in, and f
denotes the predicate applied to each clause. For a formal definition, refer to Definition 1.4.
We state the informal version of our results, the formal versions of which may be found in
Theorems 4.2 and 4.3 in the full version of this paper.




                                                                                                  ICALP 2022
41:6   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


       ▶ Theorem 1.1 (Obstruction to QAOAp given coupled OGP, informal). Given a uniformly
       random instance Ψ of a (k, d)-CSP(f ) that satisfies a coupled OGP, with high probability a
       depth-p QAOAp circuit with

                       log(n)
          p≤                          −1
               2 log(d(k − 1)/ ln(2))

       cannot output a solution that is better than a (1 − ε0 )-approximation for some ε0 > 0.

           In particular, this immediately implies an obstruction for approximating maximum cuts
       of random sparse hypergraphs, as a coupled OGP is known to exist for that problem [10].
       Furthermore, though the obstruction in Theorem 1.1 is stated for QAOAp , it will apply to
       any generic local algorithm, and will, therefore, also apply to any local quantum algorithm.
       This is stated more precisely in Theorem 2.8.

       ▶ Theorem 1.2 (Obstruction to generic local algorithms on random Max-k-XOR, informal).
       For every even k ≥ 4, there exists d0 ∈ N and the following holds. There exists ε0 > 0 such
       that if QAOAp outputs a solution σ ∈ {−1, 1}n with H(σ) being (1 − ε0 )-close to the H ∗ of
       a random Max-k-XOR instance of average degree d ≥ d0 with probability at least 0.99, then
       p = Ω(log n).

       This is stated formally in Corollary 4.4 in the full version, and answers a question of Farhi et
       al. [20], where the authors ask if QAOAp would perform well on k-spin generalizations of the
       SK model, citing Max-k-XOR in particular [10]. The above result is immediately implied by a
       proof of a coupled Overlap-Gap Property for the Max-k-XOR problem, stated in Lemma 2.9
       and proved in Section 8 in the full version.
            To prove Theorem 1.1, two key lemmas about the concentration of output of local
       quantum algorithms need to be proved (Theorems 5.3 and 5.4 in the full version). A corollary
       to these two lemmas is that the quality of solution output by QAOAp (with p as stated
       in Theorem 1.1) concentrates heavily around the expected value. More specifically, if we
       let valΨ (σ) denote the number of clauses of Ψ satisfied by an assignment σ ∈ {±1}n to the
       variables, then this value has small deviation on almost all instances.

       ▶ Theorem 1.3 (Landscape-independence of QAOAε log(n) , informal). Given a random instance
       Ψ of a (k, d)-CSP(f ) and a QAOAp circuit with depth p as stated in Theorem 1.1, the solution
       σ output by QAOAp with value valΨ (σ) concentrates as,
                                                  γ
          Pr valΨ (σ) − E[valΨ (σ)] ≥ δn ≤ eO(n ) ,
                                       


       for every δ > 0 and some γ > 0, and the probability taken over both the input distribution
       and internal randomness of the algorithm.

           The theorem above immediately confirms a conjecture by Brandao et al. [8] about the
       “landscape independence” of QAOAp upto depth ε log(n). The “landscape independence” of
       QAOAp is a term which asserts that the algorithm performs almost equally well on almost
       all instances.

       1.4     Technical overview
       1.4.1    Chen et al. [10] analysis
       Chen et al. [10] establish a coupled overlap-gap property (OGP) for the maximum cut of
       random hypergraphs. The property says that for two “coupled” random instances and any
       nearly optimal solutions σ1 , σ2 ∈ {−1, 1}n of these, the solutions either have large or small
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                        41:7


overlap on the assignment values to the variables, i.e., there exists an interval 0 < a < b < 1
such that ⟨σ1 , σ2 ⟩/n ∈ / [a, b]. The coupled OGP holds over an interpolation of a pair of
hypergraphs {(G1 (t), G2 (t))}t∈[0,1] with the following three properties: for every t ∈ [0, 1],
denote σ1 (t) and σ2 (t) as the outputs of a factors i.i.d. algorithm on inputs G1 (t) and
G2 (t) respectively. (i) when t = 0, (G1 (0), G2 (0)) are independent random hypergraphs and
⟨σ1 (0), σ2 (0)⟩/n < a with high probability; (ii) when t = 1, G1 (1) = G2 (1) are the same
random hypergraph and ⟨σ1 (1), σ2 (1)⟩/n = 1 with high probability; (iii) for each t ∈ [0, 1],
the correlation ⟨σ1 (t), σ2 (t)⟩/n between the two solutions is highly concentrated (with respect
to the randomness of G1 (t), G2 (t) and the algorithm) to a value R(t), and R(t) is a continuous
function of t. By the intermediate value theorem, this contradicts the OGP if the solutions
are nearly optimal and hence no such factors of i.i.d. algorithm can exist. Note that it is also
important to assert that the hamming weight and the objective function values output by
the algorithm also concentrate.


1.4.2     Our analysis
The key part of the proof in Chen et al. [10] that does not work for QAOAp is item (iii)
of step 2. Specifically, local quantum algorithms are not factors of i.i.d. algorithms and
hence their concentration analysis on the correlation between solutions to coupled instances
does not apply. Intuitively, this is because local quantum circuits can induce entanglement
between qubits in a local neighborhood which cannot be explained by a local hidden variable
theory [6]. We overcome this issue by first generalizing the notion of factors of i.i.d. algorithms
to what we call generic local algorithms (Definition 2.1).
    To establish concentration of overlap for quantum local algorithms, the challenge lies
in how to capture the local correlations of G1 (t) and G2 (t). We achieve this by defining a
new notion of a random vector being locally independent (Definition 5.2 in the full version).
This structure enables us to show concentration on a fixed instance over multiple runs of
the generic local algorithm with respect to its internal randomness (Theorem 5.3 in the full
version). Finally, to establish concentration between a pair of correlated instances (G1 (t) and
G2 (t)), we strengthen McDiarmid’s inequality for biased distributions (Lemma 2.7) and this
allows the concentration analysis of the correlation function R(t) to pull through (Theorem
5.1 in the full version). We complete the analysis by showing that the hamming weight
and objective function values output by a generic p-local algorithm also concentrate on any
(k, d)-CSP(f ), obtained as corollaries to the main concentration lemmas (Corollaries 5.10
and 5.13 in the full version).


1.4.3     Comparison with Chen et al. [10] and Farhi et al. [17]
We augment the techniques of Farhi et al. [17] to handle a coupled OGP over a continuous
interpolation, as opposed to the coupled OGP in Farhi et al. [17] which is over a fixed discrete
interpolation. The advantage of this is to enable the use of a broader family of coupled
OGPs provable using statistical mechanics methods, whereas the coupled OGP of Farhi et
al. [17] requires reasoning about explicit sequences of instances in a way that does not clearly
generalize from their independent set analysis to the setting of CSPs.
   Our statements additionally show stronger concentration than those of Chen et al. [10]
which is necessary to demonstrate that polynomially many runs of the algorithm will (with
high probability) not succeed. Lastly, we extend the coupled OGP from the setting of diluted
k-spin glasses shown by Chen et al. [10] to the setting of random Max-k-XOR.


                                                                                                      ICALP 2022
41:8   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


       1.5     Preliminaries & notation
       1.5.1      Constraint-satisfaction problems & hypergraphs
       Constraint satisfaction problems are a class of optimization problems where a set of constraints
       on the underlying variables need to be satisfied in tandem. We restrict our attention to the
       setting where the variables are boolean valued and the number of constraints are sparse.
       Furthermore, every constraint involves k variables, where k is a constant independent of the
       number of variables.

       ▶ Definition 1.4 (Random (k, d)-CSP(f )). A (signed) random (k, d)-CSP(f ) instance with a
       local constraint function f : {−1, 1}k → {0, 1} is constructed as follows:
        1. Choose r ∼ Poisson(dn/k).
        2. Sample r clauses of size k by choosing each clause Ci independently as a collection of k
           variables uniformly at random from {x1 , . . . , xn }k , and, in the case of a signed random
           CSP, random signs si,1 , . . . , si,k ∈ {±1}.
       To each clause Ci there are k variables associated: {xi1 , . . . , xik }. A clause is satisfied
       if there is some assignment to every xij ∈ {−1, 1}, such that, f (xi1 , . . . , xxk ) = 1 (or
       f (si,1 xi1 , . . . , si,k xxk ) = 1 if signed). The value of an assignment σ ∈ {−1, 1}n is defined as
       valΨ (σ) := #{Ci : f (σi1 , . . . , σik ) = 1} (or #{Ci : f (si,1 σi1 , . . . , si,k σik ) = 1} if signed). The
       optimal value of Ψ is defined as val(Ψ) := maxσ valΨ (σ).

       When unspecified, we will be referring to unsigned CSPs. In a diluted k-spin glass, the
       underyling particles can be thought of as vertices of a hypergraph with dn   k hyperedges. Each
       hyperedge is a tuple of k-vertices, and any interaction Ji1 ,...,ik over a tuple (i1 , . . . , ik ) is −1
       if (i1 , . . . , ik ) is a hyperedge of G and 0 otherwise.

       ▶ Definition 1.5 (Random k-uniform hypergraph). A random k-uniform hypergraph consists
       of choosing a number of edges |E| ∼ Poisson( dn
                                                     k ) and then choosing hyperedges e1 , . . . , e|E|
       independently and uniformly at random from the set {1, . . . , n}k of all vertex k-tuples.

       The underlying hamiltonian of a diluted k-spin glass then is,
                         X
            G
          Hn,k,d (σ) = −   σe1 . . . σek ,                                                                        (1)
                             e∈E

       which on maximization corresponds to the MAX-CUT of a random k-uniform hypergraph.
       Observe that a (k, d)-CSP(f ) can be encoded as a diluted k-spin glass by choosing the
       variables to be the set of vertices, the clauses to be the hyperedges, and the hamiltonian to
       be the same as in Equation 1 with the additional requirement that f acts on the variables in
       every hyperedge.


       1.5.2      Vanishing Local Neighborhoods of Sparse Random Hypergraphs
       We state a bound on sufficiently local neighborhoods of random sparse k-uniform hypergraphs.
       This bound is used in the obstruction result to precisely quantify the size of the neighborhood
       p(n) up to which a p(n)-generic local algorithm does not “see the whole hypergraph” around
       any vertex.
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                         41:9


▶ Lemma 1.6 (Vanishing local neighborhoods of random sparse k-uniform hypergraphs). Let
k ≥ 2 and d ≥ 2 and τ ∈ (0, 1). Then there exists a > 0 and 0 < A < 1, such that, for n
large enough and p satisfying

               (1 − τ ) log n
   2p + 1 ≤                ,
               log d(k−1)
                      ln 2

the following are true:
                                          a                                                      a
                                                                                       A
     Pr      [max BG (vi , 2p) ≥ nA ] ≤ e−n ,   and       Pr      [max BG (vi , p) ≥ n 2 ] ≤ e−n 2 .
  G∼Hn,d,k     i                                       G∼Hn,d,k     i

Intuitively, the above lemma says that the local neighborhood of each vertex is vanishingly
small with high probability. To prove Lemma 1.6, we utilize a modified version of the
proof of Farhi et al. [17, Neighborhood Size Theorem] to handle the case of sparse random
hypergraphs and we defer the complete proof to Appendix B in the full version.

1.5.3     The Overlap Gap Property
We say that a (k, d)-CSP(f ) (signed or unsigned) satisfies a coupled overlap-gap property
(OGP) if, given two instances Ψ, Ψ′ constructed so that they share a random t-fraction of
clauses with the remaining (1 − t)-fraction chosen independently, any two “good” solutions σ
of Ψ and σ ′ of Ψ′ are either very similar of dissimilar.

▶ Definition 1.7 (Coupled OGP, informal). A signed or unsigned (k, d)-CSP(f ) satisfies a
coupled OGP if there exists ε0 > 0 and 0 < a < b < 1 such that the following hold for
every t ∈ [0, 1]: Given two (k, d)-CSP(f ) instances Ψ, Ψ′ constructed so that they share a
random t-fraction of their clauses and have the remaining (1 − t)-fraction of clauses chosen
independently and uniformly at random, then for every 0 < ε < ε0 , the overlap between any
(1 − ε)-optimal solution σ of Ψ and σ ′ of Ψ′ satisfies
                     n
                             !
    1      ′    1 X        ′
      ⟨σ, σ ⟩ =        σi σi ∈ / [a, b]
    n           n i=1

with high probability.

   A formal definition of the interpolation procedure described in Definition 1.7 and a
complete and formal statement of a coupled OGP are provided in section 3.

1.5.4     Local classical algorithms
A local classical algorithm takes as input a hypergraph G and a label set S, runs a stochastic
process {X G (t)}t that associates to each vertex v a label XvG (t) ∈ S at time t, and outputs
an assignment σv to each vertex v according to its final label. While there is a huge design
space for local classical algorithms, a factors of i.i.d. algorithm of radius p has the following
restrictions:
1. The initial label for each vertex v is set to be one from an i.i.d. set of random variables
    XvG (0).
2. For each vertex v, the assignment σv is a random variable that only depends on the labels
    from a p-neighborhood of v and is updated via a stochastic process.
3. The assignment function (also known as the factor) for each vertex is the same.
4. The label assignment of two vertices v, v ′ in hypergraphs G and G′ are equivalent if the
    two vertices have isomorphic p-neighborhoods.


                                                                                                       ICALP 2022
41:10   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        As we shall see, in subsection 2.1, we relax the first three conditions to include a larger class
        of local algorithms, which subsume local quantum algorithms. We now state the definition
        of the p-neighborhood of a vertex in a hypergraph, which generalizes the p-neighborhood
        of a graph by considering two vertices v and w to be adjacent if they belong to the same
        hyperedge e.
        ▶ Definition 1.8 (p-neighborhood and hypergraphs with radius p). Let G be a hypergraph,
        v ∈ V (G), and p ∈ N. The p-neighborhood of v is defined as
             BG (v, p) := {w ∈ V (G) | w can be reached in p steps from v} .
        Let G be a hypergraph, v ∈ V (G), and p ∈ N. We say (G, v) has radius p if Bp (Gv ) = V (G).
        Further, let k ∈ N, we define
             Gp := {(G, v) | (G, v) has radius p and G is connected, finite, and k-uniform}
        be the collections of hypergraphs with radius at most p.
           To capture the fact that classical local algorithms assign the value of a vertex v by only
        looking at a stochastic process of the p-neighborhood, we define a factor f as a measurable
        function which gives a label σv ∈ {±1} to every vertex v ∈ V (G). We restrict to the case
        where the label set S = [0, 1].
        ▶ Definition 1.9 (Factor of radius p). Let p ∈ N. We define the collection of all [0, 1]-labelled
        hypergraphs of radius at most p as
                 n                                           o
           Λp := (G, v, X) | (G, v) ∈ Gp and X ∈ [0, 1]V (G)

            We say (G1 , v1 , X1 ), (G2 , v2 , X2 ) ∈ Λr are isomorphic if there exists a hypergraph
        isomorphism ϕ : V (G1 ) → V (G2 ) such that (i) ϕ(v1 ) = ϕ(v2 ) and (ii) X1 = X2 ◦ ϕ.
            Finally, we say f : Λp → {−1, 1} is a factor of radius p function if
         1. f is measurable.
         2. f (G1 , v1 , X1 ) = f (G2 , v2 , X2 ) for every isomorphic (G1 , v1 , X1 ), (G2 , v2 , X2 ) ∈ Λr .
           Intuitively, the output distribution of a factors of i.i.d. algorithm with radius p on a
        vertex v is determined by the p-neighborhood of v.
        ▶ Definition 1.10 (Factors of i.i.d., [10, Section 2]). Let k, p ∈ N. A factors of i.i.d. algorithm
        A with radius p is associated with a factor of radius p function f with the following property.
        On input a k-uniform hyper graph G, the algorithm A samples a random labeling X =
        {X(v)}v∈V (G) where X(v)’s are i.i.d. uniform random variables on [0, 1]. The output of A
        is σ ∈ {−1, 1}V (G) where σv := f (Bp (G, v), v, {X(w)}|w∈Bp (G,v) ) for each v ∈ V (G).
            Common local algorithms such as Glauber dynamics and Belief Propagation are examples
        of factors of i.i.d. algorithms.

         2      Main Technical Theorems
        The main results include showing that QAOAp is a generic p-local algorithm, a concept
        which subsumes factors of i.i.d. local algorithms and local quantum algorithms, and then
        establishing that this more general class of algorithms also have strong concentration
        properties. The concentration allows the original interpolation argument of Chen et al. [10]
        stated in subsubsection 1.4.1 to continue to pose an obstruction to generic p-local algorithms
        from outputting arbitrarily good solutions on almost all instances of a (k, d)-CSP(f ) that
        has a coupled OGP.
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                       41:11


2.1     Generic local algorithms
Generic local algorithms, including local quantum algorithms, can be defined from an
information-based perspective. Specifically, given a parameter p that characterizes the
locality of the information an algorithm has about the input, we can assert that a generic
p-local algorithm makes independent decisions on appropriately far-away vertices and that
all decisions for a vertex are sufficiently local.

▶ Definition 2.1 (Generic local algorithms, informal). Let p ∈ N and let S be a finite label set.
We say an algorithm A (which takes a hypergraph G as an input) is generic p-local if the
following hold:
   (Local distribution determination). For every set of vertices L ⊂ V , the joint marginal
   distribution of the labels (A(G)v )v∈L depends only on the union of the p-neighborhoods of
   v ∈ L in G.
    (Local independence). A(G)v is statistically independent of the joint distribution of
    {A(G)v′ } for every v ′ that is farther than a distance of 2p from v.

    The definition makes no assumptions about how the randomness of the algorithm is
instantiated, what sort of function is used to decide the label locally, or whether it is the
same for every vertex. A formal defintion is provided in section 4, along with a procedure
to partially sample from the run of the algorithm on correlated instances. We now briefly
introduce the QAOAp circuit.

▶ Definition 2.2 (QAOAp algorithm, [19]). The QAOA circuit parametrized by angle vectors
γ̂ = (γ1 , . . . , γp ) and β̂ = (β1 , . . . , βp ) looks as follows,

                  p      Pn
                    e−iβj k=1 Xk e−iγj Hc (G) .
                  Y
    Up (β̂, γ̂) =
                 j=1


In the circuit above, Xi is the Pauli-X matrix acting on the i-th qubit (with identity action
everywhere else) and HC (G) is the hamiltonian that encodes the problem instance. For
                    G
us, HC (G) = Hn,k,d     where every k-spin interaction is replaced by a Pauli-Z interaction
Ze1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Zek . Typically, the initial state on which the circuit is applied is a symmetric
                                  ⊗n         ⊗n
product state, most notably |0⟩       or |+⟩ . The expected value that QAOA outputs after
applying the circuit on some initial state |ψ0 ⟩ is,

    ⟨ψ0 | U † Hc (G)U |ψ0 ⟩ .

We will notate by QAOA(β̂, γ̂) a QAOA circuit of depth 2p with angle parameters β̂ and γ̂.
In our regime, we will work with any collection of fixed angles (β̂, γ̂).
    As stated below, generic p-local algorithms strictly generalize the factors of i.i.d. framework
as well as QAOAp .

▶ Proposition 2.3 (Generic local strictly generalizes factors of i.i.d.). There exists a generic
p-local algorithm as defined in Definition 2.1 that is not a p-local factors of i.i.d. algorithm
as defined in Definition 1.10.

▶ Proposition 2.4 (QAOAp is generic p-local). For every p > 0 and fixed angle vectors β̂
and γ̂, QAOAp (β̂, γ̂) is generic p-local under Definition 2.1.

    The proofs for the two propositions above are provided in section 4.

                                                                                                      ICALP 2022
41:12   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        2.2       Concentration of outputs of local quantum algorithms
        Having shown that generic p-local algorithms capture classical & quantum local algorithms,
        we now first show that the outputs of these algorithms concentrate even when run on multiple
        fixed correlated instances. Additionally, the outputs concentrate over the input distribution
        from which the instances are drawn. The proof for the lemmas in this subsection are delegated
        to Section 5 in the full version.

        2.2.1            Concentration over internal randomness of the algorithm
        We first show that the output of generic p-local algorithms on sufficiently “local” functions
        of the underlying spins concentrates heavily, even when run on multiple correlated instances.
        We state an informal version of the lemma. For a formal and detailed version, please refer to
        Theorem 5.3 in the full version. “Spins” here refer to the assignment of a variable.
        ▶ Lemma 2.5 (Concentration of local functions of spins, informal). Let z, m ∈ N and A < 1.
        Let σ be the output of a generic p-local algorithm on a fixed hypergraph G. Let vj,i denote
        the vertex corresponding to the i-th vertex (or variable) in the j-th hyperedge (or clause) with
        j ∈ [m] and i ∈ [z]. Let r = (r1 , . . . , rm ) be a random vector of a correlated hypergraph G′
        with a certain joint independence structure (Definition 5.2 in the full version). Now, consider
                     P
        a sum X = j∈[m] h(σvj,1 , . . . , σvj,z )rj , where |h| ≤ 1. Suppose that each vertex v occurs at
        most C times among the different vj,i . Then, provided the p-neighborhood of every vertex in
        G ∪ G′ has at most nA vertices:
                                                 2     A
            Pr[|X − E [X]| ≥ δn] ≤ e−Ω(δ m/(Czn )) .
            σ,r            σ,r

            The lemma above states that even when choosing two correlated instances G and G′ that
        share, say t-fraction of their clauses, provided every vertex sees not too many vertices in the
        local neighborhood of the combined input G ∪ G′ , the value of sufficiently local functions h
        acting on the output of the algorithm concentrate. To get concentration of overlap between
        two solutions σ of G and σ ′ of G′ , we choose h(σvj,1 , . . . , σvj,z ) = σvj , m = n and r = σ ′ . To
        get concentration for valG (σ), we choose h = f for the underlying (k, d)-CSP(f ) and m = dn         k .
        When working to obtain concentration on a single instance, it suffices to set G′ = G and r to
        be the all 1s vector.

        2.2.2            Concentration over instances
        The prior lemma merely asserts that the output is concentrated for fixed correlated instances.
        However, this still doesn’t imply that the output will be concentrated across random input
        instances. To do so, we need concentration over the distribution from which the inputs are
        sampled. This is accomplished by Theorem 5.4 in the full version, an informal version of
        which is stated below.
        ▶ Lemma 2.6 (Concentration of differences of coupled hypergraphs, informal). Let f be a
        function of two hypergraphs over n vertices such that
            |f (G1 , G2 ) − f (G′1 , G′2 )| ≤ r(n) ,
        for some r whenever (G1 , G2 ) differs from (G′1 , G′2 ) by the addition and/or removal of a
        single hyperedge e ∈ [n]k from one or both hypergraphs. Furthermore, assume that the largest
                                                                    A
        p-nieghborhood of G1 , G2 , G′1 , G′2 has no more than n 2 vertices for some A < 1. Then
        ∃ a ∈ (0, 1), such that
                                                                          −3kδ 2 n
                                                                                             
              Pr       f (G1 , G2 ) − E f (G1 , G2 ) ≥ δn r(n) ≤ 2 exp               + 2 exp −na/2 .
            G1 ,G2 ∼                 G1 ,G2                            12(2−t)d+2kδ
              Hn,k,d,t
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                                    41:13


The notation G1 , G2 ∼ Hn,k,d,t indicates that G1 and G2 are t-correlated random hypergraphs.
This means that t-fraction of their hyperedges are chosen i.i.d. from [n]k and these are common.
The remaining (1 − t) fraction of edges are chosen independently for each. For a formal
definition of the coupled distribution, refer to Definition 3.3. The above lemma relies on two
critical facts:
1. For p ≤ ε log(n) (for an appropriately chosen ε), the p-neighborhood of a random k-
                                               A
    uniform hypergraph has no more than n 2 vertices (Lemma 1.6).
2. A strengthening of McDiarmid’s Inequality (Lemma 2.7) for biased distributions. This
    strengthening is proved via a martinagle argument.

2.2.3       Strengthened McDiarmid’s Inequality
We end by stating the strengthened version of McDiarmid’s Inequality (Lemma 2.7) for
biased distributions, which is a generic concentration statement that may be of independent
interest. The inequality adds a Bernstein-like variance term to the tail-bound that controls
the likelihood of deviation, where the variance term depends on a precise quantification of
how unlikely certain very rare events are.

▶ Lemma 2.7 (McDiarmid’s inequality for biased distributions). Suppose that X1 , . . . , Xn are
sampled i.i.d. from a distribution D over a finite set X , such that D assigns probability 1 − p
to a particular outcome χ0 ∈ X . Let f : X n → R satisfy a bounded-differences inequality, so
that

    |f (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi , xi+1 , . . . xn ) − f (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , x′i , xi+1 , . . . xn )| ≤ c

for all x1 , . . . , xn , x′i ∈ X . Then

                                                                                           −ε2
                                                                                                          
                                                         
    Pr |f (X1 , . . . , Xn ) − E f (X1 , . . . , Xn )| ≥ ε ≤ 2 exp                                             .
                                                                                   2np(2 − p)c2 + 2cε/3

    The above inequality is robust in that if there are highly unlikely or likely (think p = on (1))
events that cause large deviations, then these deviations can be absorbed into the Bernstein-
like variance term in the tail bound term. This means that one can get strong concentration
bounds even in the presence of a vanishingly small set of events that cause large deviations.
This property ends up being critical when showing concentration of outputs of generic local
algorithms over the input distribution.

2.3      Obstruction of generic local algorithms by the Overlap Gap Property
We state our main theorem (informally) that obstructs all generic p-local algorithms on
random instances Ψ of a (k, d)-CSP(f ) that satisfies the coupled Overlap-Gap Property.

▶ Theorem 2.8 (Obstruction to Generic p-Local Algorithms given coupled OGP, informal). Let f
be a boolean predicate defined on k variables and p(n) be such that it satisfies the requirements
of Lemma 2.5 and Lemma 2.6. Furthermore, assume that (k, d)-CSP(f ) satisfies the coupled
Overlap Gap Property. Then, given an instance Ψ ∼ (k, d)-CSP(f ) and a generic p(n)-local
algorithm A that outputs a solution σ on input Ψ, with high probability, the solution will be
no more than (1 − ε0 )-optimal for some ε0 > 0.

    The theorem above is stated in full precision and formality in Theorem 4.3 in the
full version and proved formally in Section 6 of the full version. The theorem effectively
obstructs any algorithm that makes assignments for variables by looking at o(n) sized



                                                                                                                   ICALP 2022
41:14   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        local neighborhoods irrespective of how these decisions are made and what concrete model
        of randomness is used, provided the problem exhibits a coupled OGP. For instance, the
        obstruction would hold even for quantum algorithms that assign labels based on the local
        neighborhoods of qubits and start and end in a state that is moderately locally entangled
        - By this, we mean a state that exhibits entanglement only between any qubit i and o(n)
        qubits in its p(n)-sized local neighborhood.

        2.4     Overlap Gap Property for MAX-k-XOR
        In Section 8 in the full version, we establish that the random Max-k-XOR problem obeys a
        coupled OGP, so that the obstruction implied by Theorem 2.8 holds for this problem.
        ▶ Lemma 2.9 (Coupled OGP for random Max-k-XOR). The random Max-k-XOR problem
        satisfies Definition 1.7.
            This is proven by means of a Guerra-Tonelli interpolation [28, 10], where a dense mean-field
        k-spin glass model is continuously transformed to the random Max-k-XOR model. Treated
        as a physical system, the thermodynamic equilibrium at each point in the interpolation is
        calculated at a low enough temperature so that the equilibrium states are approximately
        optimal. The change in equilibrium energy over the course of the interpolation is then shown
        to be small.
            A coupled OGP is shown in this way by interpolating a pair of systems constrained so
        that the overlap between the two states of the systems is bounded.

         3      Coupled Interpolation & Overlap-Gap Properties
        We now state the OGP formally as it holds for the diluted k-spin glass model in both
        uncoupled and coupled form. To do so, we begin by introducing the notion of an overlap
        between two spin-configurations σ1 and σ2 , which is equivalent to the number of spins that
        are the same in both configurations subtracted by the number of different spins, normalized
        by the number of particles in the system. Formally,
        ▶ Definition 3.1 (Overlap between spin configuration vectors). Given any two vectors σ1 , σ2 ∈
        {−1, 1}n , the overlap between them is defined as,
                         1            1 X
           R(σ1 , σ2 ) = ⟨σ1 , σ2 ⟩ =      (σ1 )i (σ2 )i .
                         n            n
                                             i∈[n]

        We first state the OGP for diluted k-spin glasses about the overlap gaps in a single instance.
        ▶ Theorem 3.2 (OGP for Diluted k-Spin Glasses, [10, Theorem 2]). For every even k ≥ 4,
        there exists an interval 0 < a < b < 1 and parameters d0 > 0, 0 < η0 < P (k) and n0 > 1,
        such that, for d ≥ d0 , n ≥ n0 and L = L(η0 , d), with probability at least 1 − Le−n/L over the
        random hypergraph G ∼ Hn,d,k , whenever two spins σ1 , σ2 satisfy
            H G (σi )
                                           
                                       η0
                      ≥ M (k, d) 1 −          ,
               n                      P (k)
        then also, |R(σ1 , σ2 )| ∈
                                 / (a, b).
           A more general version of the OGP excludes, with high probability, a certain range of
        overlaps between any two solutions of two different instances jointly drawn from a coupled
        random process. We first introduce this process, and then state the coupled version of the
        OGP as proven in Chen et al [10].
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                      41:15


▶ Definition 3.3 (Coupled Interpolation, [10, Section 3.2]). The coupled interpolation Hd,k,n,t
generates a coupled pair of hypergraphs (G1 , G2 ) ∼ Hd,k,n,t as follows:
1. First, a random number is sampled from Poisson(tdn/k), and that number of random
   k-hyperedges are uniformly drawn from the set [n]k and put into a set E.
2. Then, two more random numbers are independently sampled from Poisson((1 − t)dn/k),
   and those numbers of random k-hyperedges are independently drawn from [n]k to form
   the sets E1 and E2 respectively.
3. Lastly, the two hypergraphs are constructed as G1 = (V, E ∪ E1 ) and G2 = (V, E ∪ E2 ).

▶ Theorem 3.4 (OGP for Coupled Diluted k-Spin Glasses, [10, Theorem 5]). For every even
k ≥ 4, there exists an interval 0 < a < b < 1 and parameters d0 > 0, 0 < η0 < P (k)
and n0 > 1, such that, for any t ∈ [0, 1], d ≥ d0 , n ≥ n0 and constant L = L(η0 , d), with
probability at least 1 − Le−n/L over the hypergraph pair (G1 , G2 ) ∼ Hn,d,k,t , whenever two
spins σ1 , σ2 satisfy

    H Gi (σi )
                                   
                               η0
               ≥ M (k, d) 1 −         ,
       n                      P (k)

then their overlap satisfies |R(σ1 , σ2 )| ∈
                                           / [a, b].

    We also provide a corresponding coupled OGP for random Max-k-XOR in Theorem 8.12
in the full version.

 4     Locality and Shared Randomness

4.1     Generic p-local algorithms
We introduce a concept of “local random algorithm” which will allow for different runs of
the same local algorithm to “share their randomness”, even when run on mostly-different
instances. Later we will demonstrate that QAOA is a local algorithm under this definition.

▶ Definition 4.1 (Generic local algorithms). We consider randomized algorithms on hypergraphs
whose output A(G) ∈ S V assigns a label from some set S to each vertex in V . Such an
algorithm is generic p-local if the following hold.
    (Local distribution determination). For every set of vertices L ⊂ V , the joint marginal
    distribution of its labels (A(G)v )v∈L is identical to the joint marginal distribution of
   (A(G′ )v )v∈L whenever v∈L BG (v, p) ∼
                            S                  S
                                            =L v∈L BG′ (v, p), and,
    (Local independence). A(G)v is statistically independent of the joint distribution of
    A(G)v′ over all v ′ ̸∈ BG (v, 2p).

     Consequently, it will be possible to sample A(G)v without even knowing what the
hypergraph looks like beyond a distance of p away from v.
     This definition is more general than the factors of i.i.d. concept used in probability theory
[24, 10]. Our definition, for instance, encompasses local quantum circuits whereas factors of
i.i.d. algorithms satisfy Bell’s inequalities and do not capture quantum mechanics.

▶ Proposition 4.2 (Generic local strictly generalizes factors of i.i.d. (Restatement of
Proposition 2.3)). There exists a generic 1-local algorithm as defined in section 4 that
is not a 1-local factors of i.i.d. algorithm as defined in Definition 1.10.

A proof of this proposition is provided in Appendix A in the full version, and consists of
setting up a Bell’s inequality experiment within the framework of a generic 1-local algorithm.



                                                                                                     ICALP 2022
41:16   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        4.2    Locality properties of QAOA for hypergraphs
        We show that any QAOA circuit of depth p with some fixed angle parameters (β̂, γ̂) is a
        p-local algorithm. This allows us to describe a process to sample outputs of this circuit when
        it is run on two different input hypergraphs.

        ▶ Proposition 4.3. For every p > 0, angle vectors β̂ and γ̂, QAOAp (β̂, γ̂) is generic p-local
        under Definition 4.1.

        Proof. To see this, consider the structure of QAOA: we start with a product state |ψ0 ⟩ where
        each qubit corresponds to a vertex in the hypergraph, apply the unitary transformation
        U = Up (β̂, γ̂) to the state, and then measure each vertex v in the computational basis
        with the Pauli-Z operator σz (v). Equally valid and equivalent is the Heisenberg picture
        interpretation of this process, where we keep the product state |ψ0 ⟩ fixed but transform the
        measurements according to the reversed unitary transformation U † , so that we end up taking
        the measurements U † σz (v)U on the fixed initial state.
            Because the σz (v) operators all commute with each other, their unitarily transformed
        versions U † σz (v)U also mutually commute, and the measurements can be taken in any order
        without any change in results. Let M (v) = U † σz (v)U and M (L) = {U † σz (u)U | u ∈ L}.
            To show that QAOA satisfies the first property of generic p-local algorithms, we need to
        show that the marginal distribution of its assignments to any set L′ ⊆ V of vertices depends
        only on the union of the p-distance neighborhoods of L′ . To show this, since we are allowed
        to take the measurements in any order, take the measurements in M (L′ ) before any other
        measurement. Then since the action of the unitary U = Up (β̂, γ̂) on qubits in L′ does not
        depend on any feature of the hypergraph outside of a radius of p around L′ , the operators
        M (L′ ) are fully determined by the p-local neighborhoods of L′ , and since we take them
        before every other measurement, the qubits are simply in their initial states when we make
        these measurements, thus the distribution of outputs is fully determined.
            The same type of reasoning shows that the assignment to each v ∈ V is statistically
        independent of the assignments to any set of vertices outside of a 2p-distance neighborhood
        of v. Take L′′ ⊂ V \ B(v, 2p). Then M (v) acts on a radius-p ball around v, and each
        measurement in M (L′′ ) acts on a radius-p ball around a vertex in L′′ , and by taking
        {M (v)} ∪ M (L′′ ) before any of the measurements in M ({B(v, 2p) \ {v}), we ensure that the
        qubits being measured by M (v) are disjoint from and unentangled with those measured by
        anything in M (L′′ ). Hence the measurement M (v) is independent of all measurements in
        M (L′′ ). We conclude that QAOAp is a generic p-local algorithm.                           ◀

        4.3    Shared randomness between runs of a generic local algorithm
        We describe a process to sample the outputs of a generic local algorithm when run twice
        on two different hypergraphs, so that the two runs of the algorithm can share randomness
        when the hypergraphs have some hyperedges in common. This is not meant as a constructive
        algorithm, but a statistical process with no guarantee of feasible implementation.
            The idea is to start with two t-coupled hypergraphs, which for large enough n, are
        likely to have some set of vertices L+ whose p-neighborhoods are identical between the two
        hypergraphs. Since these vertices have identical p-neighborhoods, a generic p-local algorithm
        behaves identically on the vertices in L+ . We pick a random t+ fraction of the elements
        of L+ , and assign the same labels to those vertices in the two coupled instances. Then the
        remaining labels on each hypergraph are assigned by generic p-local algorithms, conditioned
        on the output being consistent with the already assigned labels.
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                   41:17


   The formal definition may be found in the full version of this paper, where it is combined
with the coupled OGP to demonstrate a contradiction if a generic local algorithm achieves a
good approximation.


 5     Conclusion & Future Work

The full version of this work conclusively establishes the coupled OGP as an obstruction
to all local quantum algorithms on any (k, d)-CSP(f ). In doing this, the work hints at and
leaves open many interesting questions for future work in areas that are at the intersection
of Quantum inapproximability, Statistical Physics, Random Graph Theory, Combinatorial
Optimization and Average-Case Complexity.


5.1    Which CSPs have an OGP?
While various sparse CSPs such as k-SAT, unsigned max-k-XOR and k-NAE-SAT have been
shown to exhibit clustering in their solution spaces at different clause-to-variable ratios [1,
15, 10], it is not known whether this property is pervasive to most CSPs or something that
happens to a select few. Therefore, in order to understand the complexity landscape of CSPs
on typical instances better, the following open question is interesting to investigate:

▶ Conjecture 5.1 (Random Predicate CSPs and coupled OGP). Given a function f chosen
uniformly at random from the set of functions Bk = {g | g : {±1}k → {0, 1}}, (k, d)-CSP(f )
has a coupled-OGP for sufficiently large k and d with high probability (over the choice of f
and instance Ψ ∼ (k, d)-CSP(f )).

   Notice that the conjecture above is specifically interested in the solution geometry of a
CSP in the unsatisfiable regime (large d). A positive resolution to the above conjecture will
make the obstructions stated in Theorem 2.8 hold for almost all CSPs.
Another question of interest is which properties about a predicate f can be identified which
would conclusively imply that a random instance Ψ of a (k, d)-CSP(f ) will have an OGP.

▶ Problem 5.1 (Properties of coupled-OGP predicates). Can we enumerate a set of necessary
and sufficient conditions on f to be such that (k, d)-CSP(f ) satisfies a coupled-OGP for
sufficiently large k and d?


5.2    Beyond log-depth obstructions for QAOAp ?
Work on obstructing QAOAp using an OGP heavily relies on the locality of the algorithm
at shallow depths. It is interesting to investigate whether this obstruction can be extended
beyond the ε log(n)-depth regime to make this a non-local obstruction. Recent work [23, 45]
suggests that the OGP may actually result in stronger obstructions than just local ones, and
it would be interesting to see if these techniques can be generalized to the setting of QAOAp
to yield obstructions that are non-local.

▶ Problem 5.2 (Poylogarithmic obstructions to QAOAp in the OGP regime). Given a QAOAp
                                 c
circuit with depth p ≤ ε (log(n)) for some c > 1, does there exist ε0 > 0, such that QAOAp
is obstructed on a (k, d)-CSP(f ) with a coupled OGP from outputting solutions that are better
than (1 - ε0 ) approximations to the optimal?



                                                                                                  ICALP 2022
41:18   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        5.3    A Quantum OGP and lifting “classical” obstructions
        The idea of the OGP obstructing families of algorithms that are stable under small
        perturbations to the input [23] motivates the idea of a quantized version of the OGP,
        to apply to quantum CSPs. To define such a property over quantum states, however, there
        would need to be a metric that is very similar to the classical hamming distance over F2
        and has the property that it is invariant over permutations of the canonical basis, while still
        quantifying entanglement in a desired way. One such possible metric is a quantum version
        of the Wasserstein distance of first order that was proposed by De-Palma et al. [13]. In
        particular, given a natural generalization of Definition 1.7 to a quantized setting using a
        quantum version of the Wasserstein distance of first order, it is interesting to investigate if
        a larger family of quantum circuits up to some depth p(n) can be obstructed by a family
        of d-local hamiltonians {Hn }n≥n0 that possess a qOGP (quantized Overlap-Gap Property).
        A result of this type could imply a way to generically “lift” classical obstructions for stable
        classical algorithms to a corresponding family of quantum algorithms.

        5.4    Message-Passing algorithm for MAX-CUT of all d-regular graphs?
        Finding an efficient classical algorithm that can output cuts that are arbitrary approximations
        of the optimal ones for d-regular graphs is a long-standing open problem in Random Graph
        Theory and Theoretical Computer Science. Recently, this problem was nearly completely
        solved by Alaoui et al. [2] as they constructed a Message-Passing algorithm for random
        regular graphs of very large degree under the widely believed no-OGP assumption about the
        SK model. However, the problem does not provide a complete solution as it needs the degree
        d to be larger than O( 1ε ) in order to output a (1 − ε)-optimal cut. A natural question is
        whether, under a no-OGP assumption, the result can be extended to output (1 − ε)-optimal
        cuts for d-regular graphs for any d ≥ 3.
        ▶ Conjecture 5.2 (AMP algorithm for Random d-Regular Graphs). There exists a poly(n, 1ε )
        time algorithm A that outputs a (1 - ε)-approximate cut of a random d-regular graph G with
        high probability under a “no-OGP” assumption for any d ≥ 3.
            Note that the approach of Alaoui et al. [2] critically relies on the Guerra-Tonnineli
        interpolation between the Gn,d model and the SK-model which will only work for d ≥ O 1ε .
                                                                                                    

        Consequently, a solution that works for all d ≥ 3 will require a fundamentally different
        approach. A natural question that is motivated by the above conjecture is to then investigate
        if there is any range of degree for which the MAX-CUT problem over d-regular graphs
        possesses an OGP. Given the belief that the SK model does not exhibit an OGP, this would
        only be an interesting question in the relatively low-degree regime.
        ▶ Problem 5.3 (Random d-Regular Graphs don’t have an OGP). Does the MAX-CUT problem
        on random d-regular graphs have an OGP for some d ≥ 3? If so, for what {d0 , d1 } ⊂ N does
        the problem exhibit an OGP?
            The study of QAOAp was initiated on MAX-CUT for d-regular graphs: positive answers
        to the conjectures above would resolve the question of quantum advantage on the problem.

              References
         1    Dimitris Achlioptas and Federico Ricci-Tersenghi. On the solution-space geometry of random
              constraint satisfaction problems. In Proceedings of the thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium
              on Theory of computing, pages 130–139, 2006.
         2    Ahmed El Alaoui, Andrea Montanari, and Mark Sellke. Local algorithms for maximum cut
              and minimum bisection on locally treelike regular graphs of large degree. arXiv preprint, 2021.
              arXiv:2111.06813.
C.-N. Chou, P. J. Love, J. S. Sandhu, and J. Shi                                                       41:19


 3   Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, et al. Hartree-Fock on a
     superconducting qubit quantum computer. Science, 369(6507):1084–1089, 2020. URL:
     https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abb9811.
 4   Antonio Auffinger, Wei-Kuo Chen, and Qiang Zeng. The sk model is infinite step replica
     symmetry breaking at zero temperature. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics,
     73(5), 2020.
 5   Boaz Barak and Kunal Marwaha. Classical algorithms and quantum limitations for maximum
     cut on high-girth graphs. arXiv preprint, 2021. arXiv:2106.05900.
 6   John S Bell. On the einstein-podolsky-rosen paradox. Physics Physique Fizika, 1(3):195, 1964.
 7   Sally C Brailsford, Chris N Potts, and Barbara M Smith. Constraint satisfaction problems:
     Algorithms and applications. European journal of operational research, 119(3):557–581, 1999.
 8   Fernando Brandao, Michael Broughton, Edward Farhi, Sam Gutmann, and Hartmut Neven.
     For fixed control parameters the quantum approximate optimization algorithm’s objective
     function value concentrates for typical instances. arXiv preprint, 2018. arXiv:1812.04170.
 9   Alfredo Braunstein, Marc Mézard, and Riccardo Zecchina. Survey propagation: An algorithm
     for satisfiability. Random Structures & Algorithms, 27(2):201–226, 2005.
10   Wei-Kuo Chen, David Gamarnik, Dmitry Panchenko, et al. Suboptimality of local algorithms
     for a class of max-cut problems. Annals of Probability, 47(3):1587–1618, 2019.
11   Chi-Ning Chou, Peter J Love, Juspreet Singh Sandhu, and Jonathan Shi. Limitations
     of local quantum algorithms on random max-k-xor and beyond. arXiv preprint v3, 2021.
     arXiv:2108.06049.
12   Francesco Concetti. The full replica symmetry breaking in the ising spin glass on random
     regular graph. Journal of Statistical Physics, 173(5):1459–1483, 2018.
13   Giacomo De Palma, Milad Marvian, Dario Trevisan, and Seth Lloyd. The quantum wasserstein
     distance of order 1. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 67(10):6627–6643, 2021.
14   Amir Dembo, Andrea Montanari, and Subhabrata Sen. Extremal cuts of sparse random graphs.
     The Annals of Probability, 45(2):1190–1217, 2017.
15   Jian Ding, Allan Sly, and Nike Sun. Satisfiability threshold for random regular nae-sat.
     Communications in Mathematical Physics, 341(2):435–489, 2016.
16   Sepehr Ebadi, Tout T Wang, Harry Levine, et al. Quantum phases of matter on a 256-atom
     programmable quantum simulator. Nature, 595(7866):227–232, 2021.
17   Edward Farhi, David Gamarnik, and Sam Gutmann. The quantum approximate optimization
     algorithm needs to see the whole graph: A typical case. arXiv preprint, 2020. arXiv:
     2004.09002.
18   Edward Farhi, David Gamarnik, and Sam Gutmann. The quantum approximate optimization
     algorithm needs to see the whole graph: Worst case examples. arXiv preprint, 2020. arXiv:
     2005.08747.
19   Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A quantum approximate optimization
     algorithm. arXiv preprint, 2014. arXiv:1411.4028.
20   Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, Sam Gutmann, and Leo Zhou. The quantum approximate
     optimization algorithm and the sherrington-kirkpatrick model at infinite size. arXiv preprint,
     2019. arXiv:1910.08187.
21   Silvio Franz and Michele Leone. Replica bounds for optimization problems and diluted spin
     systems. Journal of Statistical Physics, 111(3):535–564, 2003.
22   David Gamarnik and Aukosh Jagannath. The overlap gap property and approximate message
     passing algorithms for p-spin models. The Annals of Probability, 49(1):180–205, 2021.
23   David Gamarnik, Aukosh Jagannath, and Alexander S Wein. Low-degree hardness of random
     optimization problems. In 2020 IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
     Science (FOCS), pages 131–140. IEEE Computer Society, 2020.
24   David Gamarnik and Madhu Sudan. Limits of local algorithms over sparse random graphs.
     In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Innovations in theoretical computer science, pages
     369–376, 2014.




                                                                                                      ICALP 2022
41:20   Limitations of Local Quantum Algorithms on Random MAX-k-XOR and Beyond


        25   David Gamarnik and Ilias Zadik. The landscape of the planted clique problem: Dense
             subgraphs and the overlap gap property. arXiv preprint, 2019. arXiv:1904.07174.
        26   Ming Gong, Shiyu Wang, Chen Zha, Ming-Cheng Chen, He-Liang Huang, Yulin Wu, Qingling
             Zhu, Youwei Zhao, Shaowei Li, Shaojun Guo, et al. Quantum walks on a programmable
             two-dimensional 62-qubit superconducting processor. Science, 372(6545):948–952, 2021.
        27   Francesco Guerra and Fabio Lucio Toninelli. The thermodynamic limit in mean field spin
             glass models. Communications in Mathematical Physics, 230(1):71–79, 2002.
        28   Francesco Guerra and Fabio Lucio Toninelli. The high temperature region of the viana–bray
             diluted spin glass model. Journal of statistical physics, 115(1):531–555, 2004.
        29   Matthew B Hastings. Classical and quantum bounded depth approximation algorithms. arXiv
             preprint, 2019. arXiv:1905.07047.
        30   Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Elchanan Mossel, and Ryan O’Donnell. Optimal inapproximability
             results for max-cut and other 2-variable csps? SIAM Journal on Computing, 37(1):319–357,
             2007.
        31   Subhash Khot and Nisheeth K Vishnoi. On the unique games conjecture. In FOCS, volume 5,
             page 3. Citeseer, 2005.
        32   Vipin Kumar. Algorithms for constraint-satisfaction problems: A survey. AI magazine,
             13(1):32–32, 1992.
        33   Kunal Marwaha. Local classical max-cut algorithm outperforms p = 2 qaoa on high-girth
             regular graphs. Quantum, 5:437, 2021.
        34   Marc Mézard and Giorgio Parisi. The bethe lattice spin glass revisited. The European Physical
             Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 20(2):217–233, 2001.
        35   Dmitry Panchenko. Introduction to the sk model. arXiv preprint, 2014. arXiv:1412.0170.
        36   Dmitry Panchenko. The parisi formula for mixed p-spin models. The Annals of Probability,
             42(3):946–958, 2014.
        37   Dmitry Panchenko and Michel Talagrand. Bounds for diluted mean-fields spin glass models.
             Probability Theory and Related Fields, 130(3):319–336, 2004.
        38   Giorgio Parisi. A sequence of approximated solutions to the sk model for spin glasses. Journal
             of Physics A: Mathematical and General, 13(4):L115, 1980.
        39   Giorgio Parisi, Federico Ricci-Tersenghi, and Tommaso Rizzo. Diluted mean-field spin-glass
             models at criticality. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2014(4):P04013,
             2014.
        40   John Preskill. Quantum computing in the nisq era and beyond. Quantum, 2:79, 2018.
        41   Prasad Raghavendra. Optimal algorithms and inapproximability results for every csp? In
             Proceedings of the 40th annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 245–254, 2008.
        42   Subhabrata Sen. Optimization on sparse random hypergraphs and spin glasses. Random
             Structures & Algorithms, 53(3):504–536, 2018.
        43   David Sherrington and Scott Kirkpatrick. Solvable model of a spin-glass. Physical review
             letters, 35(26):1792, 1975.
        44   Michel Talagrand. The parisi formula. Annals of mathematics, pages 221–263, 2006.
        45   Alexander S Wein. Optimal low-degree hardness of maximum independent set. Mathematical
             Statistics and Learning, 2022.
        46   Jonathan Yedidia, William Freeman, Yair Weiss, et al. Understanding belief propagation and
             its generalizations. Exploring artificial intelligence in the new millennium, 8:236–239, 2003.
