Probabilistic Model Checking for
Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making:
Advances and Challenges
Marta Kwiatkowska #
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Gethin Norman #
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
David Parker #
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Gabriel Santos #
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Rui Yan #
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

      Abstract
Game-theoretic concepts have been extensively studied in economics to provide insight into competit-
ive behaviour and strategic decision making. As computing systems increasingly involve concurrently
acting autonomous agents, game-theoretic approaches are becoming widespread in computer science
as a faithful modelling abstraction. These techniques can be used to reason about the competitive
or collaborative behaviour of multiple rational agents with distinct goals or objectives. This paper
provides an overview of recent advances in developing a modelling, verification and strategy syn-
thesis framework for concurrent stochastic games implemented in the probabilistic model checker
PRISM-games. This is based on a temporal logic that supports finite- and infinite-horizon temporal
properties in both a zero-sum and nonzero-sum setting, the latter using Nash and correlated equilibria
with respect to two optimality criteria, social welfare and social fairness. We summarise the key
concepts, logics and algorithms and the currently available tool support. Future challenges and
recent progress in adapting the framework and algorithmic solutions to continuous environments
and neural networks are also outlined.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation

Keywords and phrases Probabilistic model checking, stochastic games, equilibria

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2022.4

Category Invited Talk

Funding This project was funded by the ERC under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (FUN2MODEL, grant agreement No. 834115).


 1      Introduction
Game-theoretic techniques have long been a source of fundamental insights into strategic
decision making for multi-agent systems. They have been widely studied in areas such as
economics [27], control [43] and robotics [36]. Concurrent stochastic multi-player games
(CSGs), in particular, provide a natural framework for modelling a set of interactive, rational
agents operating concurrently within an uncertain or stochastic environment. They can be
viewed as a collection of players (agents) with strategies for determining their actions based
on the execution so far, and where the resulting evolution of the system is probabilistic.
             © Marta Kwiatkowska, Gethin Norman, David Parker, Gabriel Santos, and Rui Yan;
             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
47th International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2022).
Editors: Stefan Szeider, Robert Ganian, and Alexandra Silva; Article No. 4; pp. 4:1–4:22
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
4:2   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


          Game-theoretic analysis is versatile, in that it can support both zero-sum and nonzero-
      sum (equilibria) analysis. Zero-sum properties focus on scenarios in which one player (or
      a coalition of players) aims to optimise some objective, while the remaining players form
      a coalition with the directly opposing goal. On the other hand, nonzero-sum (equilibria)
      properties correspond to situations where two or more players (or coalitions of players) in a
      CSG have distinct objectives to be maximised or minimised. In nonzero-sum properties the
      goals of the players (or coalitions) are not necessarily directly opposing, and therefore it may
      be beneficial for players to collaborate. Competitive scenarios occur in many applications,
      e.g., attackers and defenders in the context of computer security. Similarly, collaborative
      behaviour can be essential, e.g., to effectively control a multi-robot system, or for users to
      send data efficiently through a shared medium in a communication protocol.
         Probabilistic model checking is a powerful approach to the formal analysis of systems
      with stochastic behaviour. It relies on the construction and analysis of a probabilistic model,
      guided by a formal specification of its desired behaviour in temporal logic. It is of particular
      benefit in the context of models, such as stochastic games, which combine nondeterministic
      and probabilistic behaviour. This is because the interplay between these aspects of the model
      can be subtle and lead to unexpected results if not carefully modelled and analysed. This is
      exacerbated when the system comprises multiple agents with differing objectives.
         Until recently, practical applications of probabilistic model checking based on stochastic
      games had focused primarily on turn-based models [15], in which simultaneous decision
      making by agents is forbidden. Alternatively, model checking of non-stochastic games has
      been extensively studied, and tool support developed [5, 39]. CSGs provide a more powerful
      and realistic modelling formalism, but also bring considerable challenges, in terms of the
      higher computational complexity or undecidability for some key problems.
          There has nonetheless been significant amounts of work on tackling verification problems
      for CSGs. A number of algorithms have been proposed for solving CSGs against formally
      specified zero-sum properties, e.g. [17, 18, 11]. In the case of nonzero-sum properties,
      [14, 25] study the existence of and the complexity of finding equilibria for stochastic games.
      Complexity results for finding equilibria are also considered in [9] and [23] for quantitative
      reachability properties and temporal logic properties, respectively. Other work concerns
      finding equilibria for discounted properties; we mention [49], which formulates a learning-
      based algorithm, and [40], which presents iterative algorithms. However these advances are
      mostly lacking in implementations, tool support or case studies. Tools exist for solving turn-
      based stochastic games [13, 16] and non-stochastic concurrent games [16, 8, 10, 55, 24, 45],
      with the latter class including support for computing equilibria.
          At the same time, there is an increasing trend to incorporate data-driven decision making,
      which necessitates the incorporation on of machine learning components within autonomous
      systems, which are built largely using conventional, symbolic methods. Examples of such
      neuro-symbolic systems are self-driving cars whose vision function is provided via a neural
      network image classifier, or an aircraft controller whose collision avoidance system uses a
      neural network for decision support. Design automation support for such systems is lacking,
      yet automatic computation of equilibria aids in ensuring stable solutions.
          This paper provides an overview of recent advances in developing a modelling, verification
      and strategy synthesis framework for concurrent stochastic games, as implemented in the
      PRISM-games probabilistic model checker [33]. The framework uses a temporal logic that
      supports a wide range of finite- and infinite-horizon properties, relating to the probability
      of an event’s occurrence or the expected amount of reward or cost accumulated. The logic
      allows specification of both zero-sum and nonzero-sum properties, with the latter expressed
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                          4:3


using either Nash equilibria or correlated equilibria. For both types of equilibria, strategies
are synthesised in which it is not beneficial for any player to unilaterally alter their chosen
actions, but correlated equilibria also allow players to coordinate through public signals.
Since several, varied such equilibria may exist, we also support distinct optimality criteria
to select between them; we consider social welfare, which maximises the sum of the players
utilities, and social fairness, which minimises the difference between the utilities.
    We summarise the key concepts, logics and algorithms that underlie this framework and
discuss the tool support provided by PRISM-games, including an illustrative case study
of formally modelling and analysing a multi-agent communication protocols using CSGs.
Future challenges and recent progress in extending the framework and algorithmic solutions
to modelling of neuro-symbolic CSGs are also outlined. In contrast to the majority of prior
research, the focus of this strand of work is on software tool development, applications and
case studies.

 2      Normal form games
We introduce the main concepts used in this paper by means of simple one-shot games known
as normal form games (NFGs), where players make their choices at the same time. We
consider both zero-sum NFGs and nonzero-sum NFGs, then define equilibria concepts for
these games and summarise existing algorithms for equilibria computation.
    We first require the following notation. Let Dist(X) denote the set of probability
distributions over set X. For any vector v ∈ Rn , we use v(i) to refer to the ith entry of the
vector. For any tuple x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ X n , element x′ ∈ X and i ⩽ n, we define the tuples
     def                                                     def
x−i = (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , xi+1 , . . . , xn ) and x−i [x′ ] = (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , x′ , xi+1 , . . . , xn ).

▶ Definition 1 (Normal form game). A (finite, n-player) normal form game (NFG) is a tuple
N = (N, A, u) where:
     N = {1, . . . , n} is a finite set of players;
     A = A1 × · · · ×An and Ai is a finite set of actions available to player i ∈ N ;
     u = (u1 , . . . , un ) and ui : A → R is a utility function for player i ∈ N .
In a normal form game N, the players choose actions simultaneously, with player i ∈ N
choosing an action from the set Ai and, assuming that each player i ∈ N selects action
ai , player j receives the utility uj (a1 , . . . , an ). The objective of each player is to maximise
their utility and their choices are governed by strategies, which we now define. We will also
distinguish strategy profiles, which comprise a strategy for each player, and correlated profiles,
which correspond to choices of the players when they are allowed to coordinate through a
(probabilistic) public signal.

▶ Definition 2 (Strategies, profiles and correlated profiles). For an NFG N:
     a strategy σi for player i in an NFG N is a probability distribution over the set of actions
     Ai and we let ΣiN denote the set of all strategies for player i;
     a strategy profile (or profile) σ = (σ1 , . . . , σn ) is a tuple of strategies for each player;
     a correlated profile is a tuple (τ, ς) comprising τ ∈ Dist(D1 × · · · ×Dn ), where Di is a
     finite set of signals for player i, and ς = (ς1 , . . . , ςn ), where ςi : Di → Ai is a function
     from the signals of player i to the actions of player i.
For a correlated profile (τ, ς) of N, the public signal τ is a joint distribution over signals Di
for each player i such that, if player i receives the signal di ∈ Di , then it chooses action
ςi (di ). We can consider any correlated profile (τ, ς) as a joint strategy, i.e., a distribution
over A1 × · · · ×An where:
                                 P
       (τ, ς)(a1 , . . . , an ) = {τ (d1 , . . . , dn ) | di ∈ Di ∧ ς(di ) = ai for all i ∈ N } .


                                                                                                                M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:4   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


      Conversely, any joint strategy τ ∈ Dist(A1 × · · · ×An ) of N can be considered as a correlated
      profile (τ, ς), where Di = Ai and ςi is the identity function for i ∈ N . Any profile σ of an
      NFG N can be mapped to an equivalent correlated profile (in which τ is the joint distribution
      σ1 × · · · ×σn and ςi is the identity function). On the other hand, there are correlated profiles
      with no equivalent strategy profile.
          Under profile σ or correlated profile (τ, ς) the expected utilities of player i are:
                        def   P                                              Qn                 
              ui (σ)    =         (a1 ,...,an )∈A ui (a1 , . . . , an ) ·       j=1 σj (aj )
                        def   P
            ui (τ, ς)   =         (d1 ,...,dn )∈D τ (d1 , . . . , dn ) · ui (ς1 (d1 ), . . . , ςn (dn )) .



      ▶ Example 3. Consider the two-player NFG with available action sets Ai = {heads i , tails i }
      for 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 2 and a correlated profile corresponding to the joint distribution τ ∈ Dist(A1 ×A2 ),
      where τ (heads 1 , heads 2 ) = τ (tails 1 , tails 2 ) = 0.5. Under this correlated profile, the players
      share a fair coin and choose their action based on the outcome of the coin toss. There is no
      equivalent strategy profile.

      2.1     Zero-sum NFGs
      A zero-sum NFG is a two-player NFG N such that u1 (α)+u2 (α) = 0 for all α ∈ A, meaning
      that the objectives of the players are directly opposing. Such an NFG is often called a
      matrix game, as it can be represented by a single matrix Z ∈ Ql×m , where A1 = {a1 , . . . , al },
      A2 = {b1 , . . . , bm } and zij = u1 (ai , bj ) = −u2 (ai , bj ).
         We next introduce the notion of the value of a zero-sum NFG and recall classical results
      about the existence of optimal strategies.

      ▶ Theorem 4 (Minimax theorem [56, 57]). For any zero-sum NFG N = (N, A, u) and
      corresponding matrix game Z, there exists v ⋆ ∈ Q, called the value of the game and denoted
      val(Z), such that:
         there is a strategy σ1⋆ for player 1, called an optimal strategy of player 1, such that under
         this strategy the player’s expected utility is at least v ⋆ regardless of the strategy of player
         2, i.e., inf σ2 ∈Σ2N u1 (σ1⋆ , σ2 ) ⩾ v ⋆ ;
         there is a strategy σ2⋆ for player 2, called an optimal strategy of player 2, such that under
         this strategy the player’s expected utility is at least −v ⋆ regardless of the strategy of player
         1, i.e., inf σ1 ∈Σ1N u2 (σ1 , σ2⋆ ) ⩾ −v ⋆ .
      The value of a matrix game Z ∈ Ql×m can be found by solving a linear programming (LP)
      problem [56, 57].

      ▶ Example 5. Table 1 shows a classic example of a two-player zero-sum game known as
      matching pennies. Columns α and ui represent the collective choice (profile) and player i’s
      utility, respectively. In this example, each player has a coin for which they may choose the
      value to be heads or tails, i.e., Ai = {heads i , tails i }. If the coins match, player 1 wins the
      round, which is indicated by being awarded a utility of 1, while player 2 receives utility −1.
      If the coins do not match, then the players’ utilities are negated.

         Table 1 Matching pennies game in normal form.

                                α                u1 (α)      u2 (α)                   α             u1 (α)   u2 (α)
                        (heads 1 , heads 2 )          1         −1          (tails 1 , heads 2 )       −1         1
                         (heads 1 , tails 2 )       −1            1          (tails 1 , tails 2 )        1      −1
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                        4:5


  The value for the corresponding matrix game is the solution to the following LP problem:
Maximise v subject to:

    x1 − x2 ⩾ v, x2 − x1 ⩾ v, x1 + x2 = 1

which yields the value v ⋆ = 0 with optimal strategy σ1⋆ = ( 12 , 12 ) for player 1 (the optimal
strategy for player 2 is the same).


2.2     Nonzero-sum NFGs
The requirement for players to have directly opposing objectives is often too limiting, and it is
necessary to allow distinct objectives, which cannot be modelled in a zero-sum fashion. These
scenarios can be captured using the notion of equilibria, defined by a separate, independent
objective for each agent. We now define the concepts of Nash equilibrium [57] and correlated
equilibrium [6] for NFGs, which ensure stability against deviations by individual agents,
improving the overall game outcomes. Since many equilibria may exist, we also introduce
optimality criteria for these equilibria: social welfare, which is standard [46], and social
fairness, which was first defined in [35].
    Before giving the formal definitions, we first extend our notation as follows: for any
profile σ and strategy σi⋆ , the strategy tuple σ−i corresponds to σ with the strategy of player
i removed and σ−i [σi⋆ ] to the profile σ after replacing player i’s strategy with σi⋆ .

▶ Definition 6 (Best response). For any nonzero-sum NFG N and profile σ or correlated
profile (τ, ς) of N, the best response moves for player i to σ−i and (τ, ς−i ) are, respectively:
   a strategy σi⋆ for player i such that ui (σ−i [σi⋆ ]) ⩾ ui (σ−i [σi ]) for all σi ∈ ΣiN ;
   a function ςi⋆ : Di → Ai for player i such that ui (τ, ς−i [ςi⋆ ]) ⩾ ui (τ, ς−i [ςi ]) for all functions
   ςi : Di → Ai .

▶ Definition 7 (NE and CE). For any nonzero-sum NFG N, a strategy profile σ ⋆ is a Nash
equilibrium (NE) and a correlated profile (τ, ς ⋆ ) of N is a correlated equilibrium (CE) if:
    σi⋆ is a best response to σ−i
                               ⋆
                                   for all i ∈ N ;
     ⋆                            ⋆
    ςi is a best response to (τ, ς−i ) for all i ∈ N ;
respectively.

Any NE of N is also a CE, while there exist CEs that cannot be represented by a strategy
profile, and therefore are not NEs. For each class of equilibria, NE and CE, we introduce
two optimality criteria, the first maximising social welfare (SW), defined as the sum of the
utilities, and the second maximising social fairness (SF), which minimises the difference
between the players’ utilities. Other variants of fairness have been considered for NEs, such
as in [38], where the authors seek to maximise the lowest utility among the players.

▶ Definition 8 (SW and SF). An equilibrium σ ⋆ is a social welfare (SW) equilibrium if the
sum of the utilities of the players under σ ⋆ is maximal over all equilibria, while σ ⋆ is a social
fair (SF) equilibrium if the difference between the player’s utilities under σ ⋆ is minimised
over all equilibria.

We can also define the dual concept of social cost (SC) equilibria [34], where players try
to minimise, rather than maximise, their expected utilities by considering equilibria of the
game N− = (N, A, −u) in which the utilities of N are negated. We remark that SC equilibria
strategies are not a subset of classically defined NE or CE strategies of N.



                                                                                                              M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:6   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


                                                          α              u1 (α)   u2 (α)   u3 (α)
                     c1                         (pro1 , pro2 , pro3 )    −1000    −1000    −100
                                                (pro1 , pro2 , yld3 )    −1000    −100      −5
                                                (pro1 , yld2 , pro3 )      5       −5        5
                                                (pro1 , yld2 , yld3 )      5       −5       −5
               c2                               (yld1 , pro2 , pro3 )     −5      −1000    −100
                                                (yld1 , pro2 , yld3 )     −5        5       −5
                            c3                  (yld1 , yld2 , pro3 )     −5       −5        5
                                                 (yld1 , yld2 , yld3 )    −10      −10      −10

         Figure 1 Example from [35]: Cars at an intersection and the corresponding NFG.


      ▶ Example 9. Consider the scenario from [35], based on an example from [50], where three
      cars meet at an intersection and want to proceed as indicated by the arrows in Figure 1.
      Each car can either proceed or yield. If two cars with intersecting paths proceed, then there
      is an accident. If an accident occurs, the car having the right of way, i.e., the other car is
      to its left, has a utility of −100 and the car that should yield has a utility of −1000. If a
      car proceeds without causing an accident, then its utility is 5 and the cars that yield have
      a utility of −5. If all cars yield, then, since this delays all cars, all have utility −10. The
      3-player NFG is given in Figure 1. The different optimal equilibria of the NFG are:
          the SWNE and SWCE are the same: for c2 to yield and c1 and c3 to proceed, with the
          expected utilities of the players (5, −5, 5);
          the SFNE is for c1 to yield with probability 1, c2 to yield with probability 0.863636
          and c3 to yield with probability 0.985148, with the expected utilities of the players
          (−9.254050, −9.925742, −9.318182);
          the SFCE gives a joint distribution where the probability of c2 yielding and of c1 and c3
          yielding are both 0.5 with the expected utilities of the players (0, 0, 0).
      Modifying u2 such that u2 (pro1 , pro2 , pro3 ) = −4.5 to, e.g., represent a reckless driver, the
      SWNE becomes for c1 and c3 to yield and c2 to proceed with the expected utilities of the
      players (−5, 5, −5), while the SWCE is still for c2 to yield and c1 and c3 to proceed. The
      SFNE and SFCE also do not change.

      Algorithms for computing equilibria in NFGs. Finding NEs in two-player NFGs is in
      the class of linear complementarity problems (LCPs). Established algorithms include the
      Lemke-Howson algorithm [37], which is based on the method of labelled polytopes [46],
      support enumeration [48] and regret minimisation [52]. In [34] a method for NE computation
      is developed, which reduces the problem to SMT via labelled polytopes [46] by considering
      the regions of the strategy profile space. This method iteratively reduces the search space
      of profiles as positive probability assignments are found and added as constraints on the
      profiles. This approach can also be used for finding both an SWNE and SFNE by computing
      all NEs and then selecting an optimal one.
          In the case of NFGs with more than two players, the computation of NEs is more
      complex since, for a given support (i.e., a sub-region of the strategy profile space which fixes
      the set of actions chosen with nonzero probability by each player), finding NEs cannot be
      reduced to an LP problem. A method for such NFGs is presented in [32], based on support
      enumeration [48], which exhaustively examines all supports one at a time, checking whether
      that sub-region contains NEs. For each support, finding an SWNE can be reduced to a
      nonlinear programming problem [32]. This nonlinear programming problem can be modified
      to find an SFNE in each support [35].
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                4:7


    In the case of CEs, the approach introduced in [35] is to first find a joint strategy for the
players, i.e., a distribution over the action tuples, which can then be mapped to a correlated
profile. For SWCEs, [35] reduces the computation to solving a LP problem which has |A|
variables, one for each action tuple, and i∈N (|Ai |2 − |Ai |) + |A| + 1 constraints. For SFCEs,
                                           P

on the other hand, the method of [35] involves solving an optimisation problem with an
additional has |N | + 2 variables and 3 · |N | constraints compared to the LP problem for
finding SWCEs.

 3     Concurrent Stochastic Games
This section introduces concurrent stochastic games (CSGs) [54], in which players repeatedly
make simultaneous choices over actions and the action choices cause a probabilistic update
of the game state. CSGs thus provide a natural framework for modelling a set of interactive,
rational agents operating concurrently within an uncertain or probabilistic environment.
Compared to normal form games, they are classified as multi-stage, which is more conveni-
ent for specifying repeated or sequential interactions among agents. The introduction of
stochasticity facilitates modelling of a wide range of important phenomena, for example
uncertain behaviour due to noisy sensors or unreliable hardware in a multi-robot system, or
the use of randomisation for coordination in a distributed security or networking protocol.

▶ Definition 10 (Concurrent stochastic game). A concurrent stochastic multi-player game
(CSG) is a tuple G = (N, S, s̄, A, ∆, δ) where:
    N = {1, . . . , n} is a finite set of players;
    S is a finite set of states and s̄ ∈ S is an initial state;
    A = (A1 ∪ {⊥})× · · · ×(An ∪ {⊥}) where Ai is a finite set of actions available to player
    i ∈ N and ⊥ is an idle action disjoint from the set ∪ni=1 Ai ;
                   n
    ∆ : S → 2∪i=1 Ai is an action assignment function;
    δ : S×A → Dist(S) is a probabilistic transition function.
Given a CSG G, the set of actions available to player i ∈ N in state s ∈ S is given by
        def
Ai (s) = ∆(s) ∩ Ai . The CSG G starts in the initial state s̄ and, if G is in the game state
s, then each player i ∈ N selects an action from its available actions in state s if this set is
non-empty, and from {⊥} otherwise. Next, supposing each player i ∈ N chooses action ai ,
the game state is updated according to the distribution δ(s, (a1 , . . . , an )). We allow sets of
players C ⊆ N to form coalitions, and will consider the induced CSG, called the coalition
game, with coalitions as players.
                                                      α0      α1
    A path π of a CSG G is a sequence π = s0 −→            s1 −→  · · · , where si ∈ S, αi ∈ A and
δ(si , αi )(si+1 ) > 0 for all i ⩾ 0. We denote by FPaths G,s and IPaths G,s the sets of finite and
infinite paths starting in state s of G, respectively, and drop the subscript s when considering
all finite and infinite paths of G. As for NFGs, we can define strategies of G that resolve the
choices of the players. Here, a strategy for player i is a function σi : FPaths G → Dist(Ai ∪{⊥})
mapping finite paths to distributions over available actions, such that, if σi (π)(ai )>0, then
ai ∈ Ai (last(π)) where last(π) is the final state of π. Furthermore, we can define strategy
profiles, correlated profiles and joint strategies analogously to Section 2.
    A labelled CSG is a tuple (G, AP, L), where G is a CSG, as in Definition 10, AP is a
set of atomic propositions and L : S → 2AP is a labelling function, specifying which atomic
propositions are true in each state. We also associate CSGs with reward structures, which
annotate states and transitions with real values. More precisely a reward structure is a pair
r=(rA , rS ) consisting of an action reward function rA : S×A → R and state reward function
rS : S → R. We use atomic propositions and rewards as the building blocks to specify players’
utilities in a CSG, which will be described in Section 4.


                                                                                                      M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:8   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


          Formally, the utility function or objective of player i in a CSG is given by a random
      variable Xi : IPaths G → R over infinite paths. For a profile σ and state s, using standard
      techniques [31], we can construct a probability measure ProbσG,s over the paths that start
      in state s corresponding to σ, denoted IPaths σG,s , and define the expected value EσG,s (Xi ) of
      player i’s utility from s under σ. Similarly, we can also define such a probability measure
      and expected value given a correlated profile or joint strategy of G.

      3.1    Zero-sum CSGs
      Similarly to NFGs (see Section 2.1), zero-sum CSGs are two-player games that have a single
      utility function X for player 1, with the utility function of player 2 given by −X, and both
      players aiming to maximise the expected value of their utility. Equivalently, we can suppose
      that player 1 tries to maximise the expected value of X, while player 2 tries to minimise
      it. As for NFGs (see Theorem 4), a CSG has a value with respect to X if it is determined,
      i.e., if the maximum value that player 1 can ensure equals the minimum value that player
      2 can ensure when starting from any state of the CSG. Since the CSGs we discuss in this
      paper are finite-state and finitely-branching, it follows that they are determined for all of the
      objectives that we consider [44].
           Given a multi-player CSG and objective X, we can divide the players into two coalitions,
      C ⊆ N and N \C, and then construct a two-player zero-sum coalition game, in which each
      coalition acts as a single player, with one coalition trying to maximise the value of X and
      the other trying to minimise that value.

      3.2    Nonzero-sum CSGs
      We define nonzero-sum CSGs similarly to NFGs: we assume that there is a distinct and
      independent objective Xi for each player i (or coalitions of players). We can then define NE
      and CE for CSGs (see Definition 7), as well as the restricted classes of SW and SF equilibria,
      similarly to those for NFGs (see Definition 8). Following [34, 32], we focus on subgame-perfect
      equilibria [47], which are equilibria in every state of G. Furthermore, because we include
      infinite-horizon objectives, where the existence of NE is an open problem [7], we will in some
      cases use ε-NE, which do exist for any ε > 0 for all the infinite-horizon objectives we consider.


      ▶ Definition 11 (Subgame-perfect ε-NE). For CSG G and ε > 0, a strategy profile σ ⋆ is
                                                                                     ⋆
      a subgame-perfect ε-Nash equilibrium for objectives ⟨Xi ⟩i∈N if and only if EσG,s (Xi ) ⩾
                 σ ⋆ [σi ]
                  −i
      supσi ∈Σi EG,s         (Xi ) − ε for all i ∈ N and s ∈ S.

      ▶ Example 12. As an example scenario that can be modelled as a CSG, consider a number
      of users trying to send packets using the slotted ALOHA protocol studied in [32, 34, 35]. If
      there is a collision or if sending a packet fails, a user waits for some number of slots before
      resending, with the wait set according to an exponential backoff scheme.
          If we model this scenario as a CSG then, when a player has a packet to send, the actions
      available to the player correspond to either sending their packet or waiting to send the packet
      at some future time step. In the case when one coalition of players has an objective related
      to sending their packets efficiently, e.g., minimising the expected time to send their packets,
      and the remaining players form a second coalition and have the dual objective, we can model
      this scenario as a zero-sum CSG. In such a zero-sum CSG, the optimal strategy for the first
      coalition is to try and choose times to send that avoid collisions, while the second coalition
      will do the opposite and instead try and cause collisions. On the other hand, when there are
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                   4:9


more coalitions and each coalition’s goal corresponds to sending their own packets efficiently,
we can model this as a nonzero-sum CSG. Here we would be looking for equilibria, i.e.,
profiles such that no coalition could improve its objective by changing its strategy, which are
also optimal, e.g., the sum of the expected times is minimal or the difference between the
expected time to send for each coalition is minimal.


 4       Property specifications and model checking for CSGs

Probabilistic model checking is a technique for systematically constructing a stochastic model
and analysing it against a quantitative property formally specified in temporal logic. This
approach can be used either to verify that a specification is always satisfied or to perform
strategy synthesis, i.e., to construct a witness to the satisfaction of a property. In the context
of CSGs, the latter means synthesising strategies for one or more players (or coalitions) such
that the resulting behaviour of the game satisfies the specification.
    To specify properties of labelled CSGs, we use the property specification language of the
PRISM-games model checker [33], which is based on the logic PCTL (probabilistic compu-
tation tree logic) [26], extended with operators to specify expected reward properties [21]
and the coalition operator ⟨⟨C⟩⟩ from alternating temporal logic (ATL) [4]. The variant
of this logic that just considers zero-sum formulae is referred to as rPATL (probabilistic
alternating-time temporal logic with rewards) in [15], but here we use a further extended
version that also supports nonzero-sum properties, using the notion of equilibria [34, 35].

▶ Definition 13 (PRISM-games logic [34, 35]). The syntax of the PRISM-games logic is given
by the grammar:

     ϕ := true | a | ¬ϕ | ϕ ∧ ϕ | ⟨⟨C⟩⟩P∼q [ ψ ] | ⟨⟨C⟩⟩Rr∼x [ ρ ] | ⟨⟨C⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )opt∼x (θ)
     ψ   :=   X ϕ | ϕ U⩽k ϕ | ϕ U ϕ
     ρ :=     I=k | C⩽k | F ϕ
     θ   :=   P[ ψ ]+· · ·+P[ ψ ] | Rr [ ρ ]+· · ·+Rr [ ρ ]

where a is an atomic proposition, C = C1 : · · · :Cm , C and C1 , . . . , Cm are coalitions of players
such that C ′ = N \C, Ci ∩ Cj = ∅ for all 1 ⩽ i ̸= j ⩽ m, (⋆1 , ⋆2 ) ∈ {ne, ce}×{sw, sf},
opt ∈ {min, max}, ∼ ∈ {<, ⩽, ⩾, >}, q ∈ Q ∩ [0, 1], x ∈ Q, r is a reward structure and k ∈ N.

The syntax distinguishes between state (ϕ), path (ψ) and reward (ρ) formulae. State formulae
are evaluated over states of a CSG, while path and reward formulae are both evaluated over
paths. Sums of formulae (θ) are used to specify multiple objectives for equilibria.
    We omit the formal semantics, which can be found in [34, 35]. Path and reward formulae
are used to express the utilities of the players, i.e., random variables over paths. For path
formulae, we allow next (X ϕ), bounded until (ϕ U⩽k ϕ) and unbounded until (ϕ U ϕ). We
also allow the usual equivalences such as F ϕ ≡ true U ϕ (i.e., probabilistic reachability)
and F⩽k ϕ ≡ true U⩽k ϕ (i.e., bounded probabilistic reachability). The random variable
corresponding to the path formula ψ returns 1 for paths that satisfy ψ and zero otherwise.
For reward formulae, we allow instantaneous (state) reward at the kth step (instantaneous
reward I=k ), reward accumulated over k steps (bounded cumulative reward C⩽k ), and reward
accumulated until a formula ϕ is satisfied (expected reachability F ϕ). The random variable
corresponding to the reward formula ρ returns for a path the reward corresponding to ρ.



                                                                                                         M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:10   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


       4.1    Zero-sum formulae
       A state satisfies a formula ⟨⟨C⟩⟩P∼q [ ψ ] if the coalition of players C ⊆ N can ensure that
       the probability of the path formula ψ being satisfied is ∼q, regardless of the actions of the
       other players (N \C) in the game. A state satisfies a formula ⟨⟨C⟩⟩Rr∼x [ ρ ] if the players in
       C can ensure that the expected value of the reward formula ρ for reward structure r is ∼x,
       whatever the other players do.
           The model checking algorithms presented in [34] involve graph-based analysis followed
       by backward induction [53, 57] for exact computation of finite-horizon properties and value
       iteration [51, 12] for approximate computation of infinite-horizon properties. During both
       backward induction and value iteration for each state, at each iteration, an LP problem of
       size |A| must be solved (corresponding to finding the value of a zero-sum one-shot game),
       which has complexity PTIME [30].
           Strategy synthesis for the formulae ⟨⟨C⟩⟩P∼q [ ψ ] and ⟨⟨C⟩⟩Rr∼x [ ρ ] corresponds to finding
       optimal strategies for the players in coalition C when their objective, respectively, is max-
       imising the probability of satisfying the formula ψ and maximising the expected value of
       the reward formula with respect to the reward structure r. All strategies synthesised are
       randomised and can be found during model checking by extracting not just the value of the
       zero-sum one-shot game solved in each state, but also an optimal (randomised) strategy. For
       infinite-horizon objectives, the synthesised strategies are memoryless, while for finite-horizon
       objectives, the synthesised strategies are finite-memory, with a separate distribution required
       for each state and each time step.


       4.2    Nonzero-sum formulae
       Nonzero-sum formulae allow us to reason about equilibria, for either of the types (NE
       or CE) and optimality criteria (SW or SF) considered here. A probabilistic formula
       ⟨⟨C1 :· · ·:Cm ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )max∼x (P[ ψ1 ]+· · ·+P[ ψm ]) is true in a state if, when the players form
       the coalitions C1 , . . . , Cm , there is a subgame-perfect equilibrium of type ⋆1 meeting the
       optimality criterion ⋆2 for which the sum of the values of the objectives P[ ψ1 ], . . . , P[ ψm ]
       for the coalitions C1 , . . . , Cm satisfies ∼x. The objective of coalition Ci is to maximise the
       probability of satisfying a path formula ψi .
           For a reward formula ⟨⟨C1 :· · ·:Cm ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )max∼x (Rr1 [ ρ1 ]+· · ·+Rrm [ ρm ]) the meaning is
       similar; however, here the objective of coalition Ci refers to a reward formula ρi with respect
       to reward structure ri . Formulae of the form ⟨⟨C1 :· · ·:Cm ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )min∼x (θ) correspond to the
       dual notion of cost equilibria, which are also supported. We also allow numerical queries of the
       form ⟨⟨C1 :· · ·:Cm ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )opt=? (θ), which return the sum of the subgame-perfect equilibrium’s
       values of of type ⋆1 meeting the optimality criterion ⋆2 .
           Model checking algorithms, presented in [34, 32, 35], involve solving an m-player coalition
       game GC , where C = {C1 , . . . , Cm } and the choices of each player i in GC correspond to
       the choices of the players in coalition Ci in G. If all the objectives in θ are finite-horizon,
       then backward induction [53, 57] can be applied to compute (precise) optimal equilibria
       values. On the other hand, if all the objectives are infinite-horizon, value iteration [12] can
       be used to approximate optimal equilibria values. When there is a combination of finite- and
       infinite-horizon objectives, the game under study is modified in a standard manner to make
       all objectives infinite-horizon.
           Both backward induction and value iteration over the CSG GC work by iteratively
       computing new values for each state s of GC . The values for each state, in each iteration,
       are found by computing optimal equilibria values, with respect to the criterion ⋆2 and
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                                4:11


equilibrium type ⋆1 , of an NFG N whose utility function is derived from the outgoing
transition probabilities from s in the CSG and the values computed for successor states of s
in the previous iteration.
    We can synthesise a strategy profile representing the appropriate type of equilibrium for
the CSG by combining the optimal strategies for the equilibria generated in each individual
state during solution. As for zero-sum formulae, randomisation is required and memory
is needed both to keep track of both the step bound of finite-horizon objectives and the
satisfaction of each player’s objective.

▶ Example 14. We now return to the scenario from Example 12, where a number users
are attempting to send packets using the slotted ALOHA protocol. The zero-sum formulae
⟨⟨usr 1 , . . . , usr k ⟩⟩Rtime
                           min=? [ F sent1...k ] and ⟨⟨usr 1 , . . . , usr k ⟩⟩Pmax=? [ F sent1...k ∧ t ⩽ D ] repres-
ent the case where the first k users form a coalition and try to minimise the expected time
to send their packets or maximise the probability they send their packets within a deadline
D ∈ N, respectively, while the remaining users form a second coalition and try and achieve
the opposite objective, i.e., maximise the expected time or minimise the probability.
    On the other hand, in the nonzero-sum case, if we suppose there are m users and the object-
ive of each user is to minimise the expected time to send their packet, this can be expressed by
the nonzero-sum formula ⟨⟨usr 1 : · · · :usr m ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )min=? (Rtime [ F sent1 ]+· · ·+Rtime [ F sentm ]).


 5      Tool support and case studies

Tool support for the modelling and automated verification of CSGs has been implemented in
PRISM-games [33], which is available from [61]. A variety of case studies have been modelled
and analysed as CSGs with the tool, using both zero-sum and nonzero-sum properties. These
include: a robot coordination problem [34]; futures market investors [34, 35]; medium access
control [32, 34]; power control [34, 35]; a public good game [32, 35] and secret sharing [32].
The results for these case studies demonstrate: the advantages of using CSGs for modelling
(for example, with respect to simpler turn-based games); that using nonzero-sum properties
can yield gains for the players (or coalitions); and that the use of correlated equilibria and
social fairness results may be advantageous compared to Nash equilibria and social welfare.
We give a brief description of the functionality and implementation of PRISM-games and
then present a representative case study: the slotted ALOHA protocol.


5.1     PRISM-games
PRISM-games [33] is an extension of the PRISM model checker, which provides support
for a variety of stochastic game models, including turn-based and concurrent multi-player
stochastic games, and (turn-based) timed probabilistic games.
    These are all described in the PRISM-games modelling language, a stochastic extension
of the Reactive Modules formalism [3]. The language facilitates the specification of systems
comprising multiple components, referred to as modules, that operate in parallel, both
asynchronously and synchronously through action labels. Each module has a number of
finite-valued variables and a state of the system specifies the values of the variables of all
modules. The behaviour of each module is defined by probabilistic guarded commands,
where the guard is a predicate over the variables of the modules and the command specifies
a probabilistic update of the module’s variables. In a CSG model, each player constitutes a
set of modules, and these therefore execute concurrently.



                                                                                                                        M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:12   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


                         1
                                                                                              80                             bmax = 4
                                                                                                                             bmax = 3
                        0.8                                                                                                  bmax = 2




                                                                              Expected time
                                                                                              60                             bmax = 1
          Probability


                        0.6
                                                                                              40
                        0.4
                                                              bmax = 1
                                                              bmax = 2
                                                                                              20
                        0.2
                                                              bmax = 3
                                                              bmax = 4
                         0                                                                     0
                              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9      10                    0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9      1
                                                                                                                  q
                                                  D

           Figure 2 Results from a CSG model of the ALOHA protocol: one user maximising the probability
       of sending their packet before a deadline D (left); and minimising the expected time to send the
       packet, assuming a message transmission failure probability q (right).


           PRISM-games provides a graphical user interface for designing and simulating stochastic
       games models, but its core functionality is to exhaustively construct a game and perform
       verification and strategy synthesis against a logical specification. For CSGs, the PRISM-
       games logic described in Definition 13 is supported, and the resulting strategies can be
       exported, simulated or further verified.
           The implementation of CSG model checking is built within PRISM’s “explicit” engine,
       which is based on sparse matrices and implemented in Java. Computing values (and optimal
       strategies) for zero-sum NFGs, needed for zero-sum formulae, is performed using the LPSolve
       library [41] via linear programming. The computation of SWNE or SFNE for nonzero-
       sum NFG, required for nonzero-sum formulae, depends on the number of players. For
       two players [34], labelled polytopes are used to characterise and find NE values through a
       reduction to SMT in both Z3 [19] and Yices [20]. If there are more than two players, the
       implementation [32] is based on support enumeration and uses a combination of the SMT
       solver Z3 [19] and the nonlinear optimisation suite Ipopt [58]. In the case of SWCE for
       nonzero-sum NFGs, as the problem reduces to an LP problem [35], either Gurobi [22] or the
       SMT solver Z3 [19] is used. Finally, for SFCE, since the problem does not reduce directly to
       an LP problem, only Z3 can be used.

       5.2               The ALOHA case study
       We now return to the slotted ALOHA protocol discussed in Examples 12 and 14 to illustrate
       the benefits of game-theoretic analysis with CSGs. For further details of this case study, as
       well as several others, see [61]. Recall that, in the slotted ALOHA protocol, a number of
       users are attempting to send packets on a shared medium. We assume that, in any time
       slot, if a single user tries to send a packet then there is a probability (q) that the packet is
       sent and, as more users try and send, then the probability of success decreases. If sending a
       packet fails, the user waits for a number of slots before resending, defined according to an
       exponential backoff scheme. More precisely, each user maintains a backoff counter, which
       it increases each time there is a failure (up to bmax ) and, if the counter equals k, randomly
       chooses the slots to wait from {0, 1, . . . , 2k −1}.

       Zero-sum properties. We first consider the zero-sum properties ⟨⟨usr 1 ⟩⟩Pmax=? [ F⩽D sent1 ]
       and ⟨⟨usr 1 ⟩⟩Rtime
                      min=? [ F sent1 ] from Example 14, which correspond to the first user trying to
       maximise the probability that their packet is sent before a deadline and trying to minimise
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                                                               4:13


                           2                                                                            1
                                                                                                                   usr 1 (SWNE)
                                                                                                                   usr 2 (SWNE)
   Sum of Probabilities

                                                                                                       0.8          usr 1 (Max)
                          1.5
                                                                                                                    usr 2 (Max)




                                                                                         Probability
                                                                                                       0.6
                           1
                                                                                                       0.4

                          0.5                           ⟨⟨usr 1 :usr 2 ⟩⟩=? (P+P)
                                                                                                       0.2
                                                          ⟨⟨usr 1 ⟩⟩Pmax + Pmax
                                                          ⟨⟨usr 1 ⟩⟩Pmax + Pmin
                           0                                                                            0
                                0   1   2   3   4   5    6     7     8      9       10                       0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
                                                    D                                                                           q


   Figure 3 Results from CSG equilibria synthesis on the ALOHA protocol, maximising the
probabilities of sending packets by deadline D for two coalitions (user 1, and users 2 and 3):
probability sums (left) and individual probabilities (right).


the expected time to send their packet, respectively. The results for the first property when
q = 0.9 as the deadline D varies, and for the second property as the probability q varies,
are presented in Figure 2 for different values of bmax . We see that the probability decreases
and the expected time decreases as bmax increases; this is because, as bmax increases, the
additional time the first user can spend in backoff outweighs the gains in reducing the chance
of avoiding further collisions. By performing strategy synthesis we see that it is optimal
for the first user to initially randomly decide as to when to send their packet in order to
avoid collisions with the coalition of the second and third user. However, this changes to a
deterministic strategy of just sending its packet when the other users have sent their packets
or the deadline is getting close, and therefore waiting will mean the deadline is missed.


Benefits of equilibria. We next highlight the analysis from [34], which demonstrates the
advantages of cooperation through nonzero-sum properties when using Nash equilibria (NE)
and the social welfare (SW) optimality criterion, as opposed to adopting a strategy that
assumes antagonistic behaviour. The first non-zero sum property we consider corresponds
to the case when each user is trying to maximise the probability of sending their packet
before a deadline D, with users 2 and 3 forming a coalition, represented by the formula
⟨⟨usr 1 :usr 2 ,usr 3 ⟩⟩(ne, sw)max=? (P[ F (sent1 ∧ t⩽D) ] + P[ F (sent2 ∧ sent3 ∧ t⩽D) ]).
    Figure 3 presents total values (the sum of the probabilities for user 1 and the coalition
of user 2 and 3) as D varies (left) and individual values as q varies (right). By performing
strategy synthesis, the analysis found that the collaboration is dependent on both D and q.
In particular, if the users have more time there is a greater chance for the users to collaborate
by sending in different slots, whereas, when q is large, it is unlikely users need to repeatedly
send, so again can send in different slots. As Figure 3 (right) demonstrates, since the coalition
has more packets to send, their probabilities are lower.


Equilibria types and optimality criteria. Finally, we report on the experiments of [35], which
investigate the benefits of using different types of equilibria, i.e., correlated (CE) over Nash
equilibria, and optimality criteria, i.e., social fairness (SF) over social welfare (SW). The
experiments varied the number of users and considered the case when the objective of each
individual user is to minimise the expected time to send their packet, which is represented by
the nonzero-sum formula ⟨⟨usr 1 : · · · :usr m ⟩⟩(⋆1 , ⋆2 )min=? (Rtime [ F sent1 ]+· · ·+Rtime [ F sentm ]).




                                                                                                                                                       M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:14   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


                                 two users                                     three users                                      four users
                                             SFNEi                       9                     SW1                       11                     SW1
          Expected time   5                   SW1                        8                     SW2                       10                     SW2




                                                         Expected time




                                                                                                         Expected time
                                              SW2                        7                     SW3                        9                     SW3
                          4                  SFCEi                                             SFi                        8                     SW4
                                                                         6
                                                                                                                          7                     SFi
                                                                         5
                          3                                                                                               6
                                                                         4                                                5
                          2                                              3                                                4
                                                                         2                                                3
                          1                                              1                                                2
                          0.4    0.6       0.8       1                   0.4   0.6       0.8         1                    0.4   0.6       0.8         1
                                       q                                             q                                                q


           Figure 4 Results from different types of equilibria (correlated vs. Nash) and optimality criteria
       (social fairness vs. social welfare) for minimising the expected times for users to send packets in the
       ALOHA protocol., for varying numbers of users.


           Synthesising optimal strategies for this specification, it was found that the cases for
       SWNE and SWCE coincide (although SWCE returns a joint strategy for the users, this joint
       strategy can be separated to form a strategy profile). This profile required one user to try
       and send first, and then for the remaining users to take turns to try and send afterwards. If
       a user fails to send, then they enter backoff and allow all remaining users to try and send
       before trying to send again. The reason for this is that there is no gain in a user trying to
       send at the same time as another user, as this will increase the probability of a collision and
       thus their packets not being sent, and therefore the users having to spend time in backoff.
           For SFNE, which has only been implemented for the two-player case, the two users
       followed identical strategies, which involve randomly deciding whether to wait or transmit,
       unless they are the only user that has not transmitted, and then they always try to send
       when not in backoff. In the case of SFCE, users employed a shared probabilistic signal to
       coordinate which user sends next. Initially, this was a uniform choice over the users, but as
       time progresses the signal favoured the users with lower backoff counters as these users had
       fewer opportunities to send their packet previously.
           Figure 4 plots the optimal values for the users, where SWi corresponds to the optimal
       values (expected times to send their packets) for user i for both SWNE and SWCE for the
       cases of two, three and four users. We see that the optimal values for the different users
       under SFNE and SFCE coincide, while under SWNE and SWCE they are different for each
       user (with the user sending first having the lowest and the user sending last the highest).
       Comparing the sum of the SWNE (and SWCE) values and that of the SFCE values, we see
       a small decrease in the sum of less than 2% of the total, whereas for SFNE there is a greater
       difference as the users cannot coordinate, and hence try and send at the same time.

        6                     Recent Developments: Neuro-symbolic CSGs
       The recent encouraging advances of AI, and particularly deep learning, have resulted in
       computing architectures that integrate components that are synthesized from data (e.g.,
       implemented as neural networks) with conventional, symbolic modules (e.g., controllers).
       Design automation support for such neuro-symbolic systems is, however, lacking. To this
       end, we have developed the model of neuro-symbolic concurrent stochastic games (NS-
       CSGs) [60, 59], which is targeted at AI-based autonomous systems, e.g., autonomous driving
       or aircraft controllers. NS-CSGs are a variant of (continuous-space) CSGs, in which each
       player is a neuro-symbolic agent and the agents act concurrently in a shared, continuous-state
       environment. As for the players of CSGs, each agent has a finite set of available actions and
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                                   4:15


agents choose their actions simultaneously; however, in NS-CSGs the action choices cause
the agents’ local states to be updated probabilistically and the agents are endowed with a
perception mechanism implemented as a neural network, through which they can observe the
local states of the other agents and that of the environment and encode these observations as
locally stored percepts. The global states of NS-CSGs comprise the state of the environment
together with the local state and percept of each agent, and are therefore infinite-state, in
contrast to the CSGs discussed in the rest of this paper.

▶ Definition 15 (Neuro-symbolic concurrent stochastic game [60, 59]). A neuro-symbolic
concurrent stochastic multi-player game (NS-CSG) NSC comprises players (Agi )i∈N , for
N = {1, . . . , n}, and an environment E where:

    Agi = (Si , Ai , ∆i , obs i , δi ) for i ∈ N , E = (SE , δE )

and we have:
   Si = Loc i × Per i is a set of states for Agi , where Loc i ⊆ Rbi and Per i ⊆ Rdi are finite
   sets of local states and percepts, respectively;
   SE ⊆ Re is a closed infinite set of environment states;
   Ai is a nonempty finite set of actions for Agi and A := (A1 ∪ {⊥}) × · · · × (An ∪ {⊥}) is
   the set of joint actions, where ⊥ is an idle action disjoint from ∪ni=1 Ai ;
   ∆i : Si → 2Ai is an available action function, defining the actions Agi can take in each
   state;
   obs i : (Loc 1 × · · · × Loc n × SE ) → Per i is a perception function for Agi , mapping the
   local states of all agents and the environment to a percept of the agent, implemented via
   a neural network (NN) classifier;
   δi : Si × A → P(Loc i ) is a partial probabilistic transition function for Agi determining
   the distribution over the agent’s local states given its current state and joint action;
   δE : SE × A → SE is a partial deterministic environment transition function determining
   the environment’s next state given its current state and joint action.

      A (global) state for an NS-CSG NSC comprises a state si = (loc i , per i ) for each agent
Agi (a pair of a local state and percept) and an environment state sE . If an NS-CSG is
in a state s = (s1 , . . . , sn , sE ), then each Agi simultaneously chooses one of the actions
available in its state si (if no action is available, i.e., ∆i (si ) = ∅, it picks the idle action ⊥)
yielding a joint action α = (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ A. Next, each Agi updates its local state to
loc ′i ∈ Loc i , according to its probabilistic local transition function δi , applied to its current
state (loc i , per i ) and the joint action α. The environment updates its state to s′E ∈ SE
according to its local deterministic transition function δE , based on its state sE and on α.
Finally, each agent, based on its new local state loc ′i , observes the new local states of the
other agents and environment through its perception function obs i to generate a new percept
per ′i = obs i (loc ′1 , . . . , loc ′n , s′E ). Thus, the game reaches the state s′ = (s′1 , . . . , s′n , s′E ), where
s′i = (loc ′i , per ′i ) for i ∈ N . We assume that each perception function obs i is implemented
via an NN fi : Rb+e → P(Per i ) yielding a normalised score over different percept values,
               Pn
where b = i=1 bi ; however, it can be any function including other types of machine learning
models. A rule is then applied that selects the percept value with the maximum score.
      Formally, the semantics of an NS-CSG NSC is given by an infinite-state CSG [[NSC]] over
the product of the states of the agents and environment, which assumes a particular structure
of the transition function that distinguishes between agent and environment states and uses
the NN-based perception function to define which states have the same characteristics.



                                                                                                                           M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:16   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


                                                                                (tr int , ad int )
                                                                                                     ḣint
                                        (tr own , ad own )                            h
                               ḣown
                                                                     t

           Figure 5 Geometry with trust levels and advisories for the agents of the VCAS[2] case study.


       ▶ Definition 16 (Semantics of an NS-CSG). Given an NS-CSG NSC consisting of n players
       and an environment, the semantics of NSC is [[NSC]] = (N, S, A, ∆, δ) where:
          S = S1 × · · · × Sn × SE is the set of (global) states, which contain both discrete and
          continuous elements;
          A = (A1 ∪ {⊥}) × · · · × (An ∪ {⊥});
          ∆(s1 , . . . , sn , sE ) = ∪ni=1 ∆i (si );
          δ : (S × ((A1 ∪ {⊥}) × · · · × (An ∪ {⊥}))) → P(S) is the partial probabilistic transition
          function, where for states s = (s1 , . . . , sn , sE ), s′ = (s′1 , . . . , s′n , s′E ) ∈ S and joint action
          α = (a1 , . . . , an ) ∈ A, if ai ∈ ∆i (si ) when ∆i (si ) ̸= ∅ and ai = ⊥ otherwise, then
          δ(s, α) is defined and if s′i = (loc ′i , per ′i ), per ′i = obs i (loc ′1 , . . . , loc ′n , s′E ) for all i ∈ N and
          s′E = δE (sE , α), then
                                  Qn                       ′
                δ(s, α)(s′ ) =
                                                                 
                                       i=1 δi (si , α)(loc i )

           and otherwise δ(s, α)(s′ ) = 0.

           To illustrate NS-CSGs, we present the VerticalCAS Collision Avoidance Scenario (VCAS[2])
       [28, 29], modelled in [59], which is a variant of the one studied in [2], where the agents’ trust
       level is modelled probabilistically to account for possible uncertainty.

       ▶ Example 17. The geometry of the VCAS[2] case study is shown in Figure 5. There are
       two aircraft (ownship and intruder), constituting the agents of the NS-CSG, both equipped
       with an NN-controlled collision avoidance system called VCAS. At each time unit (i.e., every
       second), VCAS issues an advisory (ad ∈ {1, . . . , 9}) from which, together with the current
       trust level (tr ∈ {1, . . . , 4}) from the previous advisory, the pilot needs to make a decision
       about the rate of acceleration, aimed at avoiding a near mid-air collision (NMAC) [1].
           The input to the VCAS system is the tuple (h, ḣown , ḣint , t) ∈ R4 including the relative
       altitude h of the aircraft, the climb rate ḣown of ownship, the climb rate ḣint of intruder, and
       the time t until loss of horizontal separation between the aircraft. VCAS is implemented
       via nine feed-forward NNs F = {fi : R4 → R9 | 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 9}, each of which corresponds to an
       advisory and outputs the scores of the nine possible advisories. Each advisory will provide a
       set of accelerations for the agent to select from and the trust level increases probabilistically
       if the current advisory is compliant with the executed accelerations, and decreases otherwise.
       We formulate the NS-CSG with agents Agi for i ∈ {own, int} as follows:
           the set of states for Agi is given by Si = {1, . . . , 4} × {1, . . . , 9}, where the agent state
           si = (tr i , ad i ) ∈ Si has local state (trust level) tr i and percept (advisory) ad i ;
           the set of environment states is given by SE = R4 , where sE = (h, ḣown , ḣint , t) ∈ SE
           represents the relative altitude, the climb rate of the ownship, the climb rate of the
           intruder, and the time until loss of their horizontal separation;
           the set of actions of Agi is given by Ai = {0, ±3.0, ±7.33, ±9.33, ±9.7, ±11.7} representing
           the acceleration options of Agi ;
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                                4:17


   Table 2 Actions available for the agents of VCAS[2] for each advisory [2].

 Label                                                             Vertical Range       Actions
        Advisory   Description
 (adi )                                                          (Min, Max) ft/min       ft/s2
   1   COC      Clear of Conflict                                    (−∞, +∞)            −3, +3
   2   DNC      Do Not Climb                                          (−∞, 0]         −9.33, −7.33
   3   DND      Do Not Descend                                        [0, +∞)          7.33, +9.33
   4   DES1500 Descend at least 1500 ft/min                         (−∞, −1500]       −9.33, −7.33
   5   CL1500   Climb at least 1500 ft/min                          [+1500, +∞)       +7.33, +9.33
   6   SDES1500 Strengthen Descend to at least 1500 ft/min          (−∞, −1500]       −11.7, −9.7
   7   SCL1500 Strengthen Climb to at least 1500 ft/min             [+1500, +∞)       +9.7, +11.7
   8   SDES2500 Strengthen Descend to at least 2500 ft/min          (−∞, −2500]       −11.7, −9.7
   9   SCL2500 Strengthen Climb to at least 2500 ft/min             [+2500, +∞)       +9.7, +11.7


   the available action function ∆i : Per i → Ai of Agi is independent of the local state of
   the agent and returns the set consisting two non-zero acceleration actions from Table 2
   for a given percept and the zero acceleration action;
   the perception function obsi : Per i × SE → {1, . . . , 9} of Agi is independent of the local
   state of the agent and is given by the feed forward NNs F of VCAS;
   the local transition function δi of Agi updates the agent’s trust level probabilistically
   according to its current trust level, its current advisory and its executed action;
   the environment transition function δE is given by δE ((h, ḣown , ḣint , t), (ḧown , ḧint )) =
   (h′ , ḣ′own , ḣ′int , t′ ) where for time step ∆t = 1:
       h′ = h − ∆t(ḣown − ḣint ) − 0.5∆t2 (ḧown − ḧint );
       ḣ′own = ḣown + ḧown ∆t;
       ḣ′int = ḣint + ḧint ∆t;
       t′ = t − ∆t.



6.1    Zero-sum NS-CSGs
In view of the uncountable state spaces, [60] presents an approach for zero-sum discounted
infinite-horizon cumulative rewards under the assumption of full state observability for
NS-CSGs, which exploits Borel state space decomposition and identifies model restrictions to
ensure determinacy, and therefore existence of a value that corresponds to a unique fixed point.
Value iteration and policy iteration algorithms to compute values and synthesise optimal
strategies are also derived based on formulating piecewise linear or constant representations
of the value functions and strategies for NS-CSGs.


6.2    Nonzero-sum NS-CSGs
In the case of nonzero-sum NS-CSGs, [59] studies the undiscounted, finite-horizon equilibria
synthesis problem. The use of finite-horizon objectives simplifies the analysis (note that
the existence of infinite-horizon NE for CSGs is an open problem [7], and the verification
of non-probabilistic infinite-horizon reachability properties for neuro-symbolic games is
undecidable [2]). Both NE and CE using the SW optimality criteria are considered. The
algorithms, based on backward induction and non-linear programming, compute globally
optimal equilibria which, from a fixed initial state, are optimal over the chosen time horizon,
in contrast to the local optimality of equilibria for finite-state CSGs [34, 35].



                                                                                                        M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:18   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


                                                          initial values: ḣown = −5, ḣint = −5, t = 4

                                                250            equilibria
                                                               zero-sum
                                                225
                                                200
                                                175




                                 Altitude (h)
                                                150
                                                125                                              safety
                                                100
                                                 75
                                                 50
                                                 25
                                                  0
                                                −25
                                                      0             1          2           3              4
                                                                               k
           Figure 6 Relative altitude h of the two aircraft at time instants k for equilibria and zero-sum
       strategies for the VCAS[2] case study.



       ▶ Example 18. The NS-CSG model of the VCAS[2] system described in Example 17 is
       studied in [59], comparing equilibria strategies to the zero-sum strategies analysed in [2].
       Figure 6 plots the relative altitude h of the two aircraft for equilibria and zero-sum strategies
       when maximising this value for a given time instant k, plotted for several different initial
       values of h. It can be seen that, with respect to the safety criterion established in [28, 2], i.e.,
       avoiding an NMAC when two aircraft are separated by less than 100 ft vertically (dotted
       line) and 500 ft horizontally, equilibria strategies allow the two aircraft to reach a safe
       configuration within a shorter horizon, which would be missed through a zero-sum analysis.
           The analysis of [59] also considers a reward structure that incorporates both the trust
       level and fuel consumption. Figure 7 shows the resulting equilibria strategies when both
       safety and trust are prioritised, using two different time horizons. When t = 3 initially
       (left), it is optimal to follow the advisories and the trust levels trown and trint of the two
       aircraft never decrease from their initial values of 4. However, when t = 3 initially (right),
       the optimal strategy shows a deviation from the advisory, denoted by action aown = 0, in
       state s2 , resulting in trown dropping to 3 in s3 with probability 0.9.

          The experiments from [59], summarised above, and from [60] are developed using prototype
       tools that build upon parts of PRISM-games, but full tool support for NS-CSGs



        7     Conclusions and Future Challenges

       This paper has provided an overview of modelling, verification and strategy synthesis
       techniques that have been developed and implemented for concurrent stochastic games in
       the PRISM-games model checker. Through case studies, we have demonstrated the uses
       and advantages of zero-sum and equilibria-based reasoning in strategic decision making,
       highlighting Nash and correlated equlilibria in conjunction with two optimality criteria, social
       welfare and social fairness. We have also discussed recent trends in autonomous systems
       towards neural-symbolic architectures, and summarised the first steps towards developing a
       modelling framework to support the development of such AI-based systems. Despite some
       progress, many problems remain open in this area, in particular, the development of (efficient)
       approximate algorithms for (undiscounted infinite-horizon) temporal logic specifications
       where the underlying problem is undecidable even in the finite-state case [42].
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                              4:19


                    state
                                                                          (4, 1)
               (tr own , ad own )                                                     s0
                                                                          (4, 1)
                (tr int , ad int )   sk
                                                                      (50, −5, 5, 4)
              (h, ḣown , ḣint , t)                                          (−9.33, 7.33)
                         (aown , aint )                                    1
                                                                          (4, 4)
                     (4, 1)                                               (4, 5)       s1
                     (4, 1)     s0
                                                                    (68, −14, 12, 3)
                 (50, −5, 5, 3)                                               (−11.7, 11.7)
                         (−9.33, 3)                                        1
                      1                                                   (4, 6)
                     (4, 4)                                               (4, 7)        s2
                     (4, 1)      s1
                                                                   (107, −26, 24, 2)
                (66, −14, 8, 2)                                               (0, −3)
                         (−3, 3)                                      0.9        0.1
                      1                                        (3, 8)                (4, 8)
                     (4, 1)                           s3       (4, 1)                (4, 1)      s4
                     (4, 1)       s2
                                                         (155, −26, 21, 1) (155, −26, 21, 1)
               (91, −17, 11, 1)                                    (3, −3)               (3, −3)
                         (−3, 3)                             0.1             0.9         1
                      1                                        (3, 1)                (4, 1)
                     (4, 1)                           s5       (4, 1)                (4, 1)      s6
                     (4, 1)        s3
                                                         (199, −23, 18, 0) (199, −23, 18, 0)
              (123, −20, 14, 0)

    Figure 7 Optimal strategies for the VCAS[2] case study over two different time horizons, using
initial t values of 3 (left) and 4 (right).



     References
 1   M. Akintunde, E. Botoeva, P. Kouvaros, and A. Lomuscio. Formal verification of neural agents
     in non-deterministic environments. In Proc. AAMAS’20, pages 25–33. Springer, 2020.
 2   M. Akintunde, E. Botoeva, P. Kouvaros, and A. Lomuscio. Verifying Strategic Abilities of
     Neural-symbolic Multi-agent Systems. In Proc. KR’20, pages 22–32. IJCAI Organization,
     September 2020.
 3   R. Alur and T. Henzinger. Reactive modules. Formal Methods in System Design, 15(1):7–48,
     1999.
 4   R. Alur, T. Henzinger, and O. Kupferman. Alternating-time temporal logic. Journal of the
     ACM, 49(5):672–713, 2002.
 5   R. Alur, T. Henzinger, F. Mang, S. Qadeer, S. Rajamani, and S. Tasiran. MOCHA: Modularity
     in model checking. In Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV’98), volume
     1427 of LNCS, pages 521–525, Vancouver, 1998. Springer.
 6   R. Aumann. Subjectivity and correlation in randomized strategies. Journal of Mathematical
     Economics, 1(1):67–96, 1974.
 7   P. Bouyer, N. Markey, and D. Stan. Mixed Nash equilibria in concurrent games. In Proc.
     FSTTCS’14, volume 29 of LIPICS, pages 351–363, 2014.
 8   R. Brenguier. PRALINE: A tool for computing Nash equilibria in concurrent games. In
     Proc. CAV’13, volume 8044 of LNCS, pages 890–895. Springer, 2013. http://www.lsv.fr/
     Software/praline/.
 9   T. Brihaye, V. Bruyère, A. Goeminne, J.-F. Raskin, and M. van den Bogaard. The complexity
     of subgame perfect equilibria in quantitative reachability games. In Proc. CONCUR’19, volume
     140 of LIPIcs, pages 13:1–13:16. Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019.




                                                                                                      M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:20   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


       10   P. Čermák, A. Lomuscio, F. Mogavero, and A. Murano. MCMAS-SLK: A model checker for
            the verification of strategy logic specifications. In Proc. CAV’14, volume 8559 of LNCS, pages
            525–532. Springer, 2014.
       11   K. Chatterjee, L. de Alfaro, and T. Henzinger. Strategy improvement for concurrent reachability
            and turn-based stochastic safety games. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 79(5):640–
            657, 2013.
       12   K. Chatterjee and T. Henzinger. Value iteration. In 25 Years of Model Checking, volume 5000
            of LNCS, pages 107–138. Springer, 2008.
       13   K. Chatterjee, T. Henzinger, B. Jobstmann, and A. Radhakrishna. Gist: A solver for
            probabilistic games. In Proc. CAV’10, volume 6174 of LNCS, pages 665–669. Springer, 2010.
            http://pub.ist.ac.at/gist/.
       14   K. Chatterjee, R. Majumdar, and M. Jurdziński. On Nash equilibria in stochastic games. In
            Proc. CSL’04, volume 3210 of LNCS, pages 26–40. Springer, 2004.
       15   T. Chen, V. Forejt, M. Kwiatkowska, D. Parker, and A. Simaitis. Automatic verification of
            competitive stochastic systems. Formal Methods in System Design, 43(1):61–92, 2013.
       16   C. Cheng, A. Knoll, M. Luttenberger, and C. Buckl. GAVS+: An open platform for the
            research of algorithmic game solving. In Proc. TACAS’11, volume 6605 of LNCS, pages
            258–261. Springer, 2011. https://sourceforge.net/projects/gavsplus/.
       17   L. de Alfaro, T. Henzinger, and O. Kupferman. Concurrent reachability games. Theoretical
            Computer Science, 386(3):188–217, 2007.
       18   L. de Alfaro and R. Majumdar. Quantitative solution of omega-regular games. Journal of
            Computer and System Sciences, 68(2):374–397, 2004.
       19   L. De Moura and N. Bjørner. Z3: An efficient SMT solver. In Proc. TACAS’08, volume 4963
            of LNCS, pages 337–340. Springer, 2008. https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3.
       20   B. Dutertre. Yices 2.2. In Proc. CAV’14, volume 8559 of LNCS, pages 737–744. Springer,
            2014. http://yices.csl.sri.com.
       21   V. Forejt, M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker. Automated verification techniques for
            probabilistic systems. In SFM’11, volume 6659 of LNCS, pages 53–113. Springer, 2011.
       22   Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2021. https://www.gurobi.
            com.
       23   J. Gutierrez, M. Najib, P. Giuseppe, and M. Wooldridge. Equilibrium design for concurrent
            games. In Proc. CONCUR’19, volume 140 of LIPIcs, pages 22:1–22:16. Leibniz-Zentrum für
            Informatik, 2019.
       24   J. Gutierrez, M. Najib, G. Perelli, and M. Wooldridge. EVE: A tool for temporal equilibrium
            analysis. In Proc. ATVA’18, volume 11138 of LNCS, pages 551–557. Springer, 2018. https:
            //github.com/eve-mas/eve-parity.
       25   Julian Gutierrez, Lewis Hammond, Anthony W. Lin, Muhammad Najib, and Michael J.
            Wooldridge. Rational verification for probabilistic systems. In Proc. 18th International
            Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR’21), pages 312–322,
            2021.
       26   H. Hansson and B. Jonsson. A logic for reasoning about time and reliability. FAC, 6(5):512–535,
            1994.
       27   L. Hurwicz and S. Reiter. Designing Economic Mechanisms. Cambridge University Press,
            2006.
       28   K. Julian and M. Kochenderfer. A reachability method for verifying dynamical systems with
            deep neural network controllers. CoRR, abs/1903.00520, 2019. arXiv:1903.00520.
       29   K. Julian, S. Sharma, J.-B. Jeannin, and M. Kochenderfer. Verifying aircraft collision avoidance
            neural networks through linear approximations of safe regions. CoRR, abs/1903.00762, 2019.
            arXiv:1903.00762.
       30   N. Karmarkar. A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming. Combinatorica,
            4(4):373–395, 1984.
       31   J. Kemeny, J. Snell, and A. Knapp. Denumerable Markov Chains. Springer, 1976.
M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, G. Santos, and R. Yan                                            4:21


32   M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, and G. Santos. Multi-player equilibria verification
     for concurrent stochastic games. In Proc. QEST’20, volume 12289 of LNCS, pages 74–95.
     Springer, 2020.
33   M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, and G. Santos. PRISM-games 3.0: Stochastic game
     verification with concurrency, equilibria and time. In Proc. CAV’20, volume 12225 of LNCS,
     pages 475–487. Springer, 2020.
34   M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, and G. Santos. Automatic verification of concurrent
     stochastic systems. Formal Methods in System Design, pages 1–63, 2021.
35   M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, D. Parker, and G. Santos. Correlated equilibria and fairness
     in concurrent stochastic games. In Proc. TACAS’22, volume 13244 of LNCS, pages 60–78.
     Springer, 2022.
36   S. LaValle. Robot motion planning: A game-theoretic foundation. Algorithmica, 26:430–465,
     2000.
37   C. Lemke and Jr J. Howson. Equilibrium points of bimatrix games. Journal of the Society for
     Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 12(2):413–423, 1964.
38   M. Littman, N. Ravi, A. Talwar, and M. Zinkevich. An efficient optimal-equilibrium algorithm
     for two-player game trees. In Proc. UAI’06, pages 298–305. AUAI Press, 2006.
39   A. Lomuscio, H. Qu, and F. Raimondi. MCMAS: A model checker for the verification of
     multi-agent systems. In Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Computer Aided Verification (CAV’09), volume
     5643 of LNCS, pages 682–688. Springer, 2009.
40   D. Lozovanu and S. Pickl. Determining Nash equilibria for stochastic positional games with
     discounted payoffs. In Proc. ADT’17, volume 10576 of LNAI, pages 339–343. Springer, 2017.
41   LPSolve (version 5.5). http://lpsolve.sourceforge.net/5.5/.
42   O. Madani, S. Hanks, and A. Condon. On the undecidability of probabilistic planning and
     related stochastic optimization problems. Artificial Intelligence, 147(1–2):5–34, 2003.
43   J. Marden and J. Shamma. Game theory and control. Annual Review of Control, Robotics,
     and Autonomous Systems, 1(1):105–134, 2018.
44   D. Martin. The determinacy of Blackwell games. J. Symbolic Logic, 63(4):1565–1581, 1998.
45   R. McKelvey, A. McLennan, and T. Turocy. Gambit: Software tools for game theory.
     http://www.gambit-project.org.
46   N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, E. Tardos, and V. Vazirani. Algorithmic Game Theory. Cambridge
     University Press, 2007.
47   M. Osborne and A. Rubinstein. An Introduction to Game Theory. Oxford University Press,
     2004.
48   R. Porter, E. Nudelman, and Y. Shoham. Simple search methods for finding a Nash equilibrium.
     In Proc. AAAI’04, pages 664–669. AAAI Press, 2004.
49   H. Prasad, L. Prashanth, and S. Bhatnagar. Two-timescale algorithms for learning Nash
     equilibria in general-sum stochastic games. In Proc. AAMAS’15, pages 1371–1379. IFAAMAS,
     2015.
50   E. Prisner. Game Theory Through Examples. Mathematical Association of America, 1 edition,
     2014.
51   T. Raghavan and J. Filar. Algorithms for stochastic games – A survey. Zeitschrift für
     Operations Research, 35(6):437–472, November 1991.
52   T. Sandholm, A. Gilpin, and V. Conitzer. Mixed-integer programming methods for finding
     Nash equilibria. In Proc. AAAI’05, pages 495–501. AAAI Press, 2005.
53   U. Schwalbe and P. Walker. Zermelo and the early history of game theory. Games and
     Economic Behavior, 34(1):123–137, 2001.
54   L. Shapley. Stochastic games. PNAS, 39:1095–1100, 1953.
55   A. Toumi, J. Gutierrez, and M. Wooldridge. A tool for the automated verification of Nash
     equilibria in concurrent games. In Proc. ICTAC’15, volume 9399 of LNCS, pages 583–594.
     Springer, 2015.




                                                                                                    M FC S 2 0 2 2
4:22   Probabilistic Model Checking for Strategic Equilibria-Based Decision Making


       56   J. von Neumann. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische Annalen, 100:295–320,
            1928.
       57   J. von Neumann, O. Morgenstern, H. Kuhn, and A. Rubinstein. Theory of Games and
            Economic Behavior. Princeton University Press, 1944.
       58   A. Wächter. Short tutorial: Getting started with ipopt in 90 minutes. In Combinatorial
            Scientific Computing, number 09061 in Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings. Leibniz-Zentrum für
            Informatik, 2009. https://github.com/coin-or/Ipopt.
       59   R. Yan, G. Santos, X. Duan, D. Parker, and M. Kwiatkowska. Finite-horizon equilibria for
            neuro-symbolic concurrent stochastic games. In Proc. UAI’22, 2022.
       60   R. Yan, G. Santos, G. Norman, D. Parker, and M. Kwiatkowska. Strategy synthesis for
            zero-sum neuro-symbolic concurrent stochastic games, 2022. arXiv:2202.06255.
       61   PRISM-games web site. http://www.prismmodelchecker.org/games/.
