If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It
Mrinal Kumar # Ñ
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India
C. Ramya # Ñ
Chennai Mathematical Institute, India
Ramprasad Saptharishi # Ñ
School of Technology and Computer Science, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India
Anamay Tengse # Ñ
Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa, Israel

      Abstract
Assuming that the Permanent polynomial requires algebraic circuits of exponential size, we show
that the class VNP does not have efficiently computable equations. In other words, any nonzero
polynomial that vanishes on the coefficient vectors of all polynomials in the class VNP requires
algebraic circuits of super-polynomial size.
    In a recent work of Chatterjee, Kumar, Ramya, Saptharishi and Tengse (FOCS 2020), it was
shown that the subclasses of VP and VNP consisting of polynomials with bounded integer coefficients
do have equations with small algebraic circuits. Their work left open the possibility that these results
could perhaps be extended to all of VP or VNP. The results in this paper show that assuming the
hardness of Permanent, at least for VNP, allowing polynomials with large coefficients does indeed
incur a significant blow up in the circuit complexity of equations.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Algebraic complexity theory

Keywords and phrases Computational Complexity, Algebraic Circuits, Algebraic Natural Proofs

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2022.44

Related Version Full Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07056

Funding C. Ramya: Research supported by INSPIRE Faculty Fellowship of DST and by a grant
from the Infosys Foundation. Part of this work was done when at the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Mumbai, India (DAE project 12-R&D-TFR-5.01-0500).
Ramprasad Saptharishi: Research was supported by the Department of Atomic Energy, Government
of India, under project no. 12-R&D-TFR-5.01-0500, and also the SERB Ramanujan Fellowship.
Anamay Tengse: Research supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 716/20). Part
of this work was done when at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India, as a
student (DAE project no. 12-R&D-TFR-5.01-0500), and later as a visitor (Prof. Prahladh Harsha’s
Swarnajaynti fellowship and Prof. Arkadev Chattopadhyay’s Microsoft Research funds).

Acknowledgements We thank anonymous reviewers of an earlier version of this paper and Joshua
Grochow, whose questions pointed us in the direction of this result. We also thank the reviewers of
STACS 2022 for their helpful comments and suggestions.
We also thank Prerona Chatterjee and Ben Lee Volk for helpful discussions at various stages of this
work.


 1      Introduction
In the context of proving lower bounds in complexity theory, many of the existing approaches
for proving Boolean circuit lower bounds were unified by Razborov and Rudich under
the Natural Proofs framework [15] and they showed that, under standard cryptographic
assumptions, any technique that fits into this framework cannot yield very strong lower
            © Mrinal Kumar, C. Ramya, Ramprasad Saptharishi, and Anamay Tengse;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
39th International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2022).
Editors: Petra Berenbrink and Benjamin Monmege; Article No. 44; pp. 44:1–44:13
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
44:2   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


       bounds. In the last few years there has been some work (e.g. [9], [10, 7]) aimed at developing
       an analogue of the Natural Proofs framework for algebraic circuit lower bounds. A crucial
       notion in this context is that of an equation for a class of polynomials which we now define.
           For a class C of polynomials, an equation for C is a family of nonzero polynomials such
       that it vanishes on the coefficient vector of polynomials in C.1 Informally, an algebraic natural
       proof for a class C is a family of equations for C which can be computed by algebraic circuits
       of size and degree polynomially bounded in their number of variables. Thus, a lower bound
       for C can be proved by exhibiting an explicit polynomial on which an equation for C does
       not vanish.
           Many of the known algebraic circuit lower bounds fit into this framework of algebraically
       natural proofs as observed by several authors [1, 9, 7, 10], thereby motivating the question of
       understanding whether techniques in this framework can yield strong algebraic circuit lower
       bounds; in particular, whether such techniques are sufficient to separate VNP from VP. In
       a recent breakthrough, Limaye, Srikanth and Tavenas [13] proved super-polynomial lower
       bounds against constant depth arithmetic circuits over fields of characteristic zero or large.
       It is not difficult to observe that this lower bound fits well into the natural proofs framework
       as it uses a complexity measure that is based on the rank of certain matrices to prove lower
       bounds. Thus, in the natural proofs framework, the first step towards a lower bound for VP
       is to understand whether VP has a family of equations which itself is in VP, that is its degree
       and its algebraic circuit size are polynomially bounded in the number of the variables. The
       next step, of course, would be to show the existence of a polynomial family in VNP which
       does not satisfy this family of equations. This work is motivated by the first step of this
       framework, that is the question of understanding whether natural and seemingly rich circuit
       classes like VP and VNP can have efficiently constructible equations. We briefly discuss prior
       work on this problem, before describing our results.

       1.1    Complexity of Equations for classes of polynomials
       In one of the first results on this problem, Forbes, Shpilka and Volk [7] and Grochow,
       Kumar, Saks and Saraf [10] observe that the class VP does not have efficiently constructible
       equations if we were to believe that there are hitting set generators for algebraic circuits with
       sufficiently succinct descriptions. However, unlike the results of Razborov and Rudich [15],
       the plausibility of the pseudorandomness assumption in [7, 10] is not very well understood.
       The question of understanding the complexity of equations for VP, or in general any natural
       class of algebraic circuits, continues to remain open.
           In a recent work of Chatterjee, Kumar, Ramya, Saptharishi and Tengse [4], it was shown
       that if we focus on the subclass of VP (in fact, even VNP) consisting of polynomial families
       with bounded integer coefficients, then we indeed have efficiently computable equations.
       More formally, the main result in [4] was the following.

       ▶ Theorem 1 ([4]). For every constant c > 0, there is a polynomial family {PN,c } ∈ VPQ 2
                                               c
       such that for all large n and N = n+n n   , the following are true.
          For every family {fn } ∈ VNPQ , where fn is an n-variate polynomial of degree at most nc
          and coefficients in {−1, 0, 1}, we have
                    −−→
              PN,c (coeff(fn )) = 0 .

       1
         Strictly speaking, these notions need us to work with families of polynomials, even though we sometimes
         drop the word family for ease of exposition.
       2
         For a field F, VPF denotes the class VP where the coefficients of the polynomials are from the field F.
         Similarly, VNPF denotes the class VNP where the coefficients of the polynomials are from the field F.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                           44:3


     There exists a family {hn } of n-variate polynomials and degree at most nc with coefficients
     in {−1, 0, 1} such that
               −−→
         PN,c (coeff(hn )) ̸= 0 .
      −−→
Here, coeff(f ) denotes the coefficient vector of a polynomial f .

    Many of the natural and well studied polynomial families like the Determinant, the
Permanent, Iterated Matrix Multiplication, etc., have this property of bounded coefficients,
and in fact the above result even holds when the coefficients are as large as poly(N ). Thus,
Theorem 1 could be interpreted as some evidence that perhaps we could still hope to prove
lower bounds for one of these polynomial families via proofs which are algebraically natural.
Extending Theorem 1 to obtain efficiently constructible equations for all of VP (or even for
slightly weaker models like formulas or constant depth algebraic circuits) is an extremely
interesting open question. In fact, even a conditional resolution of this problem in either
direction, be it showing that the bounded coefficients condition in Theorem 1 can be removed,
or showing that there are no such equations, would be extremely interesting and would
provide much needed insight into whether or not there is a natural-proofs-like barrier for
algebraic circuit lower bounds.

1.2      Our results
In this paper, we show that assuming the Permanent is hard, the constraint of bounded
coefficients in Theorem 1 is necessary for efficient equations for VNP. More formally, we
show the following theorem.

▶ Theorem 2 (Conditional Hardness of Equations for VNP). Let ε > 0 be a constant. Suppose,
                                                                                 ε
for an m large enough, we have that Permm requires            circuits of size 2m .
                                                      n+d
                                                          
    Then, for n = mε/4 , any d ≤ n and N = n , we have that every nonzero polynomial
P (x1 , . . . , xN ) that vanishes on all coefficient vectors of polynomials in VNPC (n, d) has size
                  4
at least 20.1n −3n .

▶ Remark. Our proof of the above theorem easily extends to any field of characteristic zero.
We shall just work with the complex numbers for better readability.
    Extending the result in Theorem 2 to hardness of equations for VP, even under the
assumption that Permanent is sufficiently hard, is an extremely interesting open question.
Such an extension would answer the main question investigated in [7, 10] and show a natural-
proofs-like barrier for a fairly general family of lower bound proof techniques in algebraic
complexity. Our proof of Theorem 2 however crucially relies on some of the properties of
VNP and does not appear to extend to VP.
    Although the proof of the above theorem is quite elementary, the main message (in our
opinion) is that we do not3 have compelling evidence to rule out, or accept, the efficacy of
algebraic natural proofs towards proving strong lower bounds for rich classes of algebraic
circuits.

1.3      An overview of the proof
As was observed in [7, 10], a lower bound for equations for a class of polynomials is
equivalent to showing the existence of succinctly describable hitting sets for this class. For
our proof we show that, assuming that the permanent is sufficiently hard, the coefficient


3
    Or rather, the results of [4] and the above theorem seem to provide some evidence for both sides!

                                                                                                        S TA C S 2 0 2 2
44:4   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


       vectors of polynomials in VNP form a hitting set for the class VP. The connection between
       hardness and randomness in algebraic complexity is well known via a result of Kabanets and
       Impagliazzo [11], and we use this connection, along with some additional ideas for our proof.
       We briefly describe a high level sketch of our proof in a bit more detail now.
           Kabanets and Impagliazzo [11] showed that using any explicit polynomial family {fn }
       that is sufficiently hard, one can construct a hitting set generator for VP, that is, we can
       construct a polynomial map Genf : Fk → Ft that “fools” any small algebraic circuit C
       on t variables in the sense that C(y1 , y2 , . . . , yt ) is nonzero if and only if the k-variate
       polynomial C ◦ Genf is nonzero. In a typical invocation of this result, the parameter k is
       much smaller than t (typically k = poly log t). Thus, this gives a reduction from the question
       of polynomial identity testing for t-variate polynomials to polynomial identity testing for
       k-variate polynomials. Another related way of interpreting this connection is that if {fn }
       is sufficiently hard then Genf is a polynomial map whose image does not have an equation
       with small circuit size. Thus, assuming the hardness of the Permanent, this immediately
       gives us a polynomial map (with appropriate parameters) such that its image does not have
       an efficiently constructible equation.
           For the proof of Theorem 2, we show that the points in the image of the map GenPerm , can
       be viewed as the coefficient vectors of polynomials in VNP, or, equivalently in the terminology
       in [7, 10], that the Kabanets-Impagliazzo hitting set generator is VNP-succinct. To this
       end, we work with a specific instantiation of the construction of the Kabanets-Impagliazzo
       generator where the underlying construction of combinatorial designs is based on Reed-
       Solomon codes. Although this is perhaps the most well known construction of combinatorial
       designs, there are other (and in some parameters, better) constructions known. However, our
       proof relies on the properties of this particular construction to obtain the succinct description.
       Our final proof is fairly short and elementary, and is based on extremely simple algebraic
       ideas and making generous use of the fact that we are trying to prove a lower bound for
       equations for VNP and not VP.

       Proof Idea
       Let us assume that for some constant ε > 0 and for all4 m ∈ N, Permm requires circuits of
               ε
       size 2m . Kabanets and Impagliazzo [11] showed that, for every combinatorial design D (a
       collection of subsets of a universe with small pairwise intersection) of appropriate parameters,
       the map

            GenPerm (z) = (Perm(zS ) : S ∈ D)

       where zS denotes the variables of in z restricted to the indices in S, is a hitting set generator
                                ε
       for circuits of size 2o(m ) . Our main goal is to construct a polynomial F (y, z) in VNP such
       that
                       X
           F (y, z) =      monS (y) · Perm(zS )                                                    (1.1)
                        S∈D

       By choosing parameters  carefully, this would immediately imply that any equation on N -
       variables, for N = n+d
                            d , that vanishes on the coefficient vector of polynomials in VNP(n, d)
       (which are n-variate polynomials in VNP of degree at most d) requires size super-polynomial
       in N .

       4
           To be more precise, we should work with this condition for “infinitely often” m ∈ N and obtain that VNP
           does not have efficient equations infinitely often. We avoid this technicality for the sake of simplicity
           and the proof continues to hold for the more precise version with suitable additional care.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                             44:5


   To show that the polynomial F (y, z) in Equation 1.1 is in VNP, we use a specific
combinatorial design. For the combinatorial design D obtained via Reed-Solomon codes,
every set in the design can be interpreted as a univariate polynomial g of appropriate degree
over a finite field. The degree of g (say δ) and size of the finite field (say p) are related to
the parameters of the design D. Now,

                              δ
                                          !
                  X           Y
   F (y, z) =                      yigi       · Perm(zS(g) ),                                    (1.2)
                 g∈Fp [v]    i=0
                deg(g)≤δ


where (g0 , . . . , gδ ) is the coefficient vector of the univariate polynomial g. Expressing
                                                                                       δ      F(y, z)
                                                                                        Q gi
in Equation 1.2 as a polynomial in VNP requires us to implement the product                 yi    as a
                                                                                        i=0
polynomial when given the binary representation of coefficients g0 , . . . , gδ via a binary vector
t of appropriate length (say r). This is done via the polynomial Mon(t, y) in Subsection 3.1
in a straightforward manner. Furthermore, we want to algebraically implement the selection
zS for a set S in the combinatorial design when given the polynomial g corresponding to S.
This is implemented via the polynomial RS-Design(t, z) in Subsection 3.2. Finally, we have
                  X
   F (y, z) =               Mon(t, y) · Perm(RS-Design(t, z))
                t∈{0,1}r


which is clearly in VNP as Permp is in VNP and polynomials Mon(t, y) and RS-Design(t, z)
are efficiently computable. We refer the reader to Section 3 for complete details.


Related results

The concept of algebraically natural proofs was first studied in the works of Forbes, Shpilka
and Volk [7] and Grochow, Kumar, Saks and Saraf [10] who showed that constructing efficient
equations for a class directly contradicts a corresponding succinct derandomization of the
polynomial identity testing problem. In fact, Forbes, Shpilka and Volk [7] unconditionally
ruled out equations for depth-three multilinear formulas computable by certain structured
classes of algebraic circuits using this connection. However, this does not imply anything
about complexity of equations for general classes of algebraic circuits such as VP and VNP.
In the context of proving algebraic circuit lower bounds, Efremenko, Garg, Oliveira and
Wigderson [6] and Garg, Makam, Oliveira and Wigderson [8] explore limitations of proving
algebraic circuit lower bounds via rank based methods. However, these results are not directly
concerned with the complexity of equations for circuit classes.
    Recently, Bläser, Ikenmeyer, Jindal and Lysikov [2] studied the complexity of equations
in a slightly different context. They studied a problem called “matrix completion rank”, a
measure for tensors that is NP-hard to compute. Assuming coNP ⊈ ∃BPP, they construct
an explicit tensor of large (border) completion rank such that any efficient equation for
the class of tensors of small completion rank must necessarily also vanish on this tensor of
large completion rank. That is, efficient equations cannot certify that this specific tensor
has large (border) completion rank. Subsequently, this result was generalized to min-rank
or slice-rank [3]. The set-up in these papers is different from the that in our paper, and
that of [10, 7]. One way to interpret this difference is that [2] shows that “variety of small
completion rank tensors” cannot be “cut out” by efficient equations, whereas the set-up
of [10, 7] and our paper would ask if every equation for this variety requires large complexity.



                                                                                                          S TA C S 2 0 2 2
44:6   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


          In the context of equations for varieties in algebraic complexity, Kumar and Volk [12]
       proved polynomial degree bounds on the equations of the Zariski closure of the set of non-rigid
       matrices as well as small linear circuits over all large enough fields.


        2      Preliminaries

       2.1     Notation
            We use [n] to denote the set {1, . . . , n} and JnK to denote the set {0, 1, . . . , n}. We also
            use N≥0 to denote the set of non-negative integers.
            We use boldface letters such as x, y to denote tuples, typically of variables. When
            necessary, we adorn them with a subscript such as y[n] to denote the length of the tuple.
            We also use xe to denote the monomial xei i . We write x≤d for the set of all monomials
                                                       Q

            of degree at most d in x, and F[x]≤d for the set of polynomials in x over the field F of
            degree at most d.
            As usual, we identify the elements of Fp with {0, 1, . . . , p − 1} and think of JnK as a subset
            of Fp in the natural way for any n < p.

       2.2     Some basic definitions
       Circuit classes
       ▶ Definition 3 (Algebraic circuits). An algebraic circuit is specified by a directed acyclic graph,
       with leaves (indegree zero; also called inputs) labelled by field constants or variables, and
       internal nodes labelled by + or ×. The nodes with outdegree zero are called the outputs of the
       circuit. Computation proceeds in the natural way, where inductively each + gate computes
       the sum of its children and each × gate computes the product of its children.
           The size of the circuit is defined as the number of nodes in the underlying graph.

       ▶ Definition 4 (VP and VNP). A family of polynomials {fn }, where fn is n-variate, is said
       to be in VP if deg(fn ) and the algebraic circuit complexity of fn are bounded by a polynomial
       function of n. That is, there is a constant c ≥ 0 such that for all large enough n we have
       deg(fn ), size(fn ) ≤ nc .
                                                                                  
           A family of polynomials {fn } is said to be in VNP if there is a family gn (x[n] , y[m] ) ∈ VP
       such that m is bounded by a polynomial function of n and
                       X
           fn (x) =           gn (x, y).
                     y∈{0,1}m


           For some n, d ∈ N, let Cn,d be a class of n-variate polynomials of total degree at most
       d. That is, Cn,d ⊆ F[x]≤d . Similarly, we will use VP(n, d) and VNP(n, d) to denote the
       intersection of VP and VNP respectively, with F[x[n] ]≤d .

       Equations and succinct hitting sets
                                                             n+d
                                                                
       ▶ Definition 5 (Equations for a class). For N =        n , a nonzero polynomial PN (Z) is called
                                                                       −−→                   −−→
       an equation for Cn,d if for all f (x) ∈ Cn,d , we have that PN (coeff(f )) = 0, where coeff(f ) is
       the coefficient vector of f .

          Alternatively, we also say that a polynomial PN (Z) vanishes on the coefficient vectors of
                                     −−→
       polynomials in class C if PN (coeff(f )) = 0 for all f ∈ C.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                            44:7


▶ Definition 6 (Hitting Set Generator (HSG)). A polynomial map G : Fℓ → Fn given by
G(z1 , . . . , zℓ ) = (g1 (z), . . . , gn (z)) is said to be a hitting set generator (HSG) for a class
C ⊆ F[x] of polynomials if for all nonzero P ∈ C, P ◦ G = P (g1 , . . . , gn ) ̸≡ 0.
     We review the definition of succinct hitting sets introduced [10, 7].
▶ Definition 7 (Succinct Hitting Sets for a class of polynomials [10, 7]). For N = n+d
                                                                                           
                                                                                         n , we
say that a class of N -variate polynomials DN has Cn,d -succinct hitting sets if for all nonzero
                                                         −−→
PN (Z) ∈ DN , there exists some f ∈ Cn,d such that PN (coeff(f )) ̸= 0.

Hardness to randomness connection
For our proofs, we will need the following notion of combinatorial designs, which is a collection
of subsets of a universe with small pairwise intersection.
▶ Definition 8 (Combinatorial designs). A family of sets {S1 , . . . , SN } ⊆ [ℓ] is said to be an
(ℓ, m, n)-design if
    |Si | = m for each i ∈ [N ]
    |Si ∩ Sj | < n for any i ̸= j.
   Kabanets and Impagliazzo [11] obtain hitting set generators from polynomials that are
hard to compute for algebraic circuits. The following lemma is crucial to the proof of our
main theorem.
▶ Lemma 2.1 (HSG from Hardness [11]). Let {S1 , . . . , SN } be an (ℓ, m, n)-design and f (xm )
be an m-variate, individual degree d polynomial that requires circuits of size s. Then for fresh
variables yℓ , the polynomial map KI-gen(N,ℓ,m,n) (f ) : Fℓ → FN given by

     (f (yS1 ), . . . , f (ySN ))                                                                (2.2)
                                                                            
                                                                     s0.1
is a hitting set generator for all circuits of size at most       N (d+1)n       .


 3       Proof of the main theorem
Notation
                                                                         (a)
1. For a vector t = (t1 , . . . , tr ), we will use the short-hand ti,j to denote the variable
   t(i·a+j+1) . This would be convenient when we consider the coordinates of t as blocks of
   length a.
2. For integers a, p, we shall use Mod(a, p) to denote the unique integer ap ∈ [0, p − 1] such
   that ap = a mod p.
    As mentioned in the overview, the strategy is to convert the hitting set generator given
in (2.2) into a succinct hitting set generator. Therefore, we would like to associate the
coordinates of (2.2) into coefficients of a suitable polynomial. That is, we would like to build
a polynomial in VNP of the form
                                            X
    g(y1 , . . . , yℓ , z1 , . . . , zt ) =   m · f (zSm )
                                    m∈y≤d

with the monomials m ∈ y≤d suitably indexing into the sets of the combinatorial design.
The above expression already resembles a VNP-definition and with a little care this can be
made effective. We will first show that the different components of the above expression can
be made succinct using the following constructions.



                                                                                                         S TA C S 2 0 2 2
44:8   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


       3.1     Building monomials from exponent vectors
       For n, r ∈ N, let a = ⌊r/n⌋, and define Monr,n (t, y) as follows.

                                                          n−1
                                                          Y a−1
                                                              Y                              
                                                                      (a)   j         (a)
                                                                          2
          Monr,n (t1 , . . . , tr , y1 , . . . , yn ) =             ti,j yi+1 + (1 − ti,j )
                                                          i=0 j=0


       The following observation is now immediate from the definition above.

       ▶ Observation 9. For any (e1 , . . . , en ) ∈ JdKn , we have

          Monr,n (Bin(e1 ), . . . , Bin(en ), y1 , . . . , yn ) = y1e1 · · · ynen ,

       where Bin(e) is the tuple corresponding to the binary representation of e, and r = n ·
       ⌈log2 (d + 1)⌉. Furthermore, the polynomial Monr,n is computable by an algebraic circuit of
       size poly(n, r).


       3.2     Indexing Combinatorial Designs Algebraically
       Next, we need to effectively compute the hard polynomial f on sets of variables in a
       combinatorial design, indexed by the respective monomials. We will need to simulate some
       computations modulo a fixed prime p. The following claim will be helpful for that purpose.

       ▷ Claim 10. For any i, b, p ∈ N≥0 with i ≤ p, there exists a unique univariate polynomial
       Qi,b,p (v) ∈ Q[v] of degree at most b such that
                          (
                           1      if 0 ≤ a < b and a ≡ i (modp),
          Qi,b,p (a) =
                             0    if 0 ≤ a < b and a ̸≡ i (modp).

       Proof. We can define a unique univariate polynomial Qi,b,p (v) satisfying the conditions of
       the claim via interpolation to make a unique univariate polynomial take a value of 0 or 1
       according to the conditions of the claim. Since, there are b conditions, there always exists
       such a polynomial of degree at most b.                                                    ◁

          For any n, b, p ∈ N≥0 with n ≤ p, define
                                             n
                                             X
          Seln,b,p (u1 , . . . , un , v) ≜         ui · Qi,b,p (v).
                                             i=1

       ▶ Observation 11. For any n, b, p ∈ N≥0 with n ≤ p, for any 0 ≤ a < b, we have that

          Seln,b,p (u1 , . . . , un , a) = uMod(a,p) = ua mod p

       The degree of Seln,b,p is at most (b + 1) and can be computed by an algebraic circuit of size
       poly(b).

       Proof. From the definition of the univariate polynomial Qi,b,p (v) of degree b in Claim 10,
       Qi,b,p (a) outputs 1 if and only if i = a mod p. Hence, Seln,b,p (u1 , . . . , un , a) is ua mod p and
       is of degree at most (b + 1).                                                                        ◀

          And finally, we choose a specific combinatorial design to instantiate Lemma 2.1.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                                             44:9


3.3       Reed-Solomon-based combinatorial designs
For any prime p and any choice of a ≤ p, the following is an explicit construction of a
(p2 , p, a)-combinatorial design of size pa , defined as follows:
      For every univariate polynomial g(t) ∈ Fp [t] of degree less than a, we add the set
      Sg = {(i, g(i)) : i ∈ Fp } ⊆ Fp × Fp to the collection.
Since any two distinct univariate polynomials of degree less than a can agree on at most a
points, it follows that the above is indeed a (p2 , p, a)-design.

    The advantage of this specific construction is that it can be made succinct as follows.
For r = a · ⌊log2 p⌋, let t1 , . . . , tr be variables taking values in {0, 1}. The values assigned to
t-variables can be interpreted as a univariate over Fp of degree < a by considering t ∈ {0, 1}r
as a matrix with a rows and ⌊log2 p⌋ columns each 5 . The binary vector in each row represents
an element in Fp . We illustrate this with an example.
                                                   
             1 1   1                            7  
           0 1 0                              2 
                                                          ∼ g(v)
                                                   
     t=   0 0 1 
                                   −→          1  =
                                                     
           1 0 0                              4 
                                                   
              0 1 1                                3


For p = 11, a = 5, g(v) = 7 + 2v + v 2 + 4v 3 + 2v 4 ∈ F11 [v],

    t is a 5 × 3 matrix that encodes the coefficients of g(v).
                                        
    Let z denote the p2 variables z1 , . . . , zp2 , put in into a p × p matrix. Let S be a set in
the Reed-Solomon-based (p2 , p, a)-combinatorial design. We want to implement the selection
zS algebraically.
                 In the following, we design a vector of polynomials that outputs the vector of
            (p)                    (p)
variables z0,g(0) mod p , . . . , zp−1,g(p−1) mod p . Note that as mentioned above the polynomial
g can be specified via variables t1 , . . . , tr . That is,

        RS-Designp,a (t1 , . . . , tr , z1 , . . . , zp2 ) ∈ (F[t, z])p , for r = a · ⌊log2 p⌋,
                                                                                                          
                                                                           (p)           (p)
      RS-Designp,a (t1 , . . . , tr , z1 , . . . , zp2 )i+1 = Selp,p3 ,p zi,0 , . . . , zi,p−1 , Ri,a,p (t) , ∀i ∈ Fp ,
                                                                                                        
                                                              a−1      ℓp −1
                                                              X         X (ℓ )
                                    where Ri,a,p (t) =                     tj,kp · 2k  · Mod(ij , p) ,
                                                           j=0      k=0

                                             with ℓp = ⌊log2 p⌋ .
                                                                             r
▶ Observation 12. For any prime p, a ≤ p, and t ∈ {0, 1} for r = a · ⌊log2 p⌋, we have
                                        
  RS-Designp,a (t, z) = zi,g(i) : i ∈ Fp ,

where g(v) ∈ Fp [v] is the univariate whose coefficient vector is represented by the bit-vector
t. Furthermore, the polynomial RS-Designp,a is computable by an algebraic circuit of size
poly(p).

5
    Working with ⌊log2 p⌋ bits (as opposed to ⌈log2 p⌉) makes the proofs much simpler, and does not affect
    the size of the design by much.




                                                                                                                          S TA C S 2 0 2 2
44:10   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


                                             r
        Proof. Fix some t ∈ {0, 1} . From the definition of Ri,a,p (t), it is clear that Ri,a,p (t) returns
        an integer α such that g(i) = α mod p where t encodes the coefficients of the polynomial g(t)
        in binary. Furthermore, since Mod(ij , p) is the unique integer c ∈ [0, p − 1] with c = ij mod p,
        it also follows that Ri,a,p (t) is an integer in the range [0, p3 ]. Hence,
                                                        
                        (p)            (p)
            Selp,p3 ,p zi,0 , . . . , zi,p−1 , Ri,a,p (t) = zi,g(i)

        as claimed.                                                                                                      ◀

        3.4     The VNP-Succinct-KI generator
        We are now ready to show the VNP-succinctness of the Kabanets-Impagliazzo hitting set
        generator when using a hard polynomial from VNP and a Reed-Solomon-based combinatorial
        design.
            For a prime p and for the largest number m such that m2 ≤ p, we will use Perm[p] ∈ F[y[p] ]
        to denote Permm applied to the first m2 variables of y.
            We now define the polynomial Fn,a,p (y[n] , z[p2 ] ) as follows.
                                                                X
           Fn,a,p (y1 , . . . , yn , z1 , . . . , zp2 ) =              Monr,n (t, y) · Perm[p] (RS-Designp,a (t, z))   (3.1)
                                                            t∈{0,1}r

                                         where r = a · ⌊log2 p⌋

        It is evident from the above definition that the polynomial Fn,a,p (y, z) is in VNP for any p
        that is poly(n), when seen as a polynomial in y-variables with coefficients from C[z].
            From the construction, we have that
                                                         X
            Fn,a,p (y1 , . . . , yn , z1 , . . . zp2 ) =   ye · Perm[p] (zSe ),
                                                            e

        where {Se } is an appropriate ordering of the Reed-Solomon-based (p2 , p, a)-combinatorial
        design of size pa , described in Subsection 3.3. Note that we define the polynomial Fn,a,p (y, z)
        with three parameters n, a, p although for our purposes we will only use a = n.

        3.5     Putting it all together
        We are now ready to show that if the Permanent polynomial is exponentially hard, then any
        polynomial P that vanishes on the coefficient vectors of all polynomials in the class VNP
        requires super-polynomial size to compute it.

        ▶ Theorem 2 (Conditional Hardness of Equations for VNP). Let ε > 0 be a constant. Suppose,
                                                                                        ε
        for an m large enough, we have that Permm requires circuits of size 2m .
                                                              n+d
                                                                  
            Then, for n = mε/4 , any d ≤ n and N = n , we have that every nonzero polynomial
        P (x1 , . . . , xN ) that vanishes on all coefficient vectors of polynomials in VNPC (n, d) has size
                          4
        at least 20.1n −3n .

        Proof. Let p be the smallest prime larger than m2 ; we know that p ≤ 2m2 . We will again
        use Perm[p] ∈ F[y[p] ] to denote Permm acting on the first m2 variables of y. Therefore, if
                                 ε
        Permm requires size 2m then so does Perm[p] .
        Consider the polynomial Fn,n,p (y[n] , z[p2 ] ) ∈ VNP defined in (3.1), which we interpret as a
        polynomial in y with coefficients in C[z]. The individual degree in y is at least d, and at
        most p.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                       44:11


       ≤d
Let Fn,n,p (y[n] , z[p2 ] ) denote the polynomial obtained from Fn,n,p by discarding all terms
whose total degree in y exceeds d. By standard homogenisation arguments, it follows that
 ≤d
Fn,n,p ∈ VNP as well. Therefore,
                          X
     ≤d
   Fn,n,p (y, z) =              ye · Perm[p] (zSe ),
                   deg(ye )≤d

where Se , for various e, is an appropriate indexing into a (p2 , p, n)-combinatorial design of
                                                                                            ≤d
size N . Since the individual degree in y of Fn,n,p was at least d, every coefficient of Fn,n,p  is
Perm[p] (zS ) for some S in the combinatorial design. In other words, the coefficient vector of
  ≤d
Fn,n,p  is precisely KI-genN,p2 ,p,n (Perm[p] ).
    Suppose P (x1 , . . . , xN ) is a nonzero equation for VNP(n, d), then in particular it should
                                                                              2
                                           ≤d
be zero on the coefficient vector of Fn,n,p    (y, a) ∈ VNP for any a ∈ Cp . By the Polynomial
Identity Lemma [14, 5, 17, 16], this implies that P must be zero on the coefficient vector of
  ≤d
Fn,n,p (y, z) ∈ (C[z])[y], where coefficients are formal polynomials in C[z]. Since the coefficient
             ≤d
vector of Fn,n,p  (y, z) is just KI-genN,p2 ,p,n (Perm[p] ), the contrapositive of Lemma 2.1 gives
that
                  size(Perm[p] )0.1    size(Permm )0.1
          size(P ) >          n
                                    >
                        N ·2                N · 2n
                    0.1mε
                  2
    =⇒ size(P ) >
                  N · 2n
                                                                           4
Since N = n+d   ≤ 22n , it follows that size(P ) is at least at least 20.1n −3n .
              
            n                                                                                    ◀

Concluding that VNP has no efficient equations
Note that for a family {PN } to be a family of equations for a class C, we want that for all
large enough n, the corresponding polynomial PN should vanish on the coefficient vectors of
all n-variate polynomials in C. This condition is particularly important if we want to use
equations for C to prove lower bounds against it, since a family of polynomials {fn } is said
to be computable in size s(n) if size(fn ) ≤ s(n) for all large enough n.
    Theorem 2 shows that, for m large enough, if there is a constant ε > 0 such that
                   ε
size(Permm ) ≥ 2m , then for n = mε/4 and any d ≤ n, the coefficient vectors of polynomials
in VNP(n, d) form a hitting set for all N -variate polynomials (where N = n+d d ) of degree
poly(N ) that are computable by circuits of size poly(N ). Now suppose the Permanent family
      ε                                                             ε
is 2m -hard for a constant ε > 0, which means that Permm is 2m -hard for infinitely many
m ∈ N. Then using Theorem 2, we can conclude that for any family {PN } ∈ VP, we must
                                      −−→
have for infinitely many n that PN (coeff(fn )) ̸= 0 for some fn ∈ VNP, which then shows
that {PN } is not a family of equations for VNP.

 4     Discussion and Open Problems
In the context of proving circuit lower bounds, and in relation to the notion of algebraically
natural proofs, an interesting question that emerges from the recent work of Chatterjee,
Kumar, Ramya, Saptharishi, Tengse [4] (stated in Theorem 1) is whether the condition of
“small coefficients” is necessary for efficiently constructible equations to exist, especially for
the class VP. While this question remains open for VP, our result shows that this additional
restriction on the coefficients is essentially vital for the existence of efficiently constructible
equations for the class VNP, and therefore provides strong evidence against the existence of
efficient equations for VNP.



                                                                                                      S TA C S 2 0 2 2
44:12   If VNP Is Hard, Then so Are Equations for It


            In light of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 for VNP, one could make a case that equations
        for VP might also incur a super-polynomial blow up, without the restriction on coefficients.
        On the other hand, it could also be argued that an analogue of Theorem 2 may not be true
        for VP, since our proof crucially uses the fact that VNP is “closed under exponential sums”.
        In fact, our proof essentially algebrizes the intuition that coefficient vectors of polynomials
        in VNP “look random” to a polynomial in VP, provided that VNP was exponentially more
        powerful than VP.
            Thus, along with the previously known results on efficient equations for polynomials in
        VP with bounded coefficients, our result highlights that the existence of such equations for
        VP in general continues to remain an intriguing mystery.

        Open Problems
        We now conclude with some possible directions for extending our results.

             Perhaps the most interesting question here is to prove an analogue of Theorem 2 for
             equations for VP. This would provide concrete evidence for the possibility that we
             cannot hope to prove very strong lower bounds for algebraic circuits using proofs which
             proceed via efficiently constructible equations, from a fairly standard complexity theoretic
             assumption.
             At the moment, we cannot rule out the possibility of there being efficient equations for
             VP in general; it may be possible that the bounded coefficients condition in Theorem 1
             can be removed. In particular, the question of proving upper bounds on the complexity
             of equations for VP is also extremely interesting, even if one proves such upper bounds
             under some reasonable complexity theoretic assumptions. A first step perhaps would be
             to prove upper bounds on the complexity of potentially simpler models, like formulas,
             algebraic branching programs or constant depth circuits. From the works of Forbes,
             Shpilka and Volk [7], we know that such equations for structured subclasses of VP (like
             depth-3 multilinear circuits) cannot be too simple (such as sparse polynomials, depth-3
             powering circuits, etc.). Can we prove a non-trivial upper bound for equations for these
             structured classes within VP?
             Another question of interest would be to understand if the hardness assumption in The-
             orem 2 can be weakened further. For instance, is it true that VNP does not have efficiently
             constructible equations if VP ̸= VNP, or if Permn requires circuits of size npoly log(n) ?
             The current proof seems to need an exponential lower bound for the Permanent.

               References
         1     Scott Aaranson and Andrew Drucker. Arithmetic natural proofs theory is sought. Shtetl
               Optimized: Scott Aaranson’s Blog, 2008. URL: https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=
               336.
         2     Markus Bläser, Christian Ikenmeyer, Gorav Jindal, and Vladimir Lysikov. Generalized matrix
               completion and algebraic natural proofs. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT
               Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, Los Angeles, CA, USA, June 25-29, 2018,
               pages 1193–1206, 2018. doi:10.1145/3188745.3188832.
         3     Markus Bläser, Christian Ikenmeyer, Vladimir Lysikov, Anurag Pandey, and Frank-Olaf
               Schreyer. Variety membership testing, algebraic natural proofs, and geometric complexity
               theory. CoRR, abs/1911.02534, 2019. arXiv:1911.02534.
         4     Prerona Chatterjee, Mrinal Kumar, C. Ramya, Ramprasad Saptharishi, and Anamay Tengse.
               On the existence of algebraically natural proofs. In Sandy Irani, editor, 61st IEEE Annual
               Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November
               16-19, 2020, pages 870–880. IEEE, 2020. arXiv:2004.14147, doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.
               00085.
M. Kumar, C. Ramya, R. Saptharishi, and A. Tengse                                                      44:13


 5   Richard A. DeMillo and Richard J. Lipton. A Probabilistic Remark on Algebraic Program
     Testing. Information Processing Letters, 7(4):193–195, 1978. doi:10.1016/0020-0190(78)
     90067-4.
 6   Klim Efremenko, Ankit Garg, Rafael Oliveira, and Avi Wigderson. Barriers for rank methods
     in arithmetic complexity. In Anna R. Karlin, editor, 9th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
     Science Conference, ITCS 2018, January 11-14, 2018, Cambridge, MA, USA, volume 94
     of LIPIcs, pages 1:1–1:19. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2018.1.
 7   Michael A. Forbes, Amir Shpilka, and Ben Lee Volk. Succinct hitting sets and barriers
     to proving lower bounds for algebraic circuits. Theory of Computing, 14(1):1–45, 2018.
     doi:10.4086/toc.2018.v014a018.
 8   Ankit Garg, Visu Makam, Rafael Oliveira, and Avi Wigderson. More barriers for rank methods,
     via a "numeric to symbolic" transfer. In David Zuckerman, editor, 60th IEEE Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2019, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, November
     9-12, 2019, pages 824–844. IEEE Computer Society, 2019. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2019.00054.
 9   Joshua A. Grochow. Unifying known lower bounds via geometric complexity theory. Compu-
     tational Complexity, 24(2):393–475, 2015. doi:10.1007/s00037-015-0103-x.
10   Joshua A. Grochow, Mrinal Kumar, Michael E. Saks, and Shubhangi Saraf. Towards an
     algebraic natural proofs barrier via polynomial identity testing. CoRR, abs/1701.01717, 2017.
     arXiv:1701.01717.
11   Valentine Kabanets and Russell Impagliazzo. Derandomizing polynomial identity tests means
     proving circuit lower bounds. Computational Complexity, 13(1-2):1–46, 2004. doi:10.1007/
     s00037-004-0182-6.
12   Mrinal Kumar and Ben Lee Volk. A polynomial degree bound on equations for non-rigid
     matrices and small linear circuits. In James R. Lee, editor, 12th Innovations in Theoretical
     Computer Science Conference, ITCS 2021, January 6-8, 2021, Virtual Conference, volume
     185 of LIPIcs, pages 9:1–9:9. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021. doi:
     10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2021.9.
13   Nutan Limaye, Srikanth Srinivasan, and Sébastien Tavenas. Superpolynomial lower bounds
     against low-depth algebraic circuits. Electron. Colloquium Comput. Complex., page 81, 2021.
     URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/081.
14   Øystein Ore. Über höhere kongruenzen. Norsk Mat. Forenings Skrifter, 1(7):15, 1922.
15   Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 55(1):24–35, 1997. doi:10.1006/jcss.1997.1494.
16   Jacob T. Schwartz. Fast Probabilistic Algorithms for Verification of Polynomial Identities.
     Journal of the ACM, 27(4):701–717, 1980. doi:10.1145/322217.322225.
17   Richard Zippel. Probabilistic algorithms for sparse polynomials. In Symbolic and Algebraic
     Computation, EUROSAM ’79, An International Symposiumon Symbolic and Algebraic Com-
     putation, volume 72 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 216–226. Springer, 1979.
     doi:10.1007/3-540-09519-5_73.




                                                                                                     S TA C S 2 0 2 2
