Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs: Constructions and
Applications to Property Testing
Oded Goldreich #
Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

Avi Wigderson #
School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, USA

      Abstract
A graph G is called self-ordered (a.k.a asymmetric) if the identity permutation is its only automorph-
ism. Equivalently, there is a unique isomorphism from G to any graph that is isomorphic to G. We
say that G = (V, E) is robustly self-ordered if the size of the symmetric difference between E and the
edge-set of the graph obtained by permuting V using any permutation π : V → V is proportional to
the number of non-fixed-points of π. In this work, we initiate the study of the structure, construction
and utility of robustly self-ordered graphs.
    We show that robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs exist (in abundance), and that they
can be constructed efficiently, in a strong sense. Specifically, given the index of a vertex in such a
graph, it is possible to find all its neighbors in polynomial-time (i.e., in time that is poly-logarithmic
in the size of the graph).
    We provide two very different constructions, in tools and structure. The first, a direct construction,
is based on proving a sufficient condition for robust self-ordering, which requires that an auxiliary
graph is expanding. The second construction is iterative, boosting the property of robust self-ordering
from smaller to larger graphs. Structuraly, the first construction always yields expanding graphs,
while the second construction may produce graphs that have many tiny (sub-logarithmic) connected
components.
    We also consider graphs of unbounded degree, seeking correspondingly unbounded robustness
parameters. We again demonstrate that such graphs (of linear degree) exist (in abundance), and
that they can be constructed efficiently, in a strong sense. This turns out to require very different
tools. Specifically, we show that the construction of such graphs reduces to the construction of
non-malleable two-source extractors (with very weak parameters but with some additional natural
features).
    We demonstrate that robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs are useful towards obtaining
lower bounds on the query complexity of testing graph properties both in the bounded-degree and
the dense graph models. Indeed, their robustness offers efficient, local and distance preserving
reductions from testing problems on ordered structures (like sequences) to the unordered (effectively
unlabeled) graphs. One of the results that we obtain, via such a reduction, is a subexponential
separation between the query complexities of testing and tolerant testing of graph properties in the
bounded-degree graph model.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Generating random combinatorial
structures

Keywords and phrases Asymmetric graphs, expanders, testing graph properties, two-source extract-
ors, non-malleable extractors, coding theory, tolerant testing, random graphs

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2021.12

Funding Oded Goldreich: Partially supported by an ISF grant number (Nr. 1146/18).
Avi Wigderson: Partially supported by NSF grant CCF-1900460.

Acknowledgements We are grateful to Eshan Chattopadhyay for discussions regarding non-malleable
two-source extractors, and to Dana Ron for discussions regarding tolerant testing. We are deeply
indebted to Jyun-Jie Liao for pointing out an error in the proof of [23, Lem. 9.7].
            © Oded Goldreich and Avi Wigderson;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
36th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2021).
Editor: Valentine Kabanets; Article No. 12; pp. 12:1–12:74
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
12:2   Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs


           1     Introduction
       For a (labeled) graph G = (V, E), and a bijection ϕ : V → V ′ , we denote by ϕ(G) the graph
       G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) such that E ′ = {{ϕ(u), ϕ(v)} : {u, v} ∈ E}, and say that G′ is isomorphic to G.
       The set of automorphisms of the graph G = (V, E), denoted aut(G), is the set of permutations
       that preserve the graph G; that is, π ∈ aut(G) if and only if π(G) = G. We say that a
       graph is asymmetric (equiv., self-ordered) if its set of automorphisms is a singleton, which
       consists of the trivial automorphism (i.e., the identity permutation). We actually prefer the
       term self-ordered, because we take the perspective that is offered by the following equivalent
       definition.

       ▶ Definition 1.1 (self-ordered (a.k.a asymmetric) graphs). The graph G = ([n], E) is self-
       ordered if for every graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to G there exists a unique bijection
       ϕ : V ′ → [n] such that ϕ(G′ ) = G.

       In other words, given an isomorphic copy G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) of a fixed graph G = ([n], E), there
       is a unique bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n] that orders the vertices of G′ such that the resulting graph
       (i.e., ϕ(G′ )) is identical to G. Indeed, if G′ = G, then this unique bijection is the identity
       permutation.1
            In this work, we consider a feature, which we call robust self-ordering, that is a quantitative
       version self-ordering. Loosely speaking, a graph G = ([n], E) is robustly self-ordered if, for
       every permutation π : [n] → [n], the size of the symmetric difference between G and π(G) is
       proportional to the number of non-fixed-points under π; that is, |E△{{π(u), π(v)} : {u, v} ∈
       E}| is proportional to |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i}|. (In contrast, self-ordering only means that the size
       of the symmetric difference is positive if the number of non-fixed-points is positive.)

       ▶ Definition 1.2 (robustly self-ordered graphs). A graph G = (V, E) is said to be γ-robustly
       self-ordered if for every permutation π : V → V it holds that

               E△ {{π(u), π(v)} : {u, v} ∈ E}   ≥ γ · |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i}|,                               (1)

       where △ denotes the symmetric differece operation. An infinite family of graphs {Gn =
       ([n], En )}n∈N (such that each Gn has maximum degree d) is called robustly self-ordered if
       there exists a constant γ > 0, called the robustness parameter, such that for every n the graph
       Gn is γ-robustly self-ordered.

       Note that |En △{{π(u), π(v)} : {u, v} ∈ En }| ≤ 2d · |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i}| always holds (for
       families of maximum degree d). The term “robust” is inspired by the property testing literature
       (cf. [31]), where it indicates that some “parametrized violation” is reflected proportionally in
       some “detection parameter”.
            The second part of Definition 1.2 is tailored for bounded-degree graphs, which will be
       our focus in Section 2–6. Nevertheless, in Sections 7–10 we consider graphs of unbounded
       degree and unbounded robustness parameters. In this case, for a function ρ : N → R, we say
       that an infinite family of graphs {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N is ρ-robustly self-ordered if for every n
       the graph Gn is ρ(n)-robustly self-ordered. Naturally, in this case, the graphs must have
       Ω(ρ(n) · n) edges.2 In Sections 7–9 we consider the case of ρ(n) = Ω(n).


       1
         Naturally, we are interested in efficient algorithms that find this unique ordering, whenever it exists;
         such algorithms are known when the degree of the graph is bounded [29].
       2
         Actually, all but at most one vertex must have degree at least ρ(n)/2.
O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson                                                                                         12:3


1.1       Robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs
The first part of this paper (i.e., Section 2–6) focuses on the study of robustly self-ordered
bounded-degree graphs.


1.1.1       Our main results and motivation
We show that robustly self-ordered (n-vertex) graphs of bounded-degree not only exist (for
all n ∈ N), but can be efficiently constructed in a strong (or local) sense. Specifically, we
prove the following result.

▶ Theorem 1.3 (constructing robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs). For all sufficiently
large d ∈ N, there exist an infinite family of d-regular robustly self-ordered graphs {Gn }n∈N
and a polynomial-time algorithm that, given n ∈ N and a vertex v ∈ [n] in the n-vertex graph
Gn , finds all neighbors of v (in Gn ).

We stress that the algorithm runs in time that is polynomial in the description of the
vertex; that is, the algorithm runs in time that is polylogarithmic in the size of the graph.
Theorem 1.3 holds both for graphs that consists of connected components of logarithmic size
and for “strongly connected” graphs (i.e., expanders).
    Recall that given an isomorphic copy G′ of such a graph Gn , the original graph Gn (i.e.,
along with its unique ordering) can be found in polynomial-time [29]. Furthermore, we show
that the pre-image of each vertex of G′ in the graph Gn (i.e., its index in the aforementioned
ordering) can be found in time that is polylogarithmic in the size of the graph (see discussion
in Section 4.4, culminating in Theorem 4.7).3
    We present two proofs of Theorem 1.3. Loosely speaking, the first proof reduces to proving
that a 2d-regular n-vertex graph representing the action of d permutations on [n] is robustly
self-ordered if the n(n − 1)-vertex graph representing the action of these permutations on
vertex-pairs is an expander. The graphs constructed in this proof are expanders, whereas the
graphs constructed via by the second proof can be either expanders or consist of connected
components of logarithmic size. More importantly, the graphs constructed in the second
proof are couple with local self-ordering and local reversed self-ordering algorithms (see
Section 4.4). The second proof proceeds in three steps, starting from the mere existence
of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree ℓ-vertex graphs, which yields a construction that
runs in poly(ℓℓ )-time. Next, a poly(n)-time construction of n-vertex graphs is obtained by
using the former graphs as small subgraphs (of o(log n)-size). Lastly, strong (a.k.a local)
constructability is obtained in an analogous manner. For more details, see Section 1.1.2.
    We demonstrate that robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs are useful towards
obtaining lower bounds on the query complexity of testing graph properties in the bounded-
degree graph model. Specifically, we use these graphs as a key ingredient in a general
methodology of transporting lower bounds regarding testing binary strings to lower bounds
regarding testing graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model. In particular, using
the methodology, we prove the following two results.


3
    The algorithm asserted above is said to perform local self-ordering of G′ according to Gn . For ϕ(G′ ) = Gn ,
    given a vertex v in G′ , this algorithm returns ϕ(v) in poly(log n)-time. In contrast, a local reversed
    self-ordering algorithm is given a vertex i ∈ [n] of Gn and returns ϕ−1 (i). The second algorithm is also
    presented in Section 4.4 (see Theorem 4.9).




                                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:4   Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs


       1. A subexponential separation between the complexities of testing and tolerant testing of
           graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model; that is, for some constant c > 0, the
           query complexity of tolerant testing is at least exp(q c ), where q is the query complexity
           of standard testing.
           This result, which appears as Theorem 5.5, is obtained by transporting an analogous
           result that was known for testing binary strings [15].
       2. A linear query complexity lower bound for testing an efficiently recognizable graph
           property in the bounded-degree graph model, where the lower bound holds even if the
           tested graph is restricted to consist of connected components of logarithmic size (see
           Theorem 5.2).
           As discussed in Section 5, an analogous result was known in the general case (i.e., without
           the restriction on the size of the connected components), and we consider it interesting
           that the result holds also in the special case of graphs with small connected components.
       To get a feeling of why robustly self-ordered graphs are relevant to such transportation, recall
       that strings are ordered objects, whereas graphs properties are effectively sets of unlabeled
       graphs, which are unordered objects. Hence, we need to make the graphs (in the property)
       ordered, and furthermore make this ordering robust in the very sense that is reflected in
       Definition 1.2. Furthermore, local self-ordering algorithms are used for transporting lower
       bounds (and local reversed self-ordering algorithms are used for transporting upper bounds).
       We comment that the theme of reducing ordered structures to unordered structures occur
       often in the theory of computation and in logic, and is often coupled with analogous of query
       complexity.
           Lastly, in Section 6, we prove that random 2d-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered;
       see Theorem 6.1. This extends work in probabilistic graph theory, which proves a similar
       result for the weaker notion of self-ordering [5, 4].

       1.1.2     Techniques
       As stated above, we present two different constructions that establish Theorem 1.3: A direct
       construction and a three-step construction. Both constructions utilize a variant of the notion
       of robust self-ordering that refers to edge-colored graphs, which we review first.

       1.1.2.1   The edge-coloring methodology
       At several different points, we found it useful to start by demonstrating the robust self-
       ordering feature in a relaxed model in which edges are assigned a constant number of colors,
       and the symmetric difference between graphs accounts also for edges that have different
       colors in the two graphs (see Definition 2.1). This allows us to analyze different sets of edges
       separately.
           For example, we actually analyze the direct construction in the edge-colored model,
       since this allows for identifying each of the underlying permutations with a different color.
       Another example, which arises in the three-step construction, occurs when we super-impose a
       robustly self-ordered graph with an expander graph in order to make the robustly self-ordered
       graph expanding (as needed for the second and third step of the aforementioned three-step
       construction). In this case, assigning the edges of each of the two graphs a different color,
       allows for easily retaining the robust self-ordering feature (of the first graph).
           We obtain robustly self-ordered graphs (in the original sense) by replacing all edges that
       are assigned a specific color with copies of a constant-sized (asymmetric) gadget, where
       different (and in fact non-isomorphic) gadgets are used for different edge colors. The soundness
       of this transformation is proved in Theorem 2.4.
O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson                                                                                              12:5


1.1.2.2       The direct construction

For any d permutations, π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n], we consider the Schreier graph (see [25,
Sec. 11.1.2]) defined by the action of these permutation on [n]; that is, the edge-set of
this graph is {{v, πi (v)} : v ∈ [n] & i ∈ [d]}. Loosely speaking, we prove that this 2d-regular
n-vertex graph is robustly self-ordered if another Schreier graph is an expander. The second
Schreier graph represents the action of the same permutations on pairs of vertices (in
[n]); that is, this graph consisting of the vertex-set {(u, v) : u, v ∈ [n]} and the edge-set
{{(u, v), (πi (u), πi (v))} : u, v ∈ [n] & i ∈ [d]}.4
    The argument is actually made with respect to edge-colored directed graphs (i.e., the
edge-set of the first graph is {(v, πi (v)) : v ∈ [n] & i ∈ [d]} and the directed edge (v, πi (v))
is assigned the color i). Hence, we also present a transformation of robustly self-ordered
edge-colored directed graphs to analogous undirected graphs. Specifically, we replace the
directed edge (u, v) colored j by a 2-path with a designated auxiliary vertex au,v,j , while
coloring the edge {u, au,v,j } by 2j − 1 and the edge {au,v,j , v} by 2j.
    We comment that permutations satisfying the foregoing condition can be efficiently
constructed; for example, any set of expanding generators for SL2 (p) (e.g., the one used
by [28]) yield such permutations on [n] ≡ {(1, i) : i ∈ GF(p)} ∪ {(0, 1)} (see Proposition 3.3).5


1.1.2.3       The three-step construction

Our alternative construction of robustly self-ordered (bounded-degree) n-vertex graphs
proceeds in three steps.
1. First, we prove the existence of bounded-degree n-vertex graphs that are robustly self-
   ordered (see Theorem 4.1), while observing that this yields a exp(O(n log n))-time al-
   gorithm for constructing them.
2. Next (see Theorem 4.2), we use the latter algorithm to construct robustly self-ordered
   n-vertex bounded-degree graphs that consist of 2ℓ-sized connected components, where
   ℓ = O(log  n)
       log log n ; these connected components are far from being isomorphic to one another,
   and are constructed using robustly self-ordered ℓ-vertex graphs as a building block.
   This yields an algorithm that constructs the n-vertex graph in poly(n)-time, since
   exp(O(ℓ log ℓ)) = poly(n).
3. Lastly, we derive Theorem 1.3 (restated as Theorem 4.5) by repeating the same strategy
   as in Step 2, but using the construction of Theorem 4.2 for the construction of the small
   connected components (and setting ℓ = O(log n)). This yields an algorithm that finds the
   neighbors of a vertex in the n-vertex graph in poly(log n)-time, since poly(ℓ) = poly(log n).
The foregoing description of Steps 2 and 3 yields graphs that consists of small connected
components. We obtain analogous results for “strongly connected” graphs (i.e., expanders)
by superimposing these graphs with expander graphs (while distinguishing the two types
of edges by using colors (see the foregoing discussion)). In fact, it is essential to perform
this transformation (on the result of Step 2) before taking Step 3; the transformation itself
appears in the proof of Theorem 2.6.


4
    Equivalently, we consider only pairs of distinct vertices; that is, the vertex-set {(u, v) : u, v ∈ [n] & u ̸= v}.
5
    In this case, the primary Schreier graph represents the natural action of the group on the 1-dimensional
    subspaces of GF(p)2 .




                                                                                                                         CCC 2021
12:6   Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs


       1.1.2.4    Using large collections of pairwise far apart permutations
       One ingredient in the foregoing three-step construction is the use of a single ℓ-vertex
       robustly self-ordered (bounded-degree) graph towards obtaining a large collection of 2ℓ-vertex
       (bounded-degree) graphs such that every two graphs are far from being isomorphic to one
       another, where “large” means exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) in one case (i.e., in the proof of Theorem 4.2)
       and exp(Ω(ℓ)) in another case (i.e., in the proof of Theorem 4.5). Essentially, this is done by
       constructing a large collection of permutations of [ℓ] that are pairwise far-apart, and letting
       the ith graph consists of two copies of the ℓ-vertex graph that are matched according to the
       ith permutation (see the aforementioned proofs). (Actually, we use two robustly self-ordered
       ℓ-vertex graphs that are far from being isomorphic (e.g., have different degree).)
           A collection of L = exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) pairwise far-apart permutations over [ℓ] can be
       constructed in poly(L)-time by selecting the permutations one by one, while relying on the
       existence of a permutation that augments the current sequence (while preserving the distance
       condition, see the proof of Theorem 4.2). A collection of L = exp(Ω(ℓ)) pairwise far-apart
       permutations over [ℓ] can be locally constructed such that the ith permutation is constructed
       in poly(ℓ)-time by using sequences of disjoint transpositions determined via a good error
       correcting code (see the proof of Theorem 4.5).
           The foregoing discussion begs the challenge of obtaining a construction of a collection of
       L = exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) permutations over [ℓ] that are pairwise far-apart along with a polynomial-
       time algorithm that, on input i ∈ [L], returns a description of the ith permutation (i.e.,
       the algorithm should run in poly(log L)-time). We meet this challenge in [21]. Note that
       such a collection constitutes a an asymptotically good code over the alphabet [ℓ], where the
       permutations are the codewords (being far-apart corresponds to constant relative distance
       and log L = Ω(log(ℓ!)) corresponds to constant rate).

       1.1.2.5    On the failure of some natural approaches
       We mention that natural candidates for robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs fail.
       In particular, there exist expander graphs that are not robustly self-ordered. In fact, any
       Cayley graph is symmetric (i.e., has non-trivial automorphisms).6
          In light of the above, it is interesting that expansion can serve as a sufficient condition for
       robust self-ordering (as explained in the foregoing review of the direct construction); recall,
       however, that this works for Schreier graphs, and expansion needs to hold for the action on
       vertex-pairs.

       1.1.2.6    On optimization
       We made no attempt to minimize the degree bound and maximize the robustness parameter.
       Note that we can obtain 3-regular robustly self-ordered graphs by applying degree reduction;
       that is, given a d-regular graph, we replace each vertex by a d-cycle and use each of these
       vertices to “hook” one original edge. To facilitate the analysis, we may use one color for the
       edges of the d-cycles and another color for the other (i.e., original) edges.7 Hence, the issue
       at hand is actually one of maximizing the robustness parameter of the resulting 3-regular
       graphs.


       6
         Specifically, multiplying the vertex labels (say, on the right) by any non-zero group element yields a
         non-trivial automorphism (assuming that edges are defined by multiplying with a generator on the left).
         Such automorphisms cannot be constructed in general for Schreier graphs, and some Schreier graphs
         have no automorphisms (e.g., the ones we construct here).
       7
         Needless to say, we later replace all colored edges by copies of adequate constant-sized gadgets.
O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson                                                                      12:7


1.1.2.7   Caveat (tedious)
Whenever we assert a d-regular n-vertex graph, we assume that the trivial conditions hold;
specifically, we assume that n > d and that nd is even (or, alternatively, allow for one
exceptional vertex of degree d − 1).

1.2     Robustly self-ordered dense graphs
In the second part of this paper (i.e., Sections 7–10) we consider graphs of unbounded degree,
seeking correspondingly unbounded robustness parameters. In particular, we are interested
in n-vertex graphs that are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered, which means that they must have
Ω(n2 ) edges.
    The construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs offers yet another alternative
approach towards the construction of bounded-degree graphs that are Ω(1)-robustly self-
ordered. Specifically, we show that n-vertex graphs that are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered can
be efficiently transformed into O(n2 )-vertex bounded-degree graphs that are Ω(1)-robustly
self-ordered; see Proposition 7.2, which is essentially proved by the “degree reduction via
expanders” technique, while using a different color for the expanders’ edges, and then using
gadgets to replace colored edges (see Theorem 2.4).

1.2.1     Our main results
It is quite easy to show that random n-vertex graphs are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered (see
Proposition 7.1); in fact, the proof is easier than the proof of the analogous result for
bounded-degree graphs (Theorem 6.1). Unfortunately, constructing n-vertex graphs that
are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered seems to be no easier constructing robustly self-ordered
bounded-degree graphs. In particular, it seems to require completely different techniques
and tools.
▶ Theorem 1.4 (constructing Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs). There exist an infinite family
of dense Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs {Gn }n∈N and a polynomial-time algorithm that,
given n ∈ N and a pair of vertices u, v ∈ [n] in the n-vertex graph Gn , determines whether
or not u is adjacent to v in Gn .
Unlike in the case of bounded-degree graphs, in general, we cannot rely on an efficient
isomorphism test for finding the original ordering of Gn , when given an isomorphic copy of
it. However, we can obtain dense Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs for which this ordering
can be found efficiently (see Theorem 8.10).
    Our proof of Theorem 1.4 is by a reduction to the construction of non-malleable two-source
extractors, where a suitable construction of the latter was provided by Chattopadhyay, Goyal,
and Li [7]. We actually present two different reductions (Theorems 8.3 and 8.7), one simpler
than the other but yielding a less efficient construction when combined with the known
constructions of extractors. We mention that the first reduction (Theorem 8.3) is partially
reversible (see Proposition 8.5, which reverses a special case captured in Remark 8.4).
    We show that Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs can be used to transport lower
bounds regarding testing binary strings to lower bounds regarding testing graph properties
in the dense graph model. This general methodology, presented in Section 9, is analogous to
the methodology for the bounded-degree graph model, which is presented in Section 5.
    We mention that in a follow-up work [22], we employed this methodology in order to
resolve several open problems regarding the relation between adaptive and non-adaptive
testers in the dense graph model. In particular, we proved that there exist graph properties



                                                                                                 CCC 2021
12:8   Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs


       for which any non-adaptive tester must have query complexity that is almost quadratic in
       the query complexity of the best general (i.e., adaptive) tester, whereas it has been known for
       a couple of decades that the query complexity of non-adaptive testers is at most quadratic in
       the query complexity of adaptive testers.

       The case of intermediate degree bounds
       Lastly, in Section 10, we consider n-vertex graphs of degree bound d(n), for every d : N → N
       such that d(n) ∈ [Ω(1), n]. Indeed, the bounded-degree case (studied in Section 2–6) and the
       dense graph case (studied in Sections 7–9) are special cases (which correspond to d(n) = O(1)
       and d(n) = n). Using results from these two special cases, we show how to construct
       Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs of maximum degree d(n), for all d : N → N.


       1.2.2    Techniques
       As evident from the foregoing description, we reduce the construction of Ω(n)-robustly
       self-ordered n-vertex graphs to the construction of non-malleable two-source extractors.
           Non-malleable two-source extractors were introduced in [8], as a variant on seeded (one-
       source) non-malleable extractors, which were introduced in [12]. Loosely speaking, we say that
       nmE : {0, 1}ℓ × {0, 1}ℓ → {0, 1}m is a non-malleable two-source extractor for a class of sources
       C if for every two independent sources in C, denoted X ands Y , and for every two functions
       f, g : {0, 1}ℓ → {0, 1}ℓ that have no fixed-point it holds that (nmE(X, Y ), nmE(f (X), g(Y ))) is
       close to (Um , nmE(f (X), g(Y )), where Um denotes the uniform distribution over {0, 1}m . We
       show that a non-malleable two-source extractor for the class of ℓ-bit sources of min-entropy
       ℓ − O(1), with a single output bit (i.e., m = 1) and constant error, suffices for constructing
       Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs. Recall that constructions with much stronger
       parameters (e.g., min-entropy ℓ − ℓΩ(1) , negligible error, and m = ℓΩ(1) ) were provided
       by Chattopadhyay, Goyal, and Li [7, Thm. 1]. (These constructions are quite complex.
       Interestingly, we are not aware of a simpler way of obtaining the weaker parameters that we
       need.)
           Actually, we show two reductions of the construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-
       vertex graphs to the construction of non-malleable two-source extractors. In both cases
       we use extractors that operate on pairs of sources of length ℓ = log2 n − O(1) that have
       min-entropy k = ℓ − O(1), hereafter called (ℓ, k)-sources. The extractor is used to define
       a bipartite graph with 2ℓ vertices on each side, and a clique is placed on the vertices of
       one side so that a permutation that maps vertices from one side to the other side yields a
       proportional symmetric difference (between the original graph and the resulting graph).
           The first reduction, presented in Theorem 8.3, requires the extractor to be quasi-orthogonal,
       which means that the residual functions obtained by any two different fixings of one of the
       extractor’s two arguments are almost unbiased and uncorrelated. Using the fact that non-
       malleable two-source extractors for (ℓ, k)-sources can we made quasi-orthogonal in exp(ℓ)-time,
       we obtain an explicit construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs (i.e., the
       n-vertex graph is constructed in poly(n)-time).
           The second reduction, presented in Theorem 8.7, yields a strongly explicit construction
       as asserted in Theorem 1.4 (i.e., the adjacency predicate of the n-vertex graph is computable
       in poly(log n)-time). This reduction uses an arbitrary non-malleable two-source extractor,
       and shifts the quasi-orthogonality condition to two auxiliary bipartite graphs.
           Both reductions are based on the observation that if the number of non-fixed-points (of
       the permutation) is very large, then the non-malleability condition implies a large symmetric
       difference (between the original graph and the resulting graph). This holds as long as there
O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson                                                                              12:9


are at least Ω(2ℓ ) non-fixed-points on each of the two sides of the corresponding bipartite
graph (which corresponds to the extractor). The complementary case is handled by the
quasi-orthogonality condition, and this is where the two reductions differ.
    The simpler case, presented in the first construction (i.e., Theorem 8.3), is that the
extractor itself is quasi-orthogonal. In this case we consider the non-fixed-points on the
side that has more of them. The quasi-orthogonality condition gives us a contribution of
approximately 0.5 · 2ℓ units per each non-fixed-point, whereas the upper-bound on the number
of non-fixed-points on the other side implies that most of these contributions actually count
in the symmetric difference (between the original graph and the resulting graph).
    In the second construction (i.e., Theorem 8.7), we augment the foregoing 2ℓ -by-2ℓ bipartite
graph, which is now determined by any non-malleable extractor, with an additional 4·2ℓ -vertex
clique that is connected to the two original 2ℓ -vertex sets by a bipartite graph that is merely
quasi-orthogonal. The analysis is analogous to the one used in the proof of Theorem 8.3, but
is slightly more complex because we are dealing with a slightly more complex graph.

Errata regarding the original posting
We retract the claims made in our initial posting [23] regarding the construction of non-
malleable two-source extractors (which are quasi-orthogonal) as well as the claims about the
construction of relocation-detecting codes (see Theorems 1.5 and 1.6 in the original version).8
The source of trouble is a fundamental flaw in the proof of [23, Lem. 9.7], which may as well
be wrong.

1.3      Perspective
Asymmetric graphs were famously studied by Erdos and Renyi [14], who considered the
(absolute) distance of asymmetric graphs from being symmetric (i.e., the number of edges
that should be removed or added to a graph to make it symmetric), calling this quantity the
degree of asymmetry. They studied the extremal question of determining the largest possible
degree of asymmetry of n-vertex graphs (as a function of n). We avoided the term “robust
asymmetry” because it could be confused with the degree of asymmetry, which is a very
different notion. In particular, the degree of asymmetry cannot exceed twice the degree of
the graph (e.g., by disconnecting two vertices), whereas our focus is on robustly self-ordered
graphs of bounded-degree.
    We mention that Bollobas proved that, for every constant d ≥ 3, almost all d-regular
graphs are asymmetric [5, 4]. This result was extended to varying d ∈ [3, n − 4] by Kim,
Sudakov, and Vu [26]. We also mention that their proof of [26, Thm. 3.1] implies that a
random n-vertex Erdos–Renyi graph with edge probability p is 2p(1 − p)n-robustly self-
ordered.

1.4      Roadmaps
This work consists of two parts. The first part (Sections 2–6) refers to bounded-degree graphs,
and the second part (Sections 7–10) refers to dense graphs. These parts are practically
independent of one another, except that Theorem 10.3 builds upon Section 6. Even when
focusing on one of these two parts, its contents may attract attention from diverse perspectives.
Each such perspective may benefit from a different roadmap.


8
    In [23] quasi-orthogonality is called niceness; we prefer the current term, which is less generic.




                                                                                                         CCC 2021
12:10   Robustly Self-Ordered Graphs


        Efficient combinatorial constructions

        As mentioned above, in the regime of bounded-degree graphs we present two different
        constructions that establish Theorem 1.3. Both constructions make use of the edge-colored
        model and the transformations presented in Section 2. The direct construction is presented in
        Section 3, and the three-step construction appears in Section 4. The three-step construction is
        augmented by local self-ordering and local reversed self-ordering algorithms (see Section 4.4).9
        In the regime of dense graphs, Sections 7 and 8 refer to the constructability of a couple of
        combinatorial objects; see roadmap “for the dense case” below.


        Potential applications to property testing

        In Section 5 we demonstrate applications of Theorem 1.3 to proving lower bounds (on the
        query complexity) for the bounded-degree graph testing model. Specifically, we present
        a methodology of transporting bounds regarding testing properties of strings to bounds
        regarding testing properties of bounded-degree graphs. The specific applications presented in
        Section 5 rely on Section 4. For the first application (Theorem 5.2) the construction presented
        in Section 4.2 suffices; for the second application (i.e., Theorem 5.5, which establishes a
        separation between testing and tolerant testing in the bounded-degree graph model), the
        local computation tasks studied in Section 4.4 are needed. An analogous methodology for
        the dense graph testing model is presented in Section 9.


        Properties of random graphs

        As stated above, it turns out that random O(1)-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered.
        This result is presented in Section 6, and this section can be read independently of any other
        section. (In addition, Section 7 presents a proof that random (dense) n-vertex graphs are
        O(n)-robustly self-ordered.)


        The dense case and non-malleable two-source extractors

        The regime of dense graphs is studied in Sections 7–9, where the construction of such graphs
        is undertaken in Section 8. In Section 7, we show that Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex
        graphs provide yet another way of obtaining Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs.
        In Section 8, we reduce the construction of O(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs to the
        construction of non-malleable two-source extractors. As outlined in Section 1.2.2, we actually
        present two different reductions, where a key issue is the quasi-orthogonality condition.
            Lastly, in Section 10, for every d : N → N such that d(n) ∈ [Ω(1), n], we show how to
        construct n-vertex graphs of maximum degree d(n) that are Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered.
        Some of the results and techniques presented in this section are also relevant to the setting
        of bounded-degree graphs.




        9
            For a locally constructable Gn and G′ = ϕ−1 (Gn ), a local self-ordering algorithm is given a vertex v in
            G′ , and returns ϕ(v). In contrast, a local reversed self-ordering algorithm is given a vertex i ∈ [n] of Gn
            and returns ϕ−1 (i). Both algorithms run in poly(log n)-time.
                                                                                                      12:11


Part I

The Case of Bounded-Degree Graphs
As stated in Section 1.1.2, a notion of robust self-ordering of edge-colored graphs plays a
pivotal role in our study of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs. This notion as
well as a transformation from it to the uncolored version (of Definition 1.2) is presented in
Section 2.
    In Section 3, we present a direct construction of O(1)-regular robustly self-ordered
edge-colored graphs; applying the foregoing transformation, this provides our first proof of
Theorem 1.3. Our second proof of Theorem 1.3 is presented in Section 4, and consists of a
three-step process (as outlined in Section 1.1.2). Sections 3 and 4 can be read independently
of one another, but both rely on Section 2.
    In Section 5 we demonstrate the applicability of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree
graphs to property testing; specifically, to proving lower bounds (on the query complexity)
for the bounded-degree graph testing model. For these applications, the global notion of
constructability, established in Section 4.2, suffices. This construction should be preferred over
the direct construction presented in Section 3, because it yields graphs with small connected
components. More importantly, the subexponential separation between the complexities of
testing and tolerant testing of graph properties (i.e., Theorem 5.5) relies on the construction
of Section 4 and specifically on the local computation tasks studied in Section 4.4.
    Lastly, in Section 6, we prove that random O(1)-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered.
This section may be read independently of any other section.


 2         The Edge-Colored Variant
Many of our arguments are easier to make in a model of (bounded-degree) graphs in which
edges are colored (by a bounded number of colors), and where one counts the number of
mismatches between colored edges. Namely, an edge that appears in one (edge-colored)
graph contributes to the count if it either does not appear in the other (edge-colored) graph
or appears in it under a different color. Hence, we define a notion of robust self-ordering for
edge-colored graphs. We shall then transform robustly self-ordered edge-colored graphs to
robustly self-ordered ordinary (uncolored) graphs, while preserving the degree, the asymptotic
number of vertices, and other features such as expansion and degree-regularity. Specifically,
the transformation consists of replacing the colored edges by copies of different connected,
asymmetric (constant-sized) gadgets such that different colors are reflected by different
gadgets.
    We start by providing the definition of the edge-colored model. Actually, for greater
flexibility, we will consider multi-graphs; that is, graphs with possible parallel edges and
self-loops. Hence, we shall consider multi-graphs G = (V, E) coupled with an edge-coloring
function χ : E → N, where E is a multi-set containing both pairs of vertices and singletons
(representing self-loops). Actually, it will be more convenient to represent self-loops as
2-element multi-sets containing two copies of the same vertex.

▶ Definition 2.1 (robust self-ordering of edge-colored multi-graphs). Let G = (V, E) be a
multi-graph with colored edges, where χ : E → N denotes this coloring, and let Ei denote the
multi-set of edges colored i (i.e., Ei = {e ∈ E : χ(e) = i}). We say that (G, χ) is γ-robustly
self-ordered if for every permutation µ : V → V it holds that
     X
           Ei △ {{µ(u), µ(v)} : {u, v} ∈ Ei }   ≥ γ · |{i ∈ V : µ(i) ̸= i}|,                  (2)
     i∈N

                                                                                                     CCC 2021
12:12


        where A△B denotes the symmetric difference between the multi-sets A and B; that is A△B
        contains t occurrences of e if the absolute difference between the number of occurrences of e
        in A and B equals t.

        (Definition 1.2 is obtained as a special case when the multi-graph is actually a graph and all
        edges are assigned the same color.)
            We stress that whenever we consider “edge-colored graphs” we actually refer to edge-
        colored multi-graphs (i.e., we explicitly allow parallel edges and self-loops).10 In contrast,
        whenever we consider (uncolored) graph, we refer to simple graphs (with no parallel edges
        and no self-loops).
            Our transformation of robustly self-ordered edge-colored multi-graphs to robustly self-
        ordered ordinary graphs depends on the number of colors used by the multi-graph. In
        particular, γ-robustness of edge-colored multi-graph that uses c colors gets translated to
        (γ/f (c))-robustness of the resulting graph, where f : N → N is an unbounded function.
        Hence, we focus on coloring functions that use a constant number of colors, denoted c. That
        is, fixing a constant c ∈ N, we shall consider multi-graphs G = (V, E) coupled with an
        edge-coloring function χ : E → [c].

        2.1       Transformation to standard (uncolored) version
        As a preliminary step for the transformation, we add self-loops to all vertices and make sure
        that parallel edges are assigned different colors. The self-loops make it easy to distinguish
        the original vertices from auxiliary vertices that are parts of gadgets introduced in the
        main transformation. Different colors assigned to parallel edges are essential to the mere
        asymmetry of the resulting graph, since we are going to replace edges of the same color by
        copies of the same gadget.

        ▶ Construction 2.2 (preliminary step towards Construction 2.3). For a fixed d ≥ 3, given a
        multi-graph G = (V, E) of maximum degree d and an edge-coloring function χ : E → [c], we
        define a multi-graph G = (V, E ′ ) and an edge-coloring function χ′ : E ′ → [d · c + 1] as follows.
         1. For every ′pair of vertices u and v that are connected by few parallel edges, denoted
             (1)         (d )                          (i)         (i)                      (i)
            eu,v , ..., eu,v , we change the color of eu,v to χ′ (eu,v ) ← (i − 1) · d + χ(eu,v ). This includes
            also the case u = v.
         2. We augment the multi-graph with self-loops colored d · c + 1; that is, E ′ is the multi-set
            E ∪ {ev : v ∈ V }, where ev is a self-loop added to v, and χ′ (ev ) = dc + 1.
        (Other edges e ∈ E maintain their color; that is, them χ′ (e) = χ(e) holds).

        (For simplicity, we re-color all parallel edges, save the first one, rather than re-coloring
        only parallel edges of the same color.) Note that refining the coloring may only increase
        the robustness parameter of a multi-graph. Clearly, G′ preserves many features of G. In
        particular, it preserves γ-robust self-ordering, expansion, degree-regularity, and the number
        of vertices.


        10
             We comment that a seemingly more appealing
                                                              definition can be used for edge-colored (simple) graphs.
             Specifically, in that case (i.e., E ⊆ V2 ), we can extend χ : E → N to non-edges by defining χ({u, v}) = 0
             if {u, v} ̸∈ E, and say that (G, χ) is γ-robustly self-ordered if for every permutation µ : V → V it holds
             that
                                                                 
                                  V
                      {u, v} ∈         : χ({µ(u), µ(v)}) ̸= χ({u, v})   ≥ γ · |{i ∈ V : µ(i) ̸= i}|.
                                  2
                                                                                                       12:13


    As stated above, our transformation of edge-colored multi-graphs to ordinary graphs
uses gadgets, which are constant-size graphs. Specifically, when handling a multi-graph of
maximum degree d with edges that are colored by c colors, we shall use c different connected
and asymmetric graphs. Furthermore, in order to maintain d-regularity, we shall use d-regular
graphs as gadgets; and in order to have better control on the number of vertices in the
resulting graph, each of these gadgets will contain k = k(d, c) vertices. The existence of such
(d-regular) asymmetric (and connected) graphs is well-known, let alone that it is known that
a random d-regular k-vertex graph is asymmetric (for any constant d ≥ 3) [5, 4].
    We stress that the different gadgets are each connected and asymmetric, and it follows
that they are not isomorphic to one another. We designate in each gadget an edge {p, q},
called the designated edge, such that omitting this edge does not disconnect the gadget.
The endpoint of this edge will be used to connect two vertices of the original multi-graph.
Specifically, we replace each edge {u, v} (of the original multi-graph) that is colored i by a
copy of the ith gadget, while omitting one its designated edge {p, q} and connecting u to p
and v to q. The construction is spelled out below.
    We say that a (non-simple) multi-graph G = (V, E) coupled with an edge-coloring χ is
eligible if each of its vertices contains a self-loop, and parallel edges are assigned different
colors. Recall that eligible comes almost for free (by applying Construction 2.2). We shall
apply the following construction only to eligible edge-colored multi-graphs.

▶ Construction 2.3 (the main transformation). For a fixed d ≥ 3 and c, let k = k(d, c)
and G1 , ..., Gk be different asymmetric and connected d-regular graphs over the vertex-set
[k]. Given a multi-graph G = (V, E) of maximum degree d and an edge-coloring function
χ : E → [c], we construct a graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) as follows.

   Suppose that the multi-set E has size m. Then, for each j ∈ [m], if the j th edge of E
   connects vertices u and v, and is colored i, then we replace it by a copy of Gi , while
   omitting its designated edge and connecting one of its endpoints to u and the other to
   v.
   Specifically, assuming that V = [n] and recalling that j is the index of the edge (colored
   i) that connects u and v, let Gu,v   i  be an isomorphic copy of Gi that uses the vertex
   set {n + (j − 1) · k + i : i ∈ [k]}. Let {p, q} be the designated edge in Gu,v       u,v
                                                                              i , and Ĝi   be
                                     u,v
   the graph that results from Gi by omitting {p, q}. Then, we replace the edge {u, v}
   by Ĝu,v
        i , and add the edges {u, p} and {v, q}.

Hence, V ′ = [n + m · k] and E ′ consists of the edges of all Ĝu,v
                                                                  i ’s as well as the edges
connecting the endpoint of the corresponding designated edges to the corresponding vertices u
and v.

We stress that, although G may have parallel edges and self-loops, the graph G′ has neither
parallel edges nor self-loops. Also note that G′ preserve various properties of G such as
degree-regularity, number of connected components, and expansion (up to a constant factor).
    Showing that the resulting graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) is robustly self-ordered relies on a
correspondence between the colored edges of G = (V, E) and the gadgets in G′ . For starters,
suppose that the permutation µ′ : V ′ → V ′ maps V to V (i.e., µ′ (V ) = V ), and gadgets to the
corresponding gadgets; that is, if µ′ maps the vertex-pair (u, v) ∈ V 2 to (µ′ (u), µ′ (v)) ∈ V 2 ,
then µ′ maps the vertices in the possible gadget that connects u and v to the vertices in
the gadget that connects µ′ (u) and µ′ (v). In such a case, letting µ be the restriction of µ′
to V , a difference of D colored edges between G and µ(G) translates to a difference of at
least D edges between G′ and µ′ (G′ ), due to the difference between the gadgets that replace



                                                                                                      CCC 2021
12:14


        the corresponding edges of G′ , whereas the number of non-fixed-point vertices in µ′ is k
        times larger than the number of non-fixed-point vertices in µ, which is at most D/γ (by the
        γ-robust self-ordering of G). Hence, in this case we have

                   |G′ △ µ′ (G′ )|                 D                    D
                       ′    ′
                                      =                           ≥
               |{v ∈ V : µ (v) ̸= v}|   k · |{v ∈ V : µ(v) ̸= v}|   k · D/γ

        which equals γ/k. However, in general, µ′ needs not satisfy the foregoing condition. Nev-
        ertheless, if µ′ splits some gadget or maps some gadget in a manner that is inconsistent
        with the vertices of V connected by it, then this gadget contributes at least one unit to the
        difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ), whereas the number of non-fixed-point vertices in this
        gadget is at most k. Lastly, if µ′ maps vertices of a gadget to other vertices in the same
        gadget, then we get a contribution of at least one unit due to the asymmetry of the gadget.
        The foregoing is made rigorous in the proof of the following theorem.

        ▶ Theorem 2.4 (from edge-colored robustness to standard robustness). For constant d ≥ 3 and
        c, suppose that the multi-graph G = (V, E) coupled with χ : E → [c] is eligible and γ-robustly
        self-ordered. Then, the graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) resulting from Construction 2.3 is (γ/3k)-robustly
        self-ordered, where k = k(d, c) is the number of vertices in a gadget (as determined above).

        Proof. As a warm-up, let us verify that G′ is asymmetric. We first observe that the vertices
        of G are uniquely identified (in G′ ), since they are the only vertices that are incident at
        copies of the gadget that replaces the self-loops.11 Hence, any automorphism of G′ must map
        V to V . Consequently, for any i, such an automorphism µ′ must map each copy of Gi to a
        copy of Gi , which induces a unique coloring of the edges of G. By the “colored asymmetry”
        of G, this implies that µ′ maps each v ∈ V to itself, and consequently each copy of Gi must
        be mapped (by µ′ ) to itself. Finally, using the asymmetry of the Gi ’s, it follows that each
        vertex of each copy of Gi is mapped to itself.
            We now turn to proving that G′ is actually robustly self-ordered. Considering an arbitrary
        permutation µ′ : V ′ → V ′ , we lower-bound the distance between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) as a function
        of the number of non-fixed-points under µ′ (i.e., of v ∈ V ′ such that µ′ (v ′ ) ̸= v ′ ). We do so by
        considering the contribution of each non-fixed-point to the distance between G′ and µ′ (G′ ).
        We first recall the fact that the vertices of V (resp., of gadgets) are uniquely identified in
        µ′ (G′ ) by virtue of the gadgets that replace self-loops (see the foregoing warm-up).

        Case 1: Vertices of some copy of Gi that are not mapped by µ′ to a single copy of Gi ; that
                                                                                                  ′ ′
          is, vertices in some Gu,v   i   that are not mapped by µ′ to some Giu ,v .
                                                                                                                           ′ ′
          (This includes the case of vertices w′ and w′′ of some Gu,v                     i   such that µ′ (w′ ) is in Gui′ ,v
                                   ′′ ′′
           and µ′ (w′′ ) is in Gui′′ ,v , but (i′ , u′ , v ′ ) ̸= (i′′ , u′′ , v ′′ ). It also includes the case of a copy
           of Gi that is mapped by µ′ to a copy of Gj for j ̸= i, and the case that a vertex w in
           some Gu,vi   that is mapped by µ′ to a vertex in V .)
           The set of vertices Siu,v of each such copy (i.e., Gu,v             i ) contribute at least one unit to the
           difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ), since µ′ (Siu,v ) induces a copy of Ĝi in µ(G′ ) but not in
           G′ , where here we also use the fact that the Ĝi ’s are connected (and not isomorphic (for
           the case of i′ = i′′ ̸= i)). Note that the total contribution of all vertices of the current
           case equals at least the number of gadgets in which they reside. Hence, if the current
           case contains n1 vertices, then their contribution to the distance between G′ and µ′ (G′ )
           is at least n1 /k.


        11
             Note that this gadget cannot appear as part of any other gadget, since all gadgets have the same number
             of vertices.
                                                                                                                   12:15


   Ditto for vertices that do not belong to a single copy of Gi and are mapped by µ′ to a
   single copy of Gi . (This also includes v ∈ V being mapped to some copy of some Gi .)
Case 2: Vertices of some copy of Gi that are mapped by µ′ to a single copy of Gi , while not
   preserving their indices inside Gi .
                                                                                                 ′ ′
   (This refers to vertices of some Gu,v       i  that are mapped by µ to vertices of Gui ,v , where
   (u′ , v ′ ) may but need not equal (u, v), such that for some j ∈ [k] the j th vertex of Gu,v       i  is
                                                       ′ ′
   not mapped by µ to the j th vertex of Gui ,v .)12
   By the fact that Gi is asymmetric, it follows that each such copy contributes at least one
   unit to the difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ), and so (again) the total contribution of all
   these vertices is proportional to their number; that is, if the number of vertices in this
   case is n2 , then their contribution is at least n2 /k.
Case 3: Vertices v ∈ V such that µ′ (v) ̸= v (equiv., µ′ (v) ∈ V \ {v}).
   (This is the main case, where we use the hypothesis that the edge-colored G is robustly
   self-ordered.
   By the hypothesis that the edge-colored G is robustly self-ordered, it follows that such
   vertices contribute proportionally to the difference between the colored versions of the
   multi-graphs G and µ(G), where µ is the restriction of µ′ to V . Specifically, the number
   of tuples ({u, v}, i) such that {u, v} is colored i in exactly one of these multi-graph
   (i.e., either in G or in µ(G) but not in both) is at least γ · |{v ∈ V : µ(v) ̸= v}|.
   Assume, without loss of generality that χ({u, v}) = i but either {µ−1 (u), µ−1 (v)} ̸∈ E or
   χ({µ−1 (u), µ−1 (v)}) = j ̸= i. Either way, it follows that some vertices that do not belong
   to a copy of Gi are mapped by µ′ to Gu,v        i , which means that Case 1 applies for each such
   a tuple. Hence, if the number of vertices in the current case is n3 , then n1 ≥ γ · n3 , and
   we get a contribution of at least γ · n3 /k via Case 1.
Case 4: Vertices of some copy of Gi that are mapped by µ′ to a different copy of Gi .
                                                                 ′ ′
   This refers to the case that µ′ maps Gu,v          i    to Gui ,v such that (u′ , v ′ ) ̸= (u, v), which
   corresponds to mapping the gadget to a gadget connecting a different pair of vertices
   (but by an edge of the same color).
   For u, v, u′ , v ′ and i as above, if µ′ (u) = u′ and µ′ (v) = v ′ , then a gadget that connects u
   and v in G′ is mapped to a gadget that does not connects them in µ′ (G′ ) (but rather
   connects the vertices u′ and v ′ , whereas either u′ ̸= u or v ′ =    ̸ v). So we get a contribution
   of at least one unit to the difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) (i.e., the gadget-edge incident at
   either u or v), whereas the number of vertices in this gadget is k. Hence, the contribution
   is proportional to the number of non-fixed-points of the current type. Otherwise (i.e.,
   (µ′ (u), µ′ (v)) ̸= (u′ , v ′ )), we get a vertex as in Case 3, and get a proportional contribution
   again.
Hence, the contribution of each of these cases to the difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) is
proportional to the number of vertices involved. Specifically, if there are ni vertices in Case i,
                                                        P
then we get a contribution-count of at least γ · i∈[4] ni /k, where some of these contributions
were possibly counted thrice. The claim follows.                                                          ◀

▶ Remark 2.5 (fitting any desired number of vertices). Assuming that the hypothesis of
Theorem 2.4 can be met for any sufficiently large n ∈ S ⊆ N, Construction 2.3 yields robustly
self-ordered n′ -vertex graphs for any n′ ∈ {k · n : n ∈ S}. To obtain such graphs also for n′
that is not a multiple of k, we may use two gadgets with a different number of vertices for
replacing at least one of the sets of colored edges.

                              ′   ′
12
     Recall that Gu,v
                   i   and Gui
                               ,v
                                   are both copies of the k-vertex graph Gi , which is an asymmetric graph,
     and so the notion of the j th vertex in them is well-defined. Formally, the j th vertex of Gu,v
                                                                                                 i   is ϕ−1 (j)
     such that ϕ is the (unique) bijection satisfying ϕ(Gu,v
                                                          i  ) = G i .


                                                                                                                  CCC 2021
12:16


        2.2       Application: Making the graph regular and expanding
        We view the edge-colored model as an intermediate locus in a two-step methodology for
        constructing robustly self-ordered graphs of bounded-degree. First, one constructs edge-
        colored multi-graphs that are robustly self-ordered in the sense of Definition 2.1, and then
        converts them to ordinary robustly self-ordered graphs (in the sense of Definition 1.2), by
        using Construction 2.3 (while relying on Theorem 2.4).
            We demonstrate the useful of this methodology by showing that it yields a simple way of
        making robustly self-ordered graphs be also expanding as well as regular, while maintaining
        a bounded degree. We just augment the original graph by super-imposing an expander (on
        the same vertex set), while using one color for the edges of the original graph and another
        color for the edges of the expander. Note that we do not have to worry about the possibility
        of creating parallel edges (since they are assigned different colors). The same method applies
        in order to make the graph regular. We combine both transformations in the following result,
        which we shall use in the sequel.

        ▶ Theorem 2.6 (making the graph regular and expanding). For constant d ≥ 3 and γ, there
        exists an efficient algorithm that given a γ-robustly self-ordered graph G = (V, E) of maximum
        degree d, returns a (d + O(1))-regular multi-graph coupled with a 2-coloring of its edges such
        that the edge-colored graph is γ-robustly self-ordered (in the sense of Definition 2.1).

        The same idea can be applied to edge-colored multi-graphs; in this case, we use one color
        more than given. We could have avoided the creation of parallel edges with the same color by
        using more colors, but preferred to relegate this task to Construction 2.2, while recalling that
        it preserves both the expansion and the degree-regularity. Either way, applying Theorem 2.4
        to the resulting edge-colored multi-graph, we obtain robustly self-ordered (uncolored) graphs.



        Proof. For any d′′ ≥ d + d′ , given a graph G = (V, E) of maximum degree d that is γ-robustly
        self-ordered and a d′ -regular expander graph G′ = (V, E ′ ), we construct the desired d′′ -regular
        multi-graph G′′ by super-imposing the two graphs on the same vertex set, while assigning the
        edges of each of these graphs a different color. In addition, we add edges to make the graph
        regular, and color them using the same color as used for the expander.13 Details follow.

              We superimpose G and G′ (i.e., create a multi-graph (V, E ∪ E ′ )), while coloring the
              edges of G (resp., G′ ) with color 1 (resp., color 2).
              Note that this may create parallel edges, but with different colors.
              Let dv ≤ d + d′ denote the degree of vertex v in the resulting multi-graph. Then, we add
              edges to this multi-graph so that each vertex has degree d′′ . These edges will also be
              colored 2.
              (Here, unless we are a bit careful, we may introduce parallel edges that are assigned the
              same color. This can be avoided by using more colors for these added edges, but in light
              of Construction 2.2 (which does essentially the same) there is no reason to worry about
              this aspect.)
        (Recall that the resulting edge-colored multi-graph is denoted G′′ .)


        13
             We assume for simplicity that |V ′ | is even. Alternatively, assuming that G contains no isolated vertex,
             we first augment it with an isolated vertex and apply the transformation on the resulting graph. Yet
             another alternative is to consider only even d′′ .
                                                                                                       12:17


    The crucial observation is that, since the edges of G are given a distinct color in G′′ , the
added edges do not harm the robust self-ordering feature of G. Hence, for any permutation
µ : V → V , any vertex-pair that contributes to the symmetric difference between G and
µ(G), also contributes to an inequality between colored edges of G′′ and µ(G′′ ) (by virtue of
the edges colored 1).                                                                          ◀

2.3    Local computability of the transformations
In this subsection, we merely point out that the transformation presented in Constructions 2.2
and 2.3 as well as the one underlying the proof of Theorem 2.6 preserve efficient local
computability (e.g., one can determine the neighborhood of a vertex in the resulting multi-
graph by making a polylogarithmic number of neighbor-queries to the original multi-graph).
Actually, this holds provided that we augment the (local) representation of graphs, in a
natural manner.
    Recall that the standard representation of bounded-degree graphs is by their incidence
functions. Specifically, a graph G = ([n], E) of maximum degree d is represented by the
incident function g : [n] × [d] → [n] ∪ {0} such that g(v, i) = u ∈ [n] if u is the ith neighbor of
v, and g(v, i) = 0 if v has less than i neighbors. This does not allow us to determined the
identity of the j th edge in G, nor even to determine the number of edges in G, by making a
polylogarithmic number of queries to g. Nevertheless, efficient local computability is preserved
if we use the following local representation (presented for edge-colored multi-graphs).
▶ Definition 2.7 (local representation). For d, c ∈ N, a local representation of a multi-graph
G = ([n], E) of maximum degree d that is coupled with a coloring χ : E → [c] is provided by
the following three functions:
 1. An incidence function g1 : [n] × [d] → N ∪ {0} such that g1 (v, i) = j ∈ N if j is the index
    of the ith edge that incident at vertex v, and g1 (v, i) = 0 if v has less than i incident
    edges.
 2. An edge enumeration function g2 : N → ([n]2 × [c]) ∪ {0} such that g2 (j) = (u, v, χ(ej ) if
    the j th edge, denoted ej , connects the vertices u and v, and g2 (j) = 0 if the multi-graph
    has less than j edges.
 3. An vertex enumeration (by degree) function g3 : [d] → ([n] → [n]) ∪ {0} such that
    g3 (i, j) = v ∈ [n] if v is the ith vertex of degree j in the multi-graph, and g3 (i, j) = 0 if
    the multi-graph has less than j vertices of degree i.
Needless to say, the function g3 is redundant in the case that we are guaranteed that the
multi-graph is regular. One may augment the above representation by providing also the
total number of edges, but this number can be determined by binary search.
▶ Theorem 2.8 (the foregoing transformations preserve local computability). The local repres-
entation of the multi-graph that result from Construction 2.2 can be computed by making a
polylogarithmic number of queries to the given multi-graph. The same holds for Construc-
tion 2.3 and for the transformation underlying the proof of Theorem 2.6.
Proof. For Construction 2.2, we mostly need to enumerate all parallel edges that connect u
and v. This can be done easily by querying the incidence function on (u, 1), ..., (u, d) and
querying the edge enumeration function on the non-zero answers. (In addition, when adding
a self-loop on vertex v ∈ [n], we need to determine the degree of v as well as the number
of edges in the multi-graph (in order to know how to index the self-loop in the incidence
and edge enumeration functions, respectively). For Construction 2.3, we merely need to
determine the color of the j th edge and its index in the incidence list of each of its endpoints
(in order to replace it by edges that lead to the gadget).



                                                                                                      CCC 2021
12:18


            For the transformation underlying the proof of Theorem 2.6, adding edges to make the
        multi-graph regular requires determining the index of a vertex in the list of all vertices of the
        same degree (in order to properly index the added edges). Here is where we use the vertex
        enumeration (by degree) function. (We also need to select a fixed procedure for transforming
        an sorted n-long sequence (d1 , ..., dn ) ∈ [d′′ ] into an all-d′′ sequence by making pairs of
        increments; that is, given j ∈ [D] such that D = (d′′ n − i∈[n] di )/2, we should determine a
                                                                       P

        pair (uj , vj ) such that for every i ∈ [n] it holds that di +|{j : uj = i}|+|{j : vj = i}| = d′′ .) ◀


         3         The Direct Construction

        We shall make use of the edge-colored variant presented in Section 2, while relying on the fact
        that robustly self-ordered colored multi-graphs can be efficiently transformed into robustly
        self-ordered (uncolored) graphs. Actually, it will be easier to present the construction as a
        directed edge-colored multi-graph. Hence, we first define a variant of robust self-ordering
        for directed edge-colored multi-graph (see Definition 3.1), then show how to construct such
        multi-graphs (see Section 3.2), and finally show how to transform the directed variant into
        an undirected one (see Section 3.1).
            The construction is based on d permutations, denoted π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n], and consists
        of the directed edge-colored multi-graph that is naturally defined by them. Specifically, for
        every v ∈ [n] and i ∈ [d], this multi-graph contains a directed edge, denoted (v, πi (v), that
        goes from vertex v to vertex πi (v), and is colored i.
            We prove that a sufficient condition for this edge-colored directed multi-graph, denoted
        G1 , to be robustly self-ordered is that a related multi-graph is an expander. Specifically,
        we refer to the multi-graph G2 = (V2 , E2 ) that represents the actions of the permutation of
        pairs of vertices of G1 ; that is, V2 = {(u, v) ∈ [n]2 : u =
                                                                   ̸ v} and E2 = {{(u, v), (πi (u), πi (v))} :
        (u, v) ∈ V2 & i ∈ [d]}.
            The foregoing requires extending the notion of robustly self-ordered (edge-colored) multi-
        graphs to the directed case. The extension is straightforward and is spelled-out next, for
        sake of good order.

        ▶ Definition 3.1 (robust self-ordering of edge-colored directed multi-graphs). Let G = (V, E)
        be a directed multi-graph with colored edges, where χ : E → N denotes this coloring, and let
        Ei denote the multi-set of edges colored i. We say that (G, χ) is γ-robustly self-ordered if for
        every permutation µ : V → V it holds that
             X
                   Ei △ {(µ(u), µ(v)) : (u, v) ∈ Ei }   ≥ γ · |{i ∈ V : µ(i) ̸= i}|,                      (3)
             i∈N


        where A△B denotes the symmetric difference between the multi-sets A and B (as in Defini-
        tion 2.1).

        (The only difference between Definition 3.1 and Definition 2.1 is that (3) refers to the directed
        edges of the directed multi-graph, whereas (2) refers to the undirected edges of the undirected
        multi-graph.)
            In Section 3.1 we present a construction of a directed edge-colored O(1)-regular multi-
        graph that is Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered. We shall actually present a sufficient condition and
        a specific instantiation that satisfies it. In Section 3.2 we show how to transform any directed
        edge-colored multi-graph into an undirected one while preserving all relevant features; that
        is, bounded robustness, bounded degree, regularity, expansion, and local computability.
                                                                                                           12:19


3.1    A sufficient condition for robust self-ordering of directed colored
       graphs
For any d permutations, π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n], we consider two multi-graphs.
1. The primary multi-graph (of π1 , ..., πd ) is a directed multi-graph, denoted G1 = ([n], E1 ),
   such that E1 = {(v, πi (v)) : v ∈ [n] & i ∈ [d]}. This directed multi-graph is coupled with
   an edge-coloring in which the directed edge from v to πi (v) is colored i.
2. The secondary multi-graph (of π1 , ..., πd ) is an undirected multi-graph, denoted G2 =
   (V2 , E2 ), such that V2 = {(u, v) ∈ [n]2 : u ̸= v} and E2 = {{(u, v), (πi (u), πi (v))} : (u, v) ∈
    V2 & i ∈ [d]}.
We note that each of these multi-graphs is a Schreier graph that correspond to the action of
the permutation π1 , ..., πd on the corresponding vertex sets (i.e., [n] and V2 , respectively).
For a wider perspective see the (paragraph at the) end of this subsection.
    We now state the main result of this section, which asserts that the primary multi-graph
G1 is robustly self-ordered if the secondary multi-graph G2 is an expander. We use the
combinatorial definition of expansion: A multi-graph G = (V, E) is γ-expanding if, for every
subset S of size at most |V |/2, there are at least γ · |S| vertices in V \ S that neighbor some
vertex in S.

▶ Theorem 3.2 (expansion of G2 implies robust self-ordering of G1 ). For any d ≥ 2 permuta-
tions, π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n], if the secondary multi-graph G2 of π1 , ..., πd is γ-expanding, then
the primary directed multi-graph G1 of π1 , ..., πd coupled with the foregoing edge-coloring is
γ-robustly self-ordered. Furthermore, G1 (or rather the undirected multi-graph underlying
G1 ) is min(0.25, γ/3)-expanding.

Proof. Let µ : [n] → [n] be an arbitrary permutation, and let T = {v ∈ [n] : µ(v) ̸= v} be its set
of non-fixed-points. Then, the size of the symmetric difference between G1 and µ(G1 ) equals
   P
2· i∈[d] |Di | such that v ∈ Di if (µ(v), µ(πi (v))) is either not an edge in G1 or is not colored i
in it, whereas (v, πi (v)) is an edge colored i in G1 . Note that if (µ(v), µ(πi (v))) is not an
i-colored edge in G1 , then πi (µ(v)) ̸= µ(πi (v)). Hence, Di = {v ∈ [n] : µ(πi (v)) ̸= πi (µ(v))}.
    The key observation (proved next) is that if v ∈ T \ Di , then (πi (v), πi (µ(v)) ∈ T2 , where
T2 = {(v, µ(v)) : v ∈ T } represents the sets of replacements performed by µ. This fact implies
        P
that if i∈[d] |Di | is small in comparison to |T |, then the set T2 (which is a set of vertices in
G2 ) does not expand much, in contradiction to the hypothesis. Details follow.

▶ Observation 3.2.1 (key observation). For T, Di and T2 as defined above, if v ∈ T \ Di ,
then (πi (v), πi (µ(v)) ∈ T2 .

Recall that v ∈ T implies (v, µ(v)) ∈ T2 . Observation 3.2.1 asserts that if (in addition to
v ∈ T ) it holds that v ̸∈ Di , then (πi (v), πi (µ(v)) is also in T2 . This means that the edges
colored i incident at {(πi (v), πi (µ(v))) : v ∈ T \ Di } do not contribute to the expansion of the
set T2 in G2 .



Proof. Since v ̸∈ Di we have πi (µ(v)) = µ(πi (v)), and µ(πi (v)) ̸= πi (v) follows, because
otherwise πi (µ(v)) = πi (v), which implies µ(v) = v in contradiction to v ∈ T . However,
µ(πi (v)) ̸= πi (v) means that πi (v) ∈ T , and (πi (v), πi (µ(v))) = (πi (v), µ(πi (v))) ∈ T2 follows.
                                                                                                     ◁



                                                                                                          CCC 2021
12:20


        Conclusion. Recall that Observation 3.2.1 implies that {(πi (v), πi (µ(v))) : v ∈ T \ Di } ⊆ T2 ,
                   S
        whereas i∈[d] {(πi (v), πi (µ(v))) : v ∈ T } is the neighborhood of T2 in the multi-graph G2
        (since {(πi (v), πi (µ(v))) : i ∈ [d]} the neighbor-set of (v, µ(v)) in G2 ). Using the γ-expansion
                                                            P
        of G2 (and |T2 | ≤ n < |V2 |/2), it follows that i∈[d] |Di | ≥ γ · |T |. The main claim follows.
            The expansion of G1 is shown by relating sets of vertices of G1 to the corresponding sets of
        pairs in G2 . Specifically, for and S ⊂ [n] of size at most n/2, we consider the set T = {(u, v) ∈
        V2 : u, v ∈ S}, which has size |S| · (|S| − 1) ≤ n2 · ( n2 − 1) < |V22 | . Letting T ′ denote the set of
        neighbors of T in G2 , and |S ′ | denote the set of neighbors of S in G1 , we have |T ′ \ T | ≥ γ · |T |,
        on the one hand (by expansion of G2 ), and |T ′ \ T | ≤ 2 · |S| · |S ′ \ S| + |S ′ \ S| · (|S ′ \ S| − 1)
        on the other hand. This implies |S ′ \ S| ≥ (γ/3) · |S| (unless |S| < 5, which can be handled
        by using |S ′ \ S| ≥ 1).                                                                               ◀

        Primary and secondary multi-graphs based on SL2 (p)
        Recall that SL2 (p) is the group of 2-by-2 matrices over GF(p) that have determinant 1.
        There are several different explicit constructions of constant-size expanding generating sets
        for SL2 (p), namely making the associated Cayley graph an expander (see, e.g., [28], [27,
        Thm. 4.4.2(i)], and [6]). We use any such generating set to define a directed (edge-colored)
        multi-graph G1 on p + 1 vertices, and show that the associated multi-graph on pairs, G2 , is
        an expander.

        ▶ Proposition 3.3 (expanding generators for SL2 (p) yield an expanding secondary multi-graph).
        For any prime p > 2, let V = {(1, i)⊤ : i ∈ GF(p)} ∪ {(0, 1)⊤ }, and M1 , ..., Md ∈ SL2 (p).
        For every i ∈ [d], define πi : V → V such that πi (u) = v if v ∈ V is a non-zero multiple of
        Mi u. Then:
         1. Each πi is a bijection.
         2. If the Cayley multi-graph C = C(SL2 (p), {M1 , ..., Md }) = (SL2 (p), {{M, Mi M } : M ∈
             SL2 (p) & i ∈ [d]}) is an expander, then the (Schreier) multi-graph G2 with vertex-set
             P = {(v, v ′ ) : v ∈ V & v ′ ∈ V \ {v}} and edge-set {{(v, v ′ ), (πi (v), πi (v ′ ))} : (v, v ′ ) ∈ P } is
            an expander.
        Part 1 implies that these permutations yield a primary directed edge-colored multi-graph
        on the vertex-set V , whereas Part 2 asserts that the corresponding secondary graph is an
        expander (if the corresponding Cayley graph is expanding). Note that |V | = p + 1 and
        |P | = (p + 1)p, whereas |SL2 (p)| = p3 − p = (p − 1) · |P |.

        Proof. Part 1 follows by observing that for every M ∈ SL2 (p) and every vector v ∈ GF(p)2
        and scalar α ∈ GF(p) it holds that M αv = αM v. Consequently, if for some non-zero
        α, α′ ∈ GF(p) it holds that αM v = α′ M v ′ , then M v = M α′′ v ′ for α′′ = α′ /α, which implies
        v = α′′ v ′ (since M is invertible). (Hence, πi (v) = πi (v ′ ), for v, v ′ ∈ V , implies v = v ′ .)
            Part 2 follows by observing that the vertices of G2 correspond to equivalence classes of
        the vertices of C that are preserved by SL2 (p), where A, B ∈ SL2 (p) are equivalent if the
        columns of A are non-zero multiples of the corresponding columns of B. That is, we consider
        an equivalence relation, denoted ≡, such that for A = [A1 |A2 ] and B = [B1 |B2 ] in SL2 (p)
        it holds that A ≡ B if Ai = αi Bi for both i ∈ {1, 2}, where α1 , α2 ∈ [p − 1] (and, in fact,
        α2 = 1/α1 ).14 By saying that these equivalence classes are preserved by SL2 (p), we mean
        that, for every A, B, M ∈ SL2 (p), if A ≡ B, then M A ≡ M B. Hence, the (combinatorial)


        14
             Recall that det(A) = 1 = det(B), whereas det([α1 B1 |α2 B2 ]) = α1 α2 ·det(B). Note that each equivalence
             class contains a single element of P .
                                                                                                                     12:21


expansion of G2 follows from the expansion of C, because the neighbors of a vertex-set S ⊆ P
in G2 are the vertices of G2 that are equivalent to T ′ such that T ′ is the set of vertices of
CC(t) that neighbor (in CC(t) ) vertices that are equivalent to vertices in S.15             ◀

A simple construction
Combining Theorem 3.2 with Proposition 3.3, while using a simple pair of expanding
generators (which does not yield a Ramanujan graph), we get

▶ Corollary 3.4 (a simple robustly self-ordered primary multi-graph). For any prime p > 2, let
V = {(1, i)⊤ : i ∈ GF(p)} ∪ {(0, 1)⊤ }, and consider the matrices
                                                
      def     1 1                   def     0 1
   M1 =                 and M2 =                                                          (4)
              0 1                          −1 0

Then, for π1 and π2 defined as in Proposition 3.3, the corresponding primary (directed
edge-colored) multi-graph is robustly self-ordered.

This follows from the fact that the corresponding Cayley graph C(SL2 (p), {M1 , M2 }) is an
expander [27, Thm. 4.4.2(i)].

Perspective
The foregoing construction using the group SL2 (p) is a special case of a much more general
family of constructions, and the elements of the proof of Proposition 3.3 follow an established
theory (explained, e.g., in [25, Sec. 11.1.2]), which we briefly describe.
    Let H be any finite group, and S an expanding generating set of H (i.e., the Cayley graph
C(H, S) is an expander). Assume that H acts on a finite set V (i.e., each h ∈ H is associated
with a permutation on V , and h′ h(v) = h′ (h(v)) for every h, h′ ∈ H and v ∈ V ). Then, the
primary (directed edge-colored) multi-graph G1 on vertices V can be constructed from the
permutations defined by members of S. The secondary multi-graph G2 is naturally defined
by the action of S on pairs of elements in V . Finally, the expansion of C(H, S) implies that
every connected component of G2 is an expander.16 Thus, whenever this (Schreier) graph G2
is connected (as it is in Proposition 3.3), one may conclude that G1 is a directed edge-colored
robustly self-ordered multi-graph.

3.2     From the directed variant to the undirected one
In this section we show how to transform directed (edge-colored) multi-graphs, of the type
constructed in Section 3.1, into undirected ones, while preserving all relevant features (i.e.,
bounded robustness, bounded degree, regularity, expansion, and local computability). The
transformation is extremely simple and natural: We replace the directed edge (u, v) colored
j by a 2-path with a designated auxiliary vertex au,v,j , while coloring the edge {u, au,v,j }
by 2j − 1 and the edge {au,v,j , v} by 2j. Evidently, this colored 2-path encodes the direction
of the original edge (as well as the original color).


15
   Specifically, let S have density at most half in P , and let T be the set of vertices of C that are equivalent
   to S. Note that |T | = (p − 1) · |S|, since each equivalence class contains a single element of P . By the
   foregoing, the set of neighbors of T in C, denoted T ′ , is a collection of equivalence classes of vertices of
   G2 , and |T ′ \ T | = Ω(|T |) by the expansion of C. It follows that the set of neighbors of S in G2 , denoted
                                                                                               ′
   S ′ , is the set of vertices that are equivalent to T ′ , which implies that |S ′ \ S| = |Tp−1\T |
                                                                                                      = Ω(|S|).
16
   Indeed, this was easy to demonstrate directly in the case of Proposition 3.3.




                                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:22


            Note that the foregoing transformation works well provided that there are no parallel
        edges that are colored with the same color, a condition which is satisfied by the construction
        presented in Section 3.1. Furthermore, since the latter construction has no vertices of (in+out)
        degree less that 2d ≥ 4, there is no need to mark the original vertices by self-loops. Hence, a
        preliminary step akin to Construction 2.2 in unnecessary here, although it can be performed
        in general.

        ▶ Proposition 3.5 (from directed robust self-ordering to undirected robust self-ordering). For
        constants d ≥ 3 and c, let G = (V, E) be a directed multi-graph in which each vertex has
        between three and d incident edges (in both directions), and that G is coupled with an
        edge-coloring function χ : E → [c] such that no parallel edges (in same the direction) are
        assigned the same color. Letting Ei = {e ∈ E : χ(e) = i} denote the set of edges colored i in
        G, consider the undirected multi-graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) such that V ′ = V ∪ {au,v,i : (u, v) ∈ Ei }
        and E ′ = j∈[2c] Ej′ where
                  S

            ′
           E2i−1    =    {{u, au,v,i } : (u, v) ∈ Ei },
               ′
              E2i   =    {{au,v,i , v} : (u, v) ∈ Ei },

        and the edge-coloring function χ′ : E ′ → [2c] that assigns the edges of Ej′ the color j (i.e.,
        χ′ (e) = j for every e ∈ Ej′ ). Then, if (G, χ) is γ-robustly self-ordered (in the sense of
        Definition 3.1), then (G′ , χ′ ) is (γ/2)-robustly self-ordered (in the sense of Definition 2.1).

        We comment that the transformation of (G, χ) to (G′ , χ′ ) preserves bounded robustness,
        bounded degree, regularity, expansion, and local computability (cf. Theorem 2.8).

        Proof. The proof is analogous to the proof of Theorem 2.4, but it is much simpler because
        the gadgets used in the current transformation (i.e., the auxiliary vertices au,v,i ) are much
        simpler.
            Considering an arbitrary permutation µ′ : V ′ → V ′ , we lower-bound the distance between
        G and µ′ (G′ ) as a function of the number of non-fixed-points under µ′ . We do so by
          ′

        considering the contribution of each non-fixed-point to the distance between G′ and µ′ (G′ ).
        We first recall the fact that the vertices of V (resp., the auxiliary vertices) are uniquely
        identified in µ′ (G′ ) by virtue of the their degree, since each vertex of V has degree at least
        three (in G′ ) whereas the auxiliary vertices have degree 2.
        Case 1: Auxiliary vertices of the form au,v,i that are not mapped by µ′ to auxiliary vertices
          of the form au′ ,v′ ,i ; that is, µ′ (au,v,i ) ∈ (V ∪ j̸=i {au′ ,v′ ,j : (u′ , v ′ ) ∈ E}).
                                                               S

           Each such vertex au,v,i contributes at least one unit to the difference between G′ and
           µ′ (G′ ), since the two edges incident at au,v,i (in G′ ) are colored 2i − 1 and 2i respectively,
           whereas µ(au,v,i ) has either more than two edges (in G′ ) or its two edges are colored 2j − 1
           and 2j, respectively, where for j =   ̸ i. Hence, if the current case contains n1 vertices, then
           their contribution to the distance between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) is at least n1 .
           Ditto for vertices of V that are mapped by µ′ to an auxiliary vertex.
        Case 2: Vertices v ∈ V such that µ′ (v) ∈ V \ {v}.
           By the hypothesis that the edge-colored directed G is robustly self-ordered, it follows that
           such vertices contribute proportionally to the difference between the colored versions of
           the directed multi-graphs G and µ(G), where µ is the restriction of µ′ to V . Specifically,
           the number of tuples ((u, v), i) such that (u, v) is colored i in exactly one of these multi-
           graph (i.e., either in G or in µ(G) but not in both) is at least γ · |{v ∈ V : µ(v) ̸= v}|.
           Assume, without loss of generality that (u, v) ∈ Ei but either (µ−1 (u), µ−1 (v)) ̸∈ E or
          (µ−1 (u), µ−1 (v)) ∈ Ej for j ̸= i. Either way, it follows that a vertex not in {au′ ,v′ ,i :
                                                                                                                       12:23


   (u′ , v ′ ) ∈ Ei } is mapped by µ′ to au,v,i , which means that Case 1 applies for each such a
   tuple. Hence, if the number of vertices in the current case is n2 , then n1 ≥ γ · n2 , and we
   get a contribution of at least γ · n2 via Case 1.
Case 3: Auxiliary vertices of the form au,v,i that are mapped by µ′ to auxiliary vertices of
   the form au′ ,v′ ,i for (u′ v ′ ) ̸= (u, v); that is, µ′ (au,v,i ) ∈ {au′ ,v′ ,i : (u′ , v ′ ) ∈ Ei \ {(u, v)}}.
   For u, v, u′ , v ′ and i as above, if µ′ (u) = u′ and µ′ (v) = v ′ , then an auxiliary vertex that
   connects u and v in G′ is mapped to an auxiliary vertex that does not connects them in
   µ′ (G′ ) (but rather connects the vertices u′ and v ′ , whereas either u′ =               ̸ u or v ′ ̸= v). So
   we get a contribution of at least one unit to the difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) (i.e.,
   the edge incident at either u or v). Hence, the contribution is proportional to the number
   of non-fixed-points of the current type. Otherwise (i.e., (µ′ (u), µ′ (v)) ̸= (u′ , v ′ )), we get a
   vertex as in either Case 1 or Case 2, and get a proportional contribution again.
Hence, the contribution of each of these cases to the difference between G′ and µ′ (G′ ) is
proportional to the number of vertices involved. Specifically, if there are ni vertices in Case i,
                                                         P
then we get a contribution-count of at least γ · i∈[3] n1 , where some of these contributions
were possibly counted twice. The claim follows.                                                                   ◀


 4      The Three-Step Construction

In this section we present a different construction of bounded-degree graphs that are robustly
self-ordered. It uses totally different techniques than the ones utilized in the construction
presented in Section 3. Furthermore, the current construction offers the flexibility of obtaining
either graphs that have small connected components (i.e., of logarithmic size) or graphs that
are highly connected (i.e., are expanders). Actually, one can obtain anything in-between (i.e.,
n-vertex graphs that consist of s(n)-sized connected components that are each an expander,
for any s(n) = Ω((log n)/ log log n)). We mention that robustly self-ordered bounded-degree
graphs with small connected components are used in the proof of Theorem 5.2.
    As stated in Section 1.1.2, the current construction proceeds in three steps. First, in
Section 4.1, we prove the existence of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs, and
observe that such ℓ-vertex graphs can actually be found in poly(ℓ!)-time [sic]. Next, setting
ℓ = Ω((log n)/ log log n), we use these graphs as part of 2ℓ-vertex connected components in
an n-vertex (robustly self-ordered bounded-degree) graph that is constructed in poly(n)-time
(see Section 4.2). Lastly, in Section 4.3, we repeat this strategy using the graphs constructed
in Section 4.2, and obtain exponentially larger graphs that are locally constructible.
    In addition, in Section 4.4, we show that the foregoing graphs can be locally self-ordered.
That is, given a vertex v in any graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to the foregoing
n-vertex graph and oracle access to the incidence function of G′ , we can find the vertex to
which this unique isomorphism maps v in poly(log n))-time.


4.1     Existence
As stated above, we start with establishing the mere existence of bounded-degree graphs
that are robustly self-ordered.

▶ Theorem 4.1 (robustly self-ordered graphs exist). For any sufficiently large constant d,
there exists a family {Gn }n∈N of robustly self-ordered d-regular graphs. Furthermore, these
graphs are expanders.




                                                                                                                      CCC 2021
12:24


        Actually, it turns out that random d-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered; see Theorem 6.1.
        Either way, given the existence of such n-vertex graphs, they can actually be found in poly(n!)-
        time, by an exhaustive search. Specifically, for each of the possible ndn/2 graphs, we check
        the robust self-ordering condition by checking all n! − 1 relevant permutation. (The expansion
        condition can be checked similarly, by trying all (0.5 + o(1)) · 2n relevant subsets of [n].)
            The proof of Theorem 4.1 utilizes a simpler probabilistic argument than the one used in
        the proof of Theorem 6.1. This argument (captured by Claim 4.1.1) refers to the auxiliary
        model of edge-colored multi-graphs (see Definition 2.1) and is combined with a transformation
        of this model to the original model of uncolored graphs (provided in Construction 2.3 and
        analyzed in Theorem 2.4). Indeed, the relative simplicity of Claim 4.1.1 is mainly due to
        using the edge-colored model (see digest at the end of Section 6).

        Proof. To facilitate the proof, we present the construction while referring to the edge-colored
        model presented in Section 2. We shall then apply Theorem 2.4 and obtain a result for the
        original model (of uncolored simple graphs).
            For m = n/O(1), we shall consider 2m-vertex multi-graphs that consists of two m-vertex
        cycles, using a different color for the edges of each cycle, that are connected by d′ = O(1)
        random perfect matching, which are also each assigned a different color. (Hence, we use 2 + d′
        colors in total.) We shall show that (w.h.p.) a random multi-graph constructed in this way
        is robustly self-ordered (in the colored sense). (Note that parallel edges, if they exist, will
        be assigned different colors.) Specifically, we consider a generic 2m-vertex multi-graph that
        is determined by d′ perfect matchings of [m] with {m + 1, ..., 2m}. Denoting this sequence
        of perfect matchings by M = (M1 , ..., Md′ ), we consider the (edge-colored) multi-graph
        GM ([2m], EM ) given by
                                  [
            EM = C1 ∪ C2 ∪             Mj
                                 j∈[d′ ]

                      where C1 = {{i, i + 1} : i ∈ [m − 1]} ∪ {{m, 1}}
                      and C2 = {{m + i, m + i + 1} : i ∈ [m − 1]} ∪ {{2m, m + 1}}
        and a coloring χ in which the edges of Cj are colored j and the edges of Mj are colored
        j + 2. (That is, for i ∈ {1, 2}, the set Ci forms a cycle of the form ((i − 1)m + 1, (i − 1)m +
        2, ..., (i − 1)m + m, (i − 1)m + 1) and its edges are colored i.) Note that the d′ + 1 edges
        incident at each vertex are assigned d′ + 1 different colors.

        ▷ Claim 4.1.1 (w.h.p., GM is robustly self-ordered). For some constant γ > 0, with high
        probability over the choice of M , the edge-colored multi-graph GM is γ-robustly self-ordered.
        Furthermore, it is also an expander.

        Proof. Consider an arbitrary permutation µ : [2m] → [2m], and let t = |{i ∈ [2m] : µ(i) ̸= i}|.
        We shall show that, with probability 1−exp(−Ω(dt log m)) over the choice of M , the difference
        between the colored versions of GM and µ(GM ) is Ω(t). Towards this end, we consider two
        cases.
        Case 1: |{i ∈ [m] : µ(i) ̸∈ [m]}| > t/4. Equivalently, |{i ∈ [2m] : ⌈µ(i)/m⌉ ≠ ⌈i/m⌉}| > t/2.
           The vertices in the set {i ∈ [m] : µ(i) ̸∈ [m]} are mapped from the first cycle to the second
           cycle, and so rather than having two incident edges that are colored 1 they have two
           incident edges colored 2. Hence, each such vertex contributes two units to the difference
           (between the colored versions of GM and µ(GM )), and the total contribution is greater
           than 2 · (t/4) · 2, where the first factor of 2 accounts also for vertices that are mapped
           from C2 to C1 .
                                                                                                                  12:25


Case 2: |{i ∈ [m] : µ(i) ̸∈ [m]}| ≤ t/4. Equivalently, |{i ∈ [2m] : ⌈µ(i)/m⌉ =
                                                                             ̸ ⌈i/m⌉}| ≤ t/2.
   We focus on the non-fixed-points of µ that stay on their original cycle (i.e., those not
                                           def                                                     def
   considered in Case 1). Let A = {i ∈ [m] : µ(i) ̸= i ∧ µ(i) ∈ [m]} and B = {i ∈
   {m + 1, ...., 2m} : µ(i) ̸= i ∧ µ(i) ∈ {m + 1, ..., 2m}}. By the case hypothesis, |A| + |B| ≥ t/2,
   and we may assume (without loss of generality) that |A| ≥ t/4. As a warm-up, we first
   show that each element of A contributes a non-zero number of units to the difference
                                                                                           ′
   (between the colored versions of GM and µ(GM )) with probability 1 − O(1/m)d , over the
   choice of M .
   To see this, let πj : [m] → {m + 1, ..., 2m} be the mapping used in the j th matching; that
   is, Mj = {{i, πj (i)} : i ∈ [m]}, which means that πj (i) is the j th match of i in GM (i.e.,
   the vertex matched to i by Mj ). Then, we consider the event that for some j ∈ [d′ ], the
   j th match of i ∈ [m] in µ(GM ) is different from the j th match of i in GM , and note that
   when this event occurs i contributes to the difference (between the colored versions of
   GM and µ(GM )). Note that x is the j th match of i in µ(GM ) if and only if µ−1 (x) is
   the j th match of µ−1 (i) in GM , which holds if and only if µ−1 (x) = πj (µ−1 (i)) (equiv.,
   x = µ(πj (µ−1 (i)))). Hence, i ∈ [m] contributes to the difference if and only if for some j
   it holds that πj (i) ̸= µ(πj (µ−1 (i))), because πj (i) ̸= µ(πj (µ−1 (i))) means that the edge
   {i, πj (i)} is colored j + 2 in GM but is not colored j + 2 in µ(GM ) (since a different edge
   incident at i in µ(GM ) is colored j + 2). Letting π = (π1 , ..., πd′ ), the probability of the
   complementary event (i.e., i does not contribute Y       to the difference) is given by
        Prπ (∀j ∈ [d′ ]) πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i))) =             Prπj πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i)))
                                                                                          

                                                             j∈[d′ ]
                                                                         ′
                                             ≤ (m − 1)−d ,
   where the inequality uses the hypothesis that µ(i) ̸= i and i, µ(i) ∈ [m]; specifically,
                                                                                     def
   fixing the value of πj (µ−1 (i)), leaves πj (i) uniformly distributed in S = {m + 1, ..., 2m} \
   {πj (µ−1 (i))}, which means that Prπj [πj (i) = µ(v)|v = πj (µ−1 (i))] ≤ 1/|S| (where equality
   holds if µ(v) ∈ S).
   The same argument generalises to any set I ⊆ A such that I ∩ µ(I) = ∅. In such a case,
   letting I = {i1 , ..., it′ }, we get
       Prπ (∀i ∈ I)(∀j ∈ [d′ ]) πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i)))
                                                        
           Y Y
                       Prπj πj (ik ) = µ(πj (µ−1 (ik ))) (∀k ′ ∈ [k − 1]) πj (ik′ ) = µ(πj (µ−1 (ik′ )))
                                                                                                        
        =
          k∈[t′ ] j∈[d′ ]
                             ′ ′
        ≤ (m − 2t′ + 1)−t d ,
   where the inequality uses the hypothesis that I ∩µ(I) = ∅; specifically, for each k ∈ [t′ ], we
   use the fact that ik ̸∈ {i1 , ..., ik−1 , µ−1 (i1 ), ..., µ−1 (ik )}. Hence, fixing the values of πj (ik′ )
   for all k ′ ∈ [k − 1] and the values of πj (µ−1 (ik′ )) for all k ′ ∈ [k], and denoting these values
                                                                                                    def
   by u1 , ..., uk−1 and v1 , ..., vk respectively, leaves πj (ik ) uniformly distributed in S = {m +
   1, ..., 2m}\{u1 , ..., uk−1 , v1 , ..., vk }, which means that Prπj [πj (i) = µ(vk )|foreging fixing] ≤
   1/|S| (where equality holds if µ(vk ) ∈ S).
   Recalling that |A| ≥ t/4 and t ≤ 2m, we upper-bound the probability (over the choice of
   M ) that A contains a t/8-subset A′ such that (∀i ∈ A′ )(∀j ∈ [d′ ]) πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i))),
   by taking a union bound over all possible A′ and using for each such A′ a subset I ⊂ A′
   such that I ∩ µ(I) = ∅. (So we actually take a union bound over the I’s and derive a
   conclusion regarding the t/8-subsets A′ .) Observing that |I| ≥ |A′ |/2 ≥ t/16, we conclude
                                               t           ′
   that, with probability at most t/16             · (m/2)d ·t/16 = exp(−Ω(d′ t log m)) over the choice
   of M , the set A contains no t/8-subset A′ as above. This means that, with probability at
   most exp(−Ω(d′ t log m)), less than t/8 of the indices i ∈ A contribute a non-zero number
   of units to the difference (between the colored versions of GM and µ(GM )).

                                                                                                                 CCC 2021
12:26


        Hence, we have shown that, for every permutations µ : [2m] → [2m], the probability (over
        the choice of M ) that the size of the symmetric difference between the colored versions of
        GM and µ(GM ) is smaller than t/8 is exp(−Ω(d′ t log m)), where t is the number of non-fixed-
        points of µ. Letting γ = 1/8 and taking a union bound over all (non-trivial) permutations
        µ : [2m] → [2m], we conclude that the probability, over the choice of M , that GM is not
        γ-robustly self-ordered is at most
             X 2m                                X
                         · exp(−Ω(d′ t log m)) =        exp(−Ω((d′ − O(1)) · t log m))
                     t
           t∈[2m]                                    t∈[2m]

                                                 =   exp(−Ω((d′ − O(1)) · log m)),
        and the claim follows (for any sufficiently large d′ ), while observing that, with very high
        probability, these multi-graphs are expanders.                                             ◁

        Back to the non-colored version. We now convert the edge-colored multi-graphs G = GM
        that are γ-robustly self-ordered into standard graphs G′ that are robustly self-ordered in the
        original sense. This is done by using Construction 2.3 (while relying on Theorem 2.4). Recall
        that this transformation also preserves expansion. Actually, before invoking Construction 2.3,
        we augment the multi-graph G by adding a self-loop to each vertex, and color all these
        self-loops using a special color. Combining Claim 4.1.1 and Theorem 2.4, the current theorem
        follows.                                                                                    ◀



        4.2    Constructions
        Having established the existence of bounded-degree graphs that are robustly self-ordered,
        we now turn to actually construct them. We shall use the fact that the proof of existence
        yields a construction that runs in time that is polynomial in the number of possible graphs.
        Specifically, for ℓ = O(log  n)                                               ℓ
                              log log n , we shall construct ℓ-vertex graphs in poly(ℓ )-time and use them
        in our construction of n-vertex graphs, while noting that poly(ℓℓ ) = poly(n).

        ▶ Theorem 4.2 (constructing robustly self-ordered graphs). For any sufficiently large constant
        d, there exists an efficiently constructable family {Gn }n∈N of robustly self-ordered graphs of
        maximum degree d. That is, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that on input 1n outputs
        the n-vertex graph Gn = ([n], En ). Furthermore, Gn consists of connected components of size
         O(log n)
         log log n = o(log n).

        Note that the connected components of Gn cannot be any smaller (than O(log   n)
                                                                              log log n ). This is the
        case because an asymmetric n-vertex bounded-degree graph, let alone a robustly self-ordered
                                                        o(log n)
        one, cannot have connected components of size log  log n (because the number of t-vertex
                                     O(t)
        graphs of bounded-degree is t     ).


        Proof. The proof proceeds in two steps. We first use the existence of ℓ-vertex (d′ -regular)
        expander graphs that are robustly self-ordered towards constructing a sequence of m =
        exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) bounded-degree 2ℓ-vertex graphs that are robustly self-ordered, expanding,
        and far from being isomorphic to one another. We construct this sequence of 2ℓ-vertex graphs
        in poly(m)-time, using the fact that (ℓ!)O(1) = poly(m). In the second step, we show that the
                                                                                                                       12:27


(m · 2ℓ)-vertex graph that consists of these 2ℓ-vertex graphs (as its connected components) is
robustly self-ordered. Note that this graph is constructed in time that is polynomial in its
size, since its size is Ω(m), whereas it is constructed in poly(m)-time.17
      Given a generic n, let ℓ = O(log    n)                       ℓ
                                   log log n , which implies that ℓ = poly(n). By Theorem 4.1,
                             ′                        ′
for all sufficiently large d , there exist ℓ-vertex d -regular expander graphs that are robustly
self-ordered (with respect to the robustness parameter c′ ). Furthermore, we can find such a
graph, denoted G′ℓ , in time poly(ℓℓ ) = poly(n), by scanning all ℓ-vertex d′ -regular graphs and
checking both the expansion and the robustness (w.r.t parameter c′ ) conditions for each of
them. Actually, for d′′ = d′ + 1, we shall also find an ℓ-vertex d′′ -regular expander, denoted
G′′ℓ , that is robustly self-ordered.

The construction of Gn . Using G′ℓ and G′′ℓ , we construct an n-vertex robustly self-ordered
graph, denoted Gn , that consists of n/2ℓ connected components that are pairwise far from
being isomorphic to one another. This is done by picking m = n/2ℓ permutations, denoted
π1 , ..., πm : [ℓ] → [ℓ], that are pairwise far-apart and constructing 2ℓ-vertex graphs such that
the ith such graph consist of a copy of G′ℓ and a copy of G′′ℓ that are connected by a matching
as determined by the permutation πi . Specifically, for G′ℓ = ([ℓ], Eℓ′ ) and G′′ℓ = ([ℓ], Eℓ′′ ), the
ith connected component is isomorphic to a graph with the vertex set [2ℓ] and the edge set

     Eℓ′ ∪ {{ℓ + u, ℓ + v} : {u, v} ∈ Eℓ′′ } ∪ {{v, ℓ + πi (v)} : v ∈ [ℓ]}.                                   (5)

(The first two sets correspond to the copies of G′ℓ and G′′ℓ , and the third set corresponds to
the matching between these copies. Note that the vertices in [ℓ] have degree d′ + 1, whereas
vertices in {ℓ + 1, ..., 2ℓ} have degree d′′ + 1 ̸= d′ + 1.)
    To see that this construction can be carried out in poly(n)-time, we need to show that
the sequence of m pairwise far-apart permutations can be determined in poly(n)-time, let
alone that such a sequence exists. This is the case, because we can pick the permutation
sequentially (one after the other) by scanning the symmetric group on [ℓ] and relying on the
fact that for (i < n and) any fixed sequence of permutations π1 , ..., πi−1 : [ℓ] → [ℓ] it holds
that a random permutation πi is far-apart from each of the fixed i − 1 permutations; that is,
Prπi [|{v ∈ [ℓ] : πi (v) ̸= πj (v)}| = Ω(ℓ)] = 1 − o(1/n) for every j ∈ [i − 1].18

Towards proving that Gn is robustly self-ordered. We now prove that the resulting graph
Gn , which consists of these m connected components, is c-robustly self-ordered, where c is a
universal constant (which is independent of the generic n). For starters, let’s verify that Gn
is self-ordered. We first note that any automorphism of Gn must map the verifices of copies
of G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ) to vertices of copies of G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ), since these are the only vertices of
degree d′ + 1. The connectivity of these copies implies that the automorophism must map
each connected component to some connected component, which determines the m connected


17
   We mention that a slightly different construction can be based on the fact that random ℓ-vertex (d′ -
   regular) graphs are robustly self-ordered expanders (see Theorem 6.1). In this alternative construction
   we find a sequence of m such graphs that are pairwise far from being isomorphic to one another. As
   further detailed in Remark 6.2, the analysis of the alternative construction is somewhat easier than
   the analysis of the construction presented below, but we need the current construction for the proof of
   Theorem 4.5.
18
   Specifically, for some ℓ′ = Ω(ℓ), we upper-bound Prπ [|{v ∈ [ℓ] : π(v) = v)}| ≥ ℓ − ℓ′ ], where π : [ℓ] → [ℓ]
   is a random permutation. We do so by observing that the number of permutations that have at least
   ℓ − ℓ′ fixed-points is at most ℓℓ′ · (ℓ′ !) = (ℓ−ℓ
                                                   ℓ!                      ′
                                                      ′ )! , whereas (ℓ − ℓ )! = exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) = ω(n) for any ℓ
                                                                                                                  ′

   such that ℓ − ℓ′ = Ω(ℓ).




                                                                                                                      CCC 2021
12:28


        components. The self-ordered feature of G′ℓ and G′′ℓ determines a unique ordering on each
        copy, whereas the fact the permutations (i.e., πi ’s) are different imposes that each connected
        component is mapped to itself (i.e., the order of the connected components is preserved).
        Hence, the automorphism must be trivial (and it follows that Gn is self-ordered).
             An analogous argument establishes the robust self-ordering of Gn , where we use the
        hypothesis that G′ℓ and G′′ℓ are expanders (rather than merely connected), the choice of the
        πi ’s as being far-apart (rather than merely different), and the robust self-ordering of G′ℓ and
        G′′ℓ (rather than their mere self-ordering) in order to establish the robust self-ordering of
        Gn . Considering an arbitrary permutation µ : [n] → [n], these stronger features are used to
        establish a lower bound on the size of the symmetric difference between Gn and µ(Gn ) as
        follows:
             The fact that G′ℓ is an expander implies that if µ splits the vertices of a copy of G′ℓ such
             that ℓ′ vertices are mapped to copies that are different than the other ℓ − ℓ′ ≥ ℓ′ vertices,
             then this contributes Ω(ℓ′ ) units to the difference between Gn and µ(Gn ). Ditto for G′′ℓ ,
             whereas mapping a copy of G′ℓ to a copy of G′′ℓ contributes Ω(ℓ) units (per the difference
             in the degrees).
             The robust self-ordering of G′ℓ and G′′ℓ implies that if µ changes the index of vertices
             inside a component, then this yields a proportional difference between Gn and µ(Gn ).
             The distance between the πi ’s (along with the aforementioned robustness) implies that if
             µ changes the indices of the connected components, then each such change contributes
             Ω(ℓ) units to the difference between Gn and µ(Gn ).
        The actual implementation of this sketch requires a careful accounting of the various contri-
        butions. As a first step in this direction we provide a more explicit description of Gn . We
        denote the set of vertices of the copy of G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ) in the ith connected component of
        Gn by Fi = {2(i − 1)ℓ + j : j ∈ [ℓ]} (resp., Si = {2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + j : j ∈ [ℓ]}). Recall that Fi
        and Si are connected by the edge-set

              {{2(i − 1)ℓ + j, 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j)} : j ∈ [ℓ]}                                           (6)

        whereas the subgraph of Gn induced by Fi (resp., Si ) has the edge-set {{2(i − 1)ℓ + u, 2(i −
        1) + v} : {u, v} ∈ Eℓ′ } (resp., {{2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + u, 2(i − 1) + ℓ + v} : {u, v} ∈ Eℓ′′ }). In addition,
                 S                        S
        let F = i∈[m] Fi (resp., S = i∈[m] Si ).


        The actual proof (that Gn is robustly self-ordered). Considering an arbitrary permutation
        µ : [n] → [n], we lower-bound the distance (i.e., size of the symmetric difference) between
        Gn and µ(Gn ) as a function of the number of non-fixed-points under µ (i.e., the number of
        v ∈ [n] such that µ(v) ̸= v). We do so by considering the (average) contribution of every
        non-fixed-point to the distance between Gn and µ(Gn ) (i.e., number of pairs of vertices that
        form an edge in one graph but not in the other). We may include the same contribution
        in few of the following (seven) cases, but this only means that we are double-counting the
        contribution by a constant factor.
        Case 1: Vertices v ∈ F such that µ−1 (v) ∈ S. Ditto for v ∈ S such that µ−1 (v) ∈ F .
           Each such vertex contributes at least one unit to the distance (between Gn and µ(G)) by
           virtue of v having degree d′ + 1 in Gn and strictly higher degree in µ(Gn ), since vertices
           in F have degree d′ + 1 (in Gn ) whereas vertices in S have higher degree (in Gn ).19


        19
             Note that v neighbors u in µ(Gn ) if and only if µ−1 (v) neighbors µ−1 (u) in Gn .
                                                                                                           12:29


In light of Case 1, we may focus on vertices whose “type” is preserved by µ−1 . Actually, it
will be more convenient to consider the set of vertices whose “type” is preserved by µ; that
is, the set {v ∈ F : µ(v) ∈ F } ∪ {v ∈ S : µ(v) ∈ S}. Next, for each i ∈ [m], we define µ′ (i) to be
                                                                                               def
the index of the connected component that takes the plurality of µ(Fi ); that is, µ′ (i) = j if
|{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fj }| ≥ |{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fk }| for all k ∈ [m] (breaking ties arbitrarily).
Case 2: Vertices v ∈ Fi such that µ(v) ∈ F \ Fµ′ (i) .
   For starters, suppose that |{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) }| ≥ ℓ/2; that is, a majority of the vertices
   of Fi are mapped by µ to Fµ′ (i) . In this case, by the expansion of G′ℓ , we get a contribution
                                                        def
   that is proportional to the size of the set Fi′ = {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ̸∈ Fµ′ (i) }, because there are
   Ω(|Fi′ |) edges betwen Fi′ and the rest of Fi but there are no edges between Fi′ and Fi \ Fi′
   in µ(Gn ). In the general case, we have to be more careful since expansion is guaranteed
   only for sets that have size at most ℓ/2. In such a case we use an adequate subset of Fi′ .
   Details follow.
   Let J ⊆ [m] \ {µ′ (i)} be maximal such that j∈J |{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fj }| ≤ ℓ/2, and note
                                                      P
             def S
   that Fi′ = j∈J {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fj } occupies at least one third of {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ F \ Fµ′ (i) }.
   Recall that the subgraph of Gn induced by Fi is an expander, and consider the edges in
   Gn that cross the cut between Fi′ and the rest of Fi . Then, this cut has Ω(|Fi′ |) edges in
   Gn , but there are no edges between Fi′ and Fi \ Fi′ in µ(Gn ), because µ−1 (Fi′ ) ⊆ j∈J Fj
                                                                                           S

   and µ−1 (Fi \ Fi′ ) ⊆ j∈[m]\J Fj are not connected in Gn . Hence, the total contribution
                          S

   of the vertices in {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ F \ Fµ′ (i) } to the distance (between Gn and µ(G)) is
   Ω(|Fi′ |), which is proportional to their number (i.e., is Ω(|{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ F \ Fµ′ (i) }|)).
Defining µ′′ (i) in an analogous manner with respect to µ(Si ), we get an analogous contribution
by the expander induced by Si . Specifically, for each i ∈ [m], we define µ′′ (i) to be the
                                                                                               def
index of the connected component that takes the plurality of µ(Si ); that is, µ′′ (i) = j if
|{v ∈ Si : µ(v) ∈ Sj }| ≥ |{v ∈ Si : µ(v) ∈ Sk }| for all k ∈ [m] (breaking ties arbitrarily).
Case 3: Vertices v ∈ Si such that µ(v) ∈ S \ Sµ′′ (i) .
    Here we get a contribution of Ω(|{v ∈ Si : µ(v) ∈ S \ Sµ′′ (i) }|), where the analysis is
    analogous to Case 2.
Recall that if v ∈ Fi then it holds that v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j for some j ∈ [ℓ], and that (in Gn )
vertex v has a unique neighbor in S, which is 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j) ∈ Si . It will be convinient
to denote this neighbor by ϕi (v); that is, for v ∈ Fi such that v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j, we have
ϕi (v) = 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j) ∈ Si . The next two cases refer to vertices that are mapped by µ
according to the plurality vote (e.g., v ∈ Fi is mapped to µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) ), but their match is
not mapped accordingly (i.e., ϕi (v) ∈ Si is not mapped to Sµ′ (i) ).
Case 4: Vertices v ∈ Fi such that µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) but µ(ϕi (v)) ̸∈ Sµ′ (i) .
  (Note that the condition v ∈ Fi and µ(v) ∈ Fπ′ (i) means that vertex v is not covered in
   Case 2. If µ′′ (i) = µ′ (i), then µ(ϕi (v)) ̸∈ Sµ′ (i) means that v is covered in Case 3, since
   ϕi (v) ∈ Si . Hence, the current case is of interest only when µ′′ (i) ̸= µ′ (i). In particular,
   it is of interest when referring to vertices in the ith connected component of Gn that
   reside in the copies of G′ℓ and G′′ℓ and are mapped according to the plurality votes of
   these copies, whereas these two plurality votes are inconsistent.)
   We focus on the case that a vast majority of the vertices in both Fi and Si are mapped
   according to the plurality votes (i.e., µ′ (i) and µ′′ (i)), since the complementary cases are
   covered by Cases 2 and 3, respectively. Specifically, if either |{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ [n] \ Fµ′ (i) }| >
   ℓ/3 or |{u ∈ Si : µ(u) ∈ [n] \ Sµ′′ (i) }| > ℓ/3, then we get a contribution of Ω(ℓ) either by
   Cases 1&2 or by Cases 1&3. Otherwise, it follows that
       |{v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) ∧ µ(ϕi (v)) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) }| ≥ ℓ − 2 · ℓ/3



                                                                                                          CCC 2021
12:30


            which implies that, if µ′ (i) ̸= µ′′ (i), then the ith connected component of Gn contributes
            ℓ/3 units to the difference (between Gn and µ(Gn )), since v and ϕi (v) are connected in
            Gn , but µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) and µ(ϕi (v)) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) reside in different connected components of
            µ(Gn ). (That is, the contribution is due to vertices v of Fi that are mapped by µ to
            Fµ′ (i) , while the corresponding vertices ϕi (v) of Si (which are connected to them in Gn )
            are mapped by µ to Sµ′′ (i) ⊂ S \ Sµ′ (i) , whereas Fµ′ (i) and Sµ′′ (i) are not connected in
            Gn , assuming µ′ (i) ̸= µ′′ (i).)
            To conclude: The contribution of the vertices of Case 4 (to the difference between Gn and
            µ(Gn )) is proportional to the number of these vertices (where this contribution might
            have been counted already in Cases 1, 2 and 3).
        Case 5: Vertices v ∈ Fi such that µ(v) ̸∈ Fµ′′ (i) but µ(ϕi (v)) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) .
            (Equiv., vertices v ∈ Si such that µ(v) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) but µ(ϕ−1  i (v)) ̸∈ Fµ′′ (i) .)
            Analogously to Case 4, the contribution of these vertices is proportional to their number.
            (Analogously, this augments Case 2 only in case µ′′ (i) ̸= µ′ (i).)
        In light of Cases 2–5, we may focus on indices i ∈ [m] such that µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i) and on vertices
        in ith connected component that are mapped by µ to the µ′ (i)th connected component (and
        the same ”type” per Case 1). The following case refers to such vertices that do not maintain
        their position in this connected component.
        Case 6: Vertices v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fi such that µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) \ {2(µ′ (i) − 1)ℓ + j}.
           Ditto for v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + j ∈ Si such that µ(v) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) \ {2(µ′′ (i) − 1)ℓ + ℓ + j}.
          (This case refers to vertices in Fi that are mapped to Fµ′ (i) but do not maintain their
           index in the relevant copy of G′ℓ ; indeed, v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j is the j th vertex of Fi , but it is
           mapped by µ to the k th vertex of Fµ′ (i) (i.e., µ(v) = 2(µ′ (i) − 1)ℓ + k) such that k ̸= j.)
                            def
            Fixing i, let C = {v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fi : µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) \ {2(µ′ (i) − 1)ℓ + j}} denote the
            set of vertices considered in this case, and D = {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ̸∈ Fµ′ (i) } denote the set
            of vertices that we are going to discount for. As a warm-up, consider first the case that
            D = ∅. In this case, by the robust self-ordering of G′ℓ , the contribution of the vertices in
            C to the difference between Gn and µ(Gn ) is Ω(|C|).
            In the general case (i.e., where D may not be empty), we get a contribution of Ω(|C|) −
            d′ · |D|, where the second term compensates for the fact that the vertices of D were
            moved outside of this copy of G′ℓ and replaced by different vertices that may have different
            incidences. Letting c′ be the constant hidden in the Ω-notation, we get a contribution of
            at least c′ · |D| − d′ · |D|, which is at least c′ · |C|/2 if |D| ≤ c′ · |C|/2d′ . On the other
            hand, if |D| > c′ · |C|/2d′ , then we get a contribution of Ω(|D|) = Ω(|C|) by Cases 1–2.
            Hence, in both sub-cases we have a contribution of Ω(|C|) to the difference between Gn
            and µ(Gn ).
            The same analysis applies to {v = 2(i−1)ℓ+ℓ+j ∈ Si : µ(v) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) \{2(µ′′ (i)−1)ℓ+ℓ+j}},
            where we use the robust self-ordering of G′′ℓ and Cases 1&3.
        Lastly, we consider vertices that do not fall into any of the prior cases. Such vertices
        maintain their type, are mapped with the plurality vote of their connected component,
        which is consistent among its two parts (i.e., µ′ and µ′′ ), and maintain their position in that
        component. Hence, the hypothesis that they are not fixed-points of µ can only be attributed
        to the fact that these vertices are mapped to a connected component with a different index.
        Case 7: Vertices v ∈ Fi such that both µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) \ Fi and µ(ϕi (v)) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) \ Si hold.
          (We may assume that µ′ (i) ̸= i and µ′′ (i) ̸= i, since otherwise this set is empty. We may
           also assume that µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i), since the complementary case was covered by Cases 4
           and 5. Hence, we focus on pairs of vertices that are matched in the ith connected
           component of Gn and are mapped by µ to the k th component of Gn such that k ̸= i.)
                                                                                                              12:31


      For every i ̸= k, let ∆i,k = {j ∈ [ℓ] : πi (j) ̸= πk (j)} be the sets on which πi and πk differ.
      (Note that if for every v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fi it holds that µ(v) = 2(k − 1)ℓ + j and
      µ(ϕi (v)) = 2(k − 1)ℓ + πi (j) (equiv., µ(2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j)) = 2(k − 1)ℓ + πi (j)), then
      we get a contribution of |∆i,k | to the difference between Gn and µ(Gn ).)
      Fixing i, let D = D1 ∪ D2 such that
       D1 = {v ∈ Fi : µ(v) ̸∈ Fµ′ (i) ∨ µ(v + ℓ) ̸∈ Sµ′′ (i) }
                                                 µ(v) ∈ Fµ′ (i) \ {2(µ′ (i) − 1)ℓ + j}
                                                                                                        
       D2 =          v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fi :
                                                 ∨ µ(ϕi (v)) ∈ Sµ′′ (i) \ {2(µ′′ (i) − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j)}
      (Recall that ϕi (2(i − 1)ℓ + j) = 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j). The set D1 accounts for the vertices
      covered in Cases 2&3, whereas D2 accounts for the vertices covered in (the two sub-cases
      of) Case 6.)
      As a warm-up, consider first the case that D = ∅. In this case, assuming µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i) ̸= i,
      we get a contribution of |∆i,µ′ (i) | = Ω(ℓ) (to the difference between Gn and µ(Gn )). This
      contribution is due to the difference in the edges that match Fµ′ (i) and Sµ′ (i) in Gn and
      the edges that match Fi and Si in Gn , where |∆i,µ′ (i) | = Ω(ℓ) is due to the fact that the
      permutations (i.e., πk ’s) are far-apart. The hypothesis D1 = ∅ means that all vertices of
      Fi (resp., of Si ) are mapped to Fµ′ (i) (resp., to Sµ′′ (i) = Sµ′ (i) ), whereas D2 = ∅ means
      that these vertices preserves their order within the two parts of the connected component.
      The general case (i.e., where D may not be empty) requires a bit more care. Suppose that
      the πk ’s are γ-apart; that is, |∆k′ ,k | > γ · ℓ for every k ′ ̸= k. We focus on the case that
      a vast majority of the vertices in both Fi and Si are mapped according to the plurality
      votes (i.e., µ′ (i) and µ′′ (i)), since the complementary cases are covered by Cases 2 and 3,
      respectively. Specifically, if |D1 | > γℓ/3, then we get a contribution of Ω(ℓ) by either
      Case 2 or Case 3. Likewise, if |D2 | > γℓ/3, then we get a contribution of Ω(ℓ) by Case 6.
      So, assuming µ′ (i) ̸= i, we are left with the case that

          |{v = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fi \ D : j ∈ ∆i,µ′ (i) }| ≥ γℓ − 2γℓ/3.

   In this case, assuming µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i), we get a contribution of at least γℓ/3 to the
   difference between Gn and µ(Gn ). This contribution is due to the difference in the edges
   that match Fµ′ (i) and Sµ′ (i) in Gn and the edges that match Fi and Si in Gn , where
   edges that have an endpoint (or its ϕi -mate) in D were discarded. Specifically, letting
   k = µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i) ̸= i, the pair (v, w) = (2(i − 1)ℓ + j, 2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j)) ∈ Fi × Si
   contributes to the difference if j ∈ ∆i,k and both µ(v) = 2(k − 1)ℓ + j ∈ Fk and
   µ(w) = 2(k − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j) ∈ Sk hold (i.e., v ̸∈ D1 and v, ϕ−1 i (w) ̸∈ D2 ).
                                                                                    20
                                                                                       Indeed, in
                                                                         −1
   this case {v, w} is an edge in Gn but {v, w} is not an edge in µ (Gn ). (Hence, if the
   number of vertices of this case is Ω(|{u ∈ [n] : µ(u) ̸= u}|), then the difference between
   Gn and µ−1 (Gn ) is Ω(|{u ∈ [n] : µ(u) ̸= u}|), and the same holds with respect to the
   difference between µ(Gn ) and Gn .)
Combining all these cases, we get a total contribution that is proportional to |{v ∈ [n] :
µ(v) ̸= v}|, where we might have counted the same contribution in several different cases.
Since the number of cases is a constant, the theorem follows.                                  ◀


Digest: Using large collections of pairwise far apart permutations
The construction presented in the proof of Theorem 4.2 utilizes a collection of (ℓ!)Ω(1)
permutations over [ℓ] that are pairwise far-apart (i.e., every two permutations differ on
Ω(ℓ) inputs). Such a collection is constructed in O(ℓ!)-time
                                                    e           by an iterative exhaustive


20
     Recall that ϕ−1
                  i (w) = ϕ
                            −1
                               ((2(i − 1)ℓ + ℓ + πi (j))) = 2(i − 1)ℓ + j = v.

                                                                                                             CCC 2021
12:32


        search, where the permutations are selected iteratively such that in each iteration we find a
        permutation that is far from permutations that were included in previous iterations. We
        mention that in Section 4.3 we shall use a collection of exp(Ω(ℓ)) such permutations that
        is locally computable (i.e., given the index of a permutation we find its explicit description
        in polynomial time). We also mention that, in follow-up work [21], we provided a locally
        computable collection of (ℓ!)Ω(1) that are pairwise far-apart.

        Digest: Combining two robustly self-ordered graphs
        One ingredient in the proof of Theorem 4.2 is forming connected components that consist
        of two robustly self-ordered graphs that have different vertex degrees and are connected by
        a bounded-degree bipartite graph. Implicit in the proof is the fact that such the resulting
        graph is robustly self-ordered graph.
        ▷ Claim 4.3 (combining two Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered graphs). For i ∈ {1, 2} and constant
        γ > 0, let Gi = (Vi , Ei ) be an γ-robustly self-ordered graph, and consider a graph G =
        (V1 ∪ V2 , E1 ∪ E2 ∪ E) of maximum degree d such that E contain edges with a single vertex
        in each Vi ; that is, G consists of G1 and G2 and an arbitrary bipartite graph that connects
        them. If the maximun degree in G of each vertex in V1 is strictly smaller than the minimum
        degree of each vertex in V2 , then G is γ/(2d + 3)-robustly self-ordered.
        Proof Sketch. For an arbitrary permutation µ : V → V , let T denote the set of its non-fixed-
        points, and consider the following two cases.
        Case 1: More than t = γ ′ ·|T | vertices are mapped by µ from G1 to G2 , where γ ′ = γ/(2d+3).
           In this case, we get a contribution of at least one unit per each such vertex, due to the
           difference in the degrees between V1 and V2 .
        Case 2: at most t vertices are mapped by µ from G1 to G2 .
           In this case, letting Ti denote the set of non-fixed vertices in Gi that are mapped by µ
                                                       P
           to Gi , we get a contribution of at least i=1,2 (γ · |Ti | − d · t) units, where the negative
           term is due to possible change in the incidence with vertices in T \ Ti . Hence, the total
           contribution in this case is at least γ · (|T | − 2t) − 2d · t = γ ′ · |T |.
        The claim follows.                                                                            ◁

        Regaining regularity and expansion
        While Theorem 4.2 achieves our main objective, it useful towards some applications (see,
        e.g., the proof of Theorem 4.5) to obtain this objective with graphs that are both regular
        and expanding. This is achieved by applying Theorem 2.6. Hence, we have.
        ▶ Theorem 4.4 (Theorem 4.2, revised). For any sufficiently large constant d, there exists an
        efficiently constructable family {Gn }n∈N of robustly self-ordered d-regular expander graphs.
        That is, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that on input 1n outputs the n-vertex
        graph Gn .


        4.3    Strong (i.e., local) constructions
        While Theorem 4.4 provides an efficient construction of robustly self-ordered d-regular
        expander graphs, we seek a stronger notion of constructability. Specifically, rather than
        requiring that the graph be constructed in time that is polynomial in its size, we require that
        the neighbors of any given vertex can be found in time that is polynomial in the vertex’s
        name (i.e., time that is polylogarithmic in the size of the graph). We call such graphs locally
        constructable (and comment that the term “strongly explicit” is often used in the literature).
                                                                                                                     12:33


▶ Theorem 4.5 (locally constructing robustly self-ordered graphs). For any sufficiently large
constant d, there exists a locally constructable family {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N of robustly self-
ordered d-regular graphs. That is, there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that on input n
and v ∈ [n] outputs the list of neighbours of vertex v in Gn . Furthermore, the graphs are
either expanders or consist of connected components of logarithmic size.

(Indeed, this establishes Theorem 1.3.) We comment that using the result of [21], we can
also get connected components of sub-logarithmic size, as in Theorem 4.2.21

Proof. We employ the idea that underlies the proof of Theorem 4.2, while starting with an
efficiently constructable family of robustly self-ordered graphs (as provided by Theorem 4.4)
rather than with the mere existence of a family of such graphs (equiv., with ℓ-vertex graphs
that can be constructed in poly(ℓ!)-time). We use a slightly larger setting of ℓ, which allows
us to use a collection of exp(Ω(ℓ)) pairwise-far-apart permutations (rather than a collection
of exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) such permutations). Lastly, we apply the same transformation as in the
proof of Theorem 4.4 (so to regain regularity and expansion). Details follow.
     Given a generic n, let ℓ = O(log n), which implies that exp(ℓ) = poly(n). By Theorem 4.4,
for all sufficiently large d′ , we can construct ℓ-vertex d′ -regular expander graphs that are
robustly self-ordered (with respect to the robustness parameter c) in poly(ℓ)-time. Again,
we shall use two such graphs: a d′ -regular graph, denoted G′ℓ = ([ℓ], Eℓ′ ), and a d′′ -regular
graph, denoted G′′ℓ = ([ℓ], Eℓ′′ ), where d′′ = d′ + 1.
     Using G′ℓ and G′′ℓ , we construct an n-vertex robustly self-ordered graph, denoted Gn , that
consists of n/2ℓ connected components that are pairwise far from being isomorphic to one
another. This is done by picking m = n/2ℓ permutations, denoted π1 , ..., πm : [ℓ] → [ℓ], that
are pairwise far-apart, and constructing 2ℓ-vertex graphs such that the ith such graph consist
of a copy of G′ℓ and a copy of G′′ℓ that are connected by a matching as determined by the
permutation πi . (as detailed in (7)).
     Using the fact that m < 2ℓ (rather that m = exp(Θ(ℓ log ℓ))), we can construct each of
these permutations in poly(ℓ)-time by using sequences of disjoint traspositions determined
via a good error correcting code. Specifically, for k = log2 m < log2 n, we use an error
correcting code C : {0, 1}k → {0, 1}ℓ of constant rate (i.e., ℓ = O(k)) and linear distance
(i.e., the codewords are Ω(ℓ) bits apart from each other), and let πi (2j − 1) = 2j − 1 + C(i)j
and πi (2j) = 2j − C(i)j , where i ∈ [m] = [2k ] ≡ {0, 1}k and j ∈ [ℓ/2]. (That is, the ith
permutation switches the pair (2j − 1, 2j) ∈ [ℓ]2 if and only if the j th bit in the ith codeword
is 1, where C(i) is considered the ith codeword.)
     Like in the proof of Theorem 4.2, the ith connected component of Gn is isomorphic to a
graph with the vertex set [2ℓ] and the edge set

      Eℓ′ ∪ {{ℓ + u, ℓ + v} : {u, v} ∈ Eℓ′′ } ∪ {{v, ℓ + πi (v)} : v ∈ [ℓ]}.                                 (7)

The key observation is that, for every i ∈ [m] and j ∈ [ℓ], the neighborhood of the j th (resp.,
(ℓ + j)th ) vertex in the ith connected component of the n-vertex graph Gn is determined by
G′ℓ and πi (j) (resp., by G′′ℓ and πi−1 (j)), which means that it can be found in poly(ℓ)-time.
This implies local constructability, since ℓ = O(log n).


21
     Specifically, the result of [21] provides a construction of a collection of L = exp(Ω(ℓ log ℓ)) permutations
     over [ℓ] that are pairwise far-apart along with a polynomial-time algorithm that, on input i ∈ [L],
     returns a description of the ith permutation (i.e., the algorithm should run in poly(log L)-time). Using
     this algorithm, we can afford to set ℓ = O(log      n)
                                                  log log n as in Theorem 4.2.




                                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:34


           The fact that Gn is robustly self-ordered was already established in the proof of The-
        orem 4.2, which is oblivious of the permutations used as long as any pair of permutations
        disagrees on Ω(ℓ) points. Lastly, we may obtain regularity and expansion by applying
        Theorem 2.6.                                                                           ◀

        4.4    Local self-ordering
        Recall that by Definition 1.1 a graph G = ([n], E) is called self-ordered if for every graph
        G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to G there exists a unique bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n] such that
        ϕ(G′ ) = G. One reason for our preferring the term “self-ordered” over the classical term
        “asymmetric” is that we envision being given such an isomorphic copy G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) and
        asked to find its unique isomorphism to G, which may be viewed as ordering the vertices
        of G′ according to (their name in) G. The task of finding this unique isomorphism will be
        called self-ordering G′ according to G or self-ordering G′ (when G is clear from the context).
            Evidently, the task of self-ordering a given graph G′ according to a self-ordered graph G
        that can be efficiently constructed reduces to testing isomorphism. When the graphs have
        bounded-degree the latter task can be performed in polynomial-time [29]. These are general
        facts that do apply also to the robustly self-ordered graph Gn constructed in the proof of
        Theorem 4.5. However, in light of the fact that the graph Gn is locally constructable, we can
        hope for more. Specifically, it is natural to ask if we can perform self-ordering of a graph G′
        that is isomorphic to Gn in a local manner; that is, given a vertex in G′ (and oracle access to
        the incidence function of G′ ), can we find the corresponding vertex in Gn in poly(log n)-time?
        Let us define this notion formally.

        ▶ Definition 4.6 (locally self-ordering a self-ordered graph). We say that a self-ordered graph
        G = ([n], E) is locally self-ordered if there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that, given a
        vertex v in any graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to G and oracle access to the incidence
        function of G′ , finds ϕ(v) ∈ [n] for the unique bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n] such that ϕ(G′ ) = G
        (i.e., the unique isomorphism of G′ to G).

        Indeed, the isomorphism ϕ orders the vertices of G′ in accordance with the original (or
        target) graph G. We stress that the foregoing algorithm works in time that is polynomial in
        the description of a vertex (i.e., poly(log n))-time), which is polylogarithmic in the size of
        the graph (i.e., n). We show that such algorithms exist for the graphs constructed in the
        proof of Theorem 4.5.

        ▶ Theorem 4.7 (locally self-ordering the graphs of Theorem 4.5). For any sufficiently large
        constant d, there exists a locally constructable family {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N of robustly self-
        ordered d-regular graphs that are locally self-ordered. Furthermore, the graphs are either
        expanders or consist of connected components of logarithmic size.

        As in Theorem 4.5, we can obtain connected components of sub-logarithmic size by using [21].



        Proof. We first consider the version that yields n-vertex graphs that consist of connected
        components of logarithmic size. The basic idea is that it we can afford reconstructing the
        connected component in which the input vertex reside, and this allows us both to determine
        the index of the vertex in this connected component as well as the index of the component
        in the graph. Specifically, on input a vertex v in a graph G′ that is isomorphic to Gn , we
        proceed as follows.
                                                                                                            12:35


1. Using queries to the incidence function of G′ , we explore and retrieve the entire 2ℓ-vertex
    connected component in which v resides, where ℓ = log2 n.
    Recall that this connected component consists of (copies of) two ℓ-vertex regular graphs,
    denoted G′ℓ and G′′ℓ , that are connected by a matching. Furthermore, these graphs have
    different degrees and are each (robustly) self-ordered.
2. Relying on the different degrees, we identify the foregoing partition of this 2ℓ-vertex
    component into two ℓ-vertex (self-ordered) graphs, denoted Av and Bv , where Av (resp.,
    Bv ) is isomorphic to G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ).
3. Relying on the self-ordering of G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ), we order the vertices of Av (resp., G′′v ).
    This is done by constructing G′ℓ (resp., G′′ℓ ), and using an isomorphism tester. The order
    of the vertices in Av and Bv also determines the permutation that defines the matching
    between the two graphs.
4. Relying on the correspondence between the permutations used in the construction and
    codewords of a good error-correcting code, we decode the relevant codeword (i.e., this
    is decoding without error). This yields the index of the permutation in the collection,
    which equals the index of the connected component.
Note that this refers to the basic construction that was presented in the proof of Theorem 4.5,
before it was transformed to a regular graph and to an expander. Recall that both trans-
formations are performed by augmenting the graph with auxiliary edges that are assigned a
different color than the original edges, and that edges with different colors are later replaced
by copies of different (constant-size) gadgets. These transformations do not hinder the local
self-ordering procedure described above, since it may identify the original graph (and ignore
the gadgets that replace other edges). The claim follows.                                      ◀

Local reversed self-ordering
While local self-ordering a (self-ordered) graph seems the natural local version of self-ordering
the graph, an alternative notion called local reversed self-ordering will be defined and studied
next (and used in Section 5). Both notions refer to a self-ordered graph, denoted G = ([n], E),
and to an isomorphic copy of it, denoted G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ); that is, G = ϕ(G′ ) for a (unique)
bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n]. While local self-ordering is the task of finding the index of a given
vertex of G′ according to G (i.e., given v ∈ V ′ , find ϕ(v) ∈ [n]), local reversed self-ordering
is the task of finding the vertex of G′ that has a given index in G (i.e., given i ∈ [n], find
ϕ−1 (i) ∈ V ′ ). In both cases, the graph G is locally constructible and we are given oracle
access to the incidence function of G′ . In addition, in the reversed task, we assume that
the algorithm is given an arbitrary vertex in G′ , since otherwise there is no hope to hit any
element of V ′ .22

▶ Definition 4.8 (locally reversed self-ordering). We say that a self-ordered graph G = ([n], E)
is locally reversed self-ordered if there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that, given i ∈ [n]
and oracle access to the incidence function of a graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to G
and an arbitrary vertex s ∈ V ′ , finds ϕ−1 (i) ∈ V ′ for the unique bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n] such
that ϕ(G′ ) = G (i.e., the unique isomorphism of G′ to G).

We stress that the foregoing algorithm works in time that is polynomial in the description of
a vertex (i.e., poly(log n))-time), which is polylogarithmic in the size of the graph (i.e., n).
We show that such algorithms exist for variants of the graphs constructed in the proof of
Theorem 4.5. In fact, we show a more general result that refers to any graph that is locally
self-ordered and for which short paths can be locally found between any given pair of vertices.


22
     Needless to say, this is not needed in case V ′ = [n], which is the case that is used in Section 5.


                                                                                                           CCC 2021
12:36


        ▶ Theorem 4.9 (sufficient conditions for locally reversed self-ordering of graphs). Suppose that
        {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N is a family of bounded degree graphs that is locally self-ordered. Further
        suppose that given v, u ∈ [n], one can find in polynomial-time a path from u to v in Gn .
        Then, {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N is locally reversed self-ordered.

        We mention that a family of robustly self-ordered graphs that is locally self-ordered can
        be transformed into one that also supports locally finding short paths. This is done by
        superimposing the graphs of this family with graphs that supports locally finding short paths,
        while using different colors for the edges of the two graphs and later replacing these colored
        edges by gadgets (as done in Section 2.1). We also mention that applying degree reduction
        to the hyper-cube (i.e., replacing the original vertices with simple cycles) yields a graph that
        supports locally finding short paths.23


        Proof. On input i ∈ [n] and s ∈ V ′ , and oracle access to the incidence function of a graph
        G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to Gn , we proceeds as follows.
        1. Using the local self-ordering algorithm, we find i0 = ϕ(s), where ϕ : V ′ → [n] is the
           unique bijection satisfying ϕ(G′ ) = G.
        2. Using the path-finding algorithm for G, we find a poly(log n)-long path from i0 to i in G.
           Let ℓ denote the length of the path, and denote its intermediate vertices by i1 , ..., iℓ−1 ;
           that is, the full path is i0 , i1 , ..., iℓ−1 , iℓ = i.
                                                def
        3. For j = 1, ..., ℓ, we find vj = ϕ−1 (ij ) as follows. First, using queries to the incidence
                                                                                                 def
            function of G′ , we find all neighbors (in G′ ) of vj−1 , where v0 = s (and, indeed,
            v0 = ϕ−1 (i0 )). Next, using the local self-ordering algorithm, we find the indices of all
            these vertices in G; that is, for every vertex w that neighbors vj−1 , we find ϕ(w). Last,
            we set vj to be the neighbor that has index ij in G; that is, vj satisfies ϕ(vj ) = ij .
        Hence, vℓ is the desired vertex; that is, vℓ satisfies ϕ(vℓ ) = iℓ = i.
            Assuming that the local self-ordering algorithm has query complexity q(n), that the paths
        found in G have length at most ℓ(n), and that d is the degree bound, the query complexity
        of our reversed self-ordering algorithm is (1 + ℓ(n) · d) · (q(n) + 1), where we count both
        our direct queries to the incidence function of G and the queries performed by the local
        self-ordering algorithm. Similar considerations apply to its time complexity.                ◀

        ▶ Corollary 4.10 (a version of Theorem 4.7 supporting local reversed self-ordering). For any
        sufficiently large constant d, there exists a locally constructable family {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N
        of robustly self-ordered graphs of maximum degree d that are both locally self-ordered and
        locally reversed self-ordered.

        The corollary follows by combining Theorem 4.7 with Theorem 4.9, while using the augment-
        ation outlined following the statement of Theorem 4.9. We mention that Corollary 4.10 will
        be used in Section 5.


        23
             For any ℓ ∈ N, the resulting graph consists of the vertex-set {⟨x, i⟩ : x ∈ {0, 1}ℓ & i∈ [ℓ]} and edges
             that connect ⟨x, i⟩ to ⟨x ⊕ 0i−1 10ℓ−i , i⟩ and to ⟨x, i + 1⟩, where ℓ + 1 stands for 1. For simplicity of
             exposition, we also add self-loops on all vertices. Then, given ⟨x, i⟩ and ⟨y, j⟩, we can combine the
             2ℓ-path that goes from ⟨x, i⟩ to ⟨y, i⟩ with the |j − i|-path that goes from ⟨y, i⟩ to ⟨y, j⟩, where the odd
             steps on the first path move from ⟨z, k⟩ to ⟨z ⊕ 0i−1 10ℓ−i , k⟩ (or stay in place) and the even steps (on
             this path) move from ⟨z, k⟩ to ⟨z, k + 1⟩.
                                                                                                     12:37


 5     Application to Testing Bounded-Degree Graph Properties
Our interest in efficiently constructable bounded-degree graphs that are robustly self-ordered
was triggered by an application to property testing. Specifically, we observed that such
constructions can be used for proving a linear lower bound on the query complexity of testing
an efficiently recognizable graph property in the bounded-degree graph model.
    It is well known that 3-Colorability has such a lower bound [3], but this set is NP-
complete. On the other hand, linear lower bounds on the query complexity of testing
efficiently recognizable properties of functions (equiv., sequences) are well known (see [18,
Sec. 10.2.3]). So the idea was to transport the latter lower bounds from the domain of
functions to the domain of bounded-degree graphs, and this is where efficient constructions of
robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs come into play. (We mention that an alternative
way of obtaining the desired lower bound was outlined in [17, Sec. 1], see details below.)
    More generally, the foregoing transportation demonstrates a general methodology of
transporting lower bounds that refer to testing binary strings to lower bounds regarding
testing graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model. The point is that strings are
ordered objects, whereas graphs properties are effectively sets of unlabeled graphs, which
are unordered objects. Hence, we need to make the graphs (in the property) ordered, and
furthermore make this ordering robust in the very sense that is reflected in Definition 1.2.
Essentially, we provide a reduction of testing a property of strings to testing a (related)
property of graphs.
    We apply this methodology to obtain a subexponential separation between the complexities
of testing and tolerant testing of graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model. This
result is obtained by transporting an analogous result that was known for testing binary
strings [15]. In addition to using a reduction from tolerantly testing a property of strings
to tolerantly testing a property of graphs, this trasportation also uses a reduction in the
opposite direction, which relies on the local computation features asserted in Corollary 4.10.

Organization of this section
We start with a brief review of the bounded-degree graph model for testing graph properties.
Next, we prove the aforementioned linear lower bound on the query complexity of testing an
efficiently recognizable property, and later we abstract the reduction that underlies this proof.
Observing that this reduction applies also to tolerant testing, and presenting a reduction in
the opposite direction, we derive the aforementioned separation between testing and tolerant
testing.

Background
Property testing refers to algorithms of sublinear query complexity for approximate decision;
that is, given oracle access to an object, these algorithms (called testers) distinguish objects
that have a predetermined property from objects that are far from the property. Different
models of property testing arise from different query access and different distance measures.
    In the last couple of decades, the area of property testing has attracted significant
attention (see, e.g., [16]). Much of this attention was devoted to testing graph properties
in a variety of models including the dense graph model [18], and the bounded-degree graph
model [20] (surveyed in [16, Chap. 8] and [16, Chap. 9], resp.). In this section, we refer to
the bounded-degree graph model, in which graphs are represented by their incidence function
and distances are measured as the ratio of the number of differing incidences to the maximal
number of edges.


                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:38


            Specifically, for a degree bound d ∈ N, we represent a graph G = ([n], E) of maximum
        degree d by the incidence function g : [n] × [d] → [n] ∪ {0} such that g(v, i) indicates the ith
        neighbor of v (where g(v, i) = 0 indicates that v has less than i neighbors). The distance
        between the graphs G = ([n], E) and G′ = ([n], E ′ ) is defined as the size of the symmetric
        difference between E and E ′ over dn/2.
            A tester for a property Π is given oracle access to the tested object, where here oracle
        access to a graph means oracle access to its incidence function. In addition, such a tester is
        given a size parameter n (i.e., the number of vertices in the graph), and a proximity parameter,
        denoted ϵ > 0. Tolerant testers, introduced in [30] (and briefly surveyed in [16, Sec. 12.1]),
        are given an additional parameter, η < ϵ, which is called the tolerance parameter.
        ▶ Definition 5.1 (testing and tolerant testing graph properties in the bounded-degree graph
        model). For a fixed degree bound d, a tester for a graph property Π is a probabilistic oracle
        machine that, on input parameters n and ϵ, and oracle access to an n-vertex graph G = ([n], E)
        of maximum degree d, outputs a binary verdict that satisfies the following two conditions.
        1. If G ∈ Π, then the tester accepts with probability at least 2/3.
        2. If G is ϵ-far from Π, then the tester accepts with probability at most 1/3, where G is ϵ-far
            from Π if for every n-vertex graph G′ = ([n], E ′ ) ∈ Π of maximum degree d it holds that
            the size of the symmetric difference between E and E ′ has cardinality that is greater than
            ϵ · dn/2.
        A tolerant tester is also given a tolerance parameter η, and is required to accept with probability
        at least 2/3 any graph that is η-close to Π (i.e., not η-far from Π).24
        We stress that a graph property is defined as a property that is preserved under isomorphism;
        that is, if G = ([n], E) is in the graph property Π, then all its isomorphic copies are in the
        property (i.e., π(G) ∈ Π for every permutation π : [n] → [n]). The fact that we deal with
        graph properties (rather than with properties of functions) is the source of the difficulty (of
        transporting results from the domain of functions to the domain of graphs) and the reason
        that robust self-ordering is relevant.25
            The query complexity of a tester for Π is a function (of the parameters d, n and ϵ) that
        represents the number of queries made by the tester on the worst-case n-vertex graph of
        maximum degree d, when given the proximity parameter ϵ. Fixing d, we typically ignore its
        effect on the complexity (equiv., treat d as a hidden constant). Also, when stating that the
        query complexity is Ω(q(n)), we mean that this bound holds for all sufficiently small ϵ > 0;
        that is, there exists a constant ϵ0 > 0 such that distinguishing between n-vertex graphs in Π
        and n-vertex graphs that are ϵ0 -far from Π requires Ω(q(n)) queries.

        Our first result
        With the foregoing preliminaries in place, we state the first result of this section, which is
        proved using Theorem 4.2.
        ▶ Theorem 5.2 (linear query complexity lower bound for testing an efficiently recognizable graph
        property in the bounded-degree graph model). For any sufficiently large constant d, there
        exists an efficiently recognizable graph property Π such that testing Π in the bounded-degree
        graph model (with degree bound d) has query complexity Ω(n). Furthermore, each n-vertex
        graph in Π consists of connected components of size o(log n).


        24
           Of course, a tolerant tester is also required to reject with probability at least 2/3 any graph that is ϵ-far
           from Π.
        25
           As noted in Section 1.1.1, this is a special case of the general phenomenon pivoted at the difference
           between ordered and unordered structures, which arises in many contexts (in complexity and logic).
                                                                                                                      12:39


The main part of the theorem was known before: As observed in [17, Sec. 1], there exists
graph properties that are recognizable in polynomial-time and yet are extremely hard to test
in the bounded-degree graph model. This follows from the fact that the local reduction from
testing 3LIN (mod 2) to testing 3-Colorability used by Bogdanov, Obata, and Trevisan [3] is
invertible in polynomial-time (which is a common feature of reductions used in the context
of NP-completeness proofs).26 Indeed, their reduction actually demonstrates that the set
of (3-colorable) graphs that are obtained by applying this reduction to satisfiable 3LIN
(mod 2) instances is hard to test (i.e., requires linear query complexity in the bounded-degree
graph model).27 We note that the resulting property contains only connected graphs, which
means that Theorem 5.2 has some added value: The fact that it applies to graphs with tiny
connected components is interesting, since testing properties of such graphs may seem easy
(or at least not extremely hard) at first thought.

Proof. Our starting point is a property Φ of (binary) strings (equiv., Boolean functions)
that is recognizable in polynomial-time but has a linear query complexity lower bound (see,
e.g., [19, Sec. 7]). This refers to a model in which one makes queries to bits of the tested
string, and the distance between strings is the (relative) Hamming distance. Such lower
bounds were transported to the dense graph model in [18, 10.2.3] (see also [19]), but – to
the best of own knowledge – no such transportation were performed before in the context of
the bounded-degree graph model. Using robustly self-ordered graphs of bounded degree, we
present such a transportation.
▷ Construction 5.2.1 (from properties of strings to properties of bounded-degree graphs).
Suppose that {Gn = ([n], En )}n∈N is a family of robustly self-ordered graphs of maximum
degree d − 2.
   For every n ∈ N and s ∈ {0, 1}n , we define the graph G′s = ([3n], Es′ ) such that
        Es′ = En ∪ {{i, n + i}, {i, 2n + i} : i ∈ [n]} ∪ {{n + i, 2n + i} : i ∈ [n] ∧ si = 1}                 (8)
     That is, G′s consists of a copy of Gn augmented by 2n vertices such that vertex i ∈ [n]
     forms a triangle with n + i and 2n + i is si = 1, and forms a wedge with n + i and 2n + i
     otherwise.
                                          S
     For a set of strings Φ, we define Π = n∈N Πn as the set of all graphs that are isomorphic
     to some graph G′s such that s ∈ Φ; that is,
        Πn = {π(G′s ) : s ∈ (Φ ∩ {0, 1}n ) ∧ π ∈ Sym3n }                                                      (9)
    where Sym3n denote the set of all permutations over [3n].
We may assume, without loss of generality, that Gn has no isolated vertices. Hence, given a
graph of the form π(G′s ), the vertices of Gn are easily identifiable as having degree at least
three (since vertices outside Gn have degree at most two). The foregoing construction yields
a local reduction of Φ to Π, where locality means that each query to G′s can be answered by
making a constant number of queries to s, and the (standard) validity of the reduction is
based on the fact that Gn is asymmetric.28


26
   Of course, 3LIN (i.e., the satisfiability of linear equations (with three variables each) over GF(2)) is easily
   solvable in polynomial-time. Nevertheless, Bogdanov et al. [3] use a reduction of 3LIN to 3-Colorability
   (via 3SAT) that originates in the theory of NP-completeness in order to reduce between the testing
   problems.
27
   Like almost all reductions of this type, the analysis of the reduction actually refers to the promise
   problem induced by the image of the reduction (i.e., the image of both the yes- and no-instances).
28
   Standard validity means that s ∈ Φ if and only if G′s ∈ Π. Evidently, s ∈ Φ is mapped to G′s ∈ Π; the
   asymmetry of Gn is used to show that s ̸∈ Φ is mapped to G′s ̸∈ Π, since G′s can not be isomorphic to
   any graph G′w such that w =    ̸ s. This, by itself, does not mean that if s is far from Φ then G′s is far
   from Π.

                                                                                                                     CCC 2021
12:40


            In order to be useful towards proving lower bounds on the query complexity of testing
        Π, we need to show that the foregoing reduction is “distance preserving” (i.e., strings that
        are far from Φ are transformed into graphs that are far from Π). The hypothesis that Gn is
        robustly self-ordered is pivotal to showing that if the string s is far from Φ, then the graph
        G′s is far from Π.

        ▷ Claim 5.2.2 (preserving distances). If s ∈ {0, 1}n is ϵ-far from Φ, then the 3n-vertex graph
        G′s (as defined in Construction 5.2.1) is Ω(ϵ)-far from Π.

        Proof. We prove the contrapositive. Suppose that G′s is δ-close to Π. Then, for some r ∈ Φ
        and a permutation π : [3n] → [3n], it holds that G′s is δ-close to π(G′r ). (The possible use
        of a non-trivial permutation arises from the fact that Π is closed under isomorphism.) If
        π(i) = i for every i ∈ [n], then s must be (3dδ/2)-close to r, where d is the degree bound
        (of the model), since si = 1 (resp., ri = 1) if and only if i forms a triangle with n + i and
        2n + i in G′s (resp., in π(G′r ) = G′r ).29 Unfortunately, the foregoing condition (i.e., π(i) = i
        for every i ∈ [n]) need not hold in general.
             In general, the hypothesis that π(G′r ) is δ-close to G′s implies that π maps at most 3δdn/2
        vertices of [n] to {n + 1, ..., 3n}. This is the case since each vertex of [n] has degree at least
        three in G′r , whereas the other vertices have degree at most two in G′s (or in any other graph
        G′s′ ). Hence, if t = |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ∈ {n + 1, ..., 3n}|, then π(G′r ) and G′s differ on at least t
        edges, whereas the hypothesis is that the difference is at most δ · 3dn/2.
             Turning to the vertices i ∈ [n] that π maps to [n] \ {i}, we upper-bound their number
        by O(δd2 n), since the difference between π(G′r ) and G′s is at most δ · 3dn/2, whereas the
        hypothesis that Gn is c-robustly self-ordered implies that the difference between π(G′r ) and
        G′s (or any other graph G′w ) is at least

              ∆ = c · |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i}| − d · |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸∈ [n]}|.

        (Compare Case 6 in the proof of Theorem 4.2.)30
                                                                              def
             Letting I = {i ∈ [n] : π(i) = i}|, observe that D = |{i ∈ I : ri ̸= si }| ≤ 3δdn/2, since
        ri ̸= si implies that, for every i ∈ I, the subgraph induced by {i, n + i, 2n + 1} is different
        in π(G′r ) and G′s (i.e., it is a triangle in one graph and contains two edges in the other),
        whereas by the hypothesis π(G′r ) and G′s differ on at most δ · 3dn/2 edges. Recalling that
        |I| = n − O(δd2 n), it follows that |{i ∈ [n] : ri =
                                                           ̸ si }| ≤ (n − |I|) + D = O(δd2 n). Recalling
        that d is a constant, we infer that s is O(δ)-close to r ∈ Φ, and the claims follows.          ◁


        Conclusion. Starting with Theorem 4.2 (i.e., an efficient construction of robustly self-ordered
        graphs of bounded degree), using Construction 5.2.1, and applying Claim 5.2.2, the theorem
        follows. Specifically, we need to verify the following facts.


        29
                                                                    ̸ ri }| ≤ δ · 3dn/2, which means that s is 3δdn/2
           Hence, G′s is δ-close to G′r implies that |{i ∈ [n] : si =                                             n   -close
           to r.
        30
           Hence, ∆ ≤ δ · 3dn/2 implies that
                                               ∆ + d · |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸∈ [n]}|
                 |{i ∈ [n] : π(i) ̸= i}|   =
                                                              c
                                               3δdn/2 + d · 3δdn/2
                                           ≤
                                                         c
             which is O(δd2 n).
                                                                                                   12:41


   The set Π is polynomial-time recognizable.
   Given an 3n-vertex graph G′ , an adequate algorithm first tries to identify and order the
   vertices of the corresponding graph Gn , which means that it finds s ∈ {0, 1}n such that
   G′ is isomorphic to G′s (or determines that no such s exists). (Note that once the vertices
   of Gn are identified, their unique ordering, whenever it exists, can be found in polynomial
   time by running an isomorphism tester on the subgraph induced by them (while relying
   on the fact that the degree of the graph is bounded [29]).) Having found s, the algorithm
   accepts if and only if s ∈ Φn , where Φ is polynomial-time recognizable by our starting
   hypothesis.
    Testing Π requires linear query complexity.
    This is shown by reducing testing Φ to testing Π, while recalling that testing Φ requires
    linear query complexity. Given (proximity parameter ϵ and) oracle access to a string
    s ∈ {0, 1}n , we invoke the tester for Π (with proximity parameter Ω(ϵ)) while emulating
    oracle access to G′s in a straightforward manner (i.e., each query to G′s is answered by
    making at most one query to s). Recall that s ∈ Φ implies G′s ∈ Π, whereas by Claim 5.2.2
    if s is ϵ-far from Φ then G′s is Ω(ϵ)-far from Π.
This completes the proof, since the n-vertex graphs of Theorem 4.2 have connected components
of size o(log n).                                                                          ◀


Digest: Reducing testing properties of strings to testing graph properties

We wish to highlight the fact that the proof of Theorem 5.2 is based on a general reduction
of testing any property Φ of strings to testing a corresponding (bounded-degree) graph
property Π. This reduction is described in Construction 5.2.1 and its validity is proved in
Claim 5.2.2. Recall that, for any n, the graph property Π consists of 3n-vertex graphs (of
bounded-degree) that encode the different n-bit long strings in Φ. This reduction is local
and preserves distances:
Locality: Each string s ∈ {0, 1}n is encoded by a graph G′s such that each query to G′s can
   be answered by making at most one query to s.
Preserving distances: If s ∈ Φ then G′s ∈ Π, whereas if s is ϵ-far from Φ then G′s is Ω(ϵ)-far
   from Π.
Recall that G′s consists of a fixed robustly self-ordered n-vertex graph Gn augmented by (n
two-vertex) gadgets that encode s. Let us spell out the effect of this reduction.

▶ Corollary 5.3 (implicit in the proof of Theorem 5.2). For Φ and Π as in Construction 5.2.1,
let QΦ and QΠ denote the query complexities of testing Φ and Π, respectively. Then,
QΦ (n, ϵ) ≤ QΠ (3n, Ω(ϵ)). Likewise, letting Q′Φ (resp., Q′Π ) denote the query complexity of
tolerantly testing Φ (resp., Π), it holds that Q′Φ (n, η, ϵ) ≤ Q′Π (3n, η/3, Ω(ϵ)).

The tolerant testing part requires an additional justification. Specifically, we observe that
strings s that are η-close to Φ yield graphs G′s that are η/3-close to Π. This is the case
because, if the n-bit long strings s and r differ on k bits, then the 3n-vertex graphs G′s and
G′r differ on k vertex pairs. In preparation to proving the separation between the complexities
of testing and tolerant testing, we show a reduction in the opposite direction. This reduction
holds provided that the robustly self-ordered graphs used in the definition of Π are locally
reversed self-ordered (see Definition 4.8).




                                                                                                  CCC 2021
12:42


        ▶ Proposition 5.4 (reducing testing Π to testing Φ). Suppose that the graphs used in Construc-
        tion 5.2.1 are locally self-ordered and locally reversed self-ordered, and let Φ, Π and QΦ , QΠ
        be as in Corollary 5.3. Then, QΠ (3n, ϵ) ≤ poly(log n) · (QΦ (n, 2ϵ) + O(1/ϵ)). Furthermore,
        one-sided error probability is preserved.31

        Recall that the hypothesis can be met by using Corollary 4.10.


        Proof. Given oracle access to a graph G′ = ([3n], E ′ ), we first test that G′ is isomorphic
        to G′s , for some s ∈ {0, 1}n , and then invoke the tester for Φ while providing it with oracle
        access to s. Specifically, when the latter tester queries the bit i, we use the local reversed
        self-order algorithm in order to locate the ith vertex of Gn in G′ , and then determine the bit
        si accordingly. Details follow.
            Let V denote the set of vertices of the graph G′ = ([3n], E ′ ) that have degree greater
        than 2 and neighbor two vertices that have degree at most 2 and neighbor each other if
        they have degree 2. Evidently, the vertices of V are easy to identify by querying G′ for their
        neighbors and their neighbors’ neighbors. Furthermore, |V | ≤ n, since each vertex in V
        has two neighbors that are not connected to any other vertex in V , and equality holds in
        case G′ ∈ Π. We try to find a (“pivot”) vertex p ∈ V by picking an arbitrary vertex in G′
        and checking it and its neighbors. If none of these is in V , then we reject. Otherwise, we
        continue; we shall be using p as an auxiliary input in all (future) invocations of the local
        reversed self-ordering algorithm, denoted A.
            Using the foregoing algorithm A and the pivot p ∈ V , we define A′ (i) = A(p, i) if
        A(p, i) ∈ V and invoking the local self-ordering algorithm on input A(p, i) yields i. Otherwise
        A′ (i) is undefined. Hence, evaluating A′ amounts to evaluating A as well as evaluating the
        local self-ordering algorithm. Letting I ′ ⊆ [n] denote the set of “indices” (i.e., vertices of Gn )
                                                                                             def
        on which A′ is defined, we note that A′ is a bijection from I ′ to V ′ = {A′ (i) : i ∈ I ′ }, and
        that I ′ = [n] if G′ ∈ Π. Hence, our first test is testing whether I ′ = [n], which is done by
        selecting at random O(1/ϵ) elements of [n], and rejecting if A′ is undefined on any of them.
        Otherwise, we proceed, while assuming that |I ′ | ≥ (1 − 0.1ϵ) · n.
            Next, we test whether the subgraph of Gn induced by I ′ is isomorphic to the subgraph
        of G′ induced by V ′ , where the isomorphism is provided by A′ (which maps I ′ to V ′ ).
        This can be done by sampling O(1/ϵ) vertices of Gn and comparing their neighbors to the
        neighbors of the corresponding vertices in G′ , which are found by A′ . Specifically, for every
        sampled vertex i ∈ [n], we determine its set of neighbors Si in Gn , obtain both A′ (i) and
        A′ (Si ) = {A′ (j) : j ∈ Si }, which are supposedly the corresponding vertices in G′ , and check
        whether A′ (Si ) is the set of neighbors of A′ (i) in G′ . We reject if A′ is undefined on any of
        these vertices (i.e., on sampled vertices or their neighbors in Gn ). Needless to say, we also
        reject if any of the foregoing neighborhood checks fails.
            Assuming that we did not reject so far, we may assume that G′ is ϵ/2-close to being
        isomorphic to some G′s , where the isomorphism is consistent with the inverse of A′ . At this
        point, we invoke the tester for Φ, denoted T , in order to test whether s ∈ Φ. This is done by
        providing T with oracle access to s as follows. When T makes a query i ∈ [n], we determine
        A′ (i), and use our query access to G′ in order to determine the two neighbors of A′ (i) that
        have degree at most 2. If this fails, we reject. Otherwise, we answer 1 if and only if these
        two neighbors are connected in G′ .


        31
             A tester is said to have one-sided error probability if it always accepts objects that have the property.
                                                                                                                     12:43


     To summarize, we employ three tests to G′ : An initial test of the size I ′ (which also
includes finding a pivot p ∈ V ), an isomorphism test between the subgraph of G′ induced by
I ′ and the subgraph of Gn induced by V ′ , and an emulation of the testing of Φ. (In all tests,
if we encounter an index in [n] \ I ′ , we suspend the execution and reject.) For simplicity and
without loss of generality, we may assume that T is correct with high (constant) probability.
     Note that if G′ ∈ Π, then it holds that G′ = π(G′s ) for some s ∈ Φ and some permutation
π ∈ Sym3n . In this case, it holds that |I ′ | = n and we always find a pivot p ∈ V . Furthermore,
A′ equals the restriction of π to [n], the isomorphism test always succeeds, and the emulation
of oracle access to s is perfect. Hence, we accept with high probability (or always, if T has
one-sided error probability).
     On the other hand, suppose that G′ is ϵ-far from Π. If either |I ′ | < (1 − 0.1ϵ) · n or the
subgraph of G′ induced by V ′ is 0.1ϵ-far from A′ (GI ′ ), where GI ′ denotes the subgraph of
Gn induced by I ′ , then we reject with high probability due to one of the first two tests.
Otherwise, letting π be an arbitrary bijection of [3n] to [3n] that extends A′ , it follows that
for some s ∈ {0, 1}n the graph G′ is 0.2ϵ-close to π(G′s ), since we may obtain π(G′s ) from
G′ by modifying the neighborhood of 0.1n vertices in I ′ as well as of the vertices in [n] \ I ′ .
Furthermore, for every i ∈ [n] on which A′ is defined, it holds that si = 1 if and only if the
two neighbors of A′ (i) that have degree at most 2 are connected. By the hypothesis regarding
G′ , the string s must be 2.4ϵ-far from Φ, and A′ (i) = π(i) whenever A′ is defined on i ∈ [n].
It follows that either the emulation of T was abruptly terminated (leading to rejection) or
the answers provided to T are according to s. Hence, we reject with high probability.          ◀


Separating tolerant testing from testing

Using Corollary 5.3 and Proposition 5.4, we transport the separation of tolerant testing from
testing, which has been established in [15], from the domain of testing strings to the domain
of testing graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model.

▶ Theorem 5.5 (in the bounded-degree graph model, tolerant testing is harder than testing).
For any sufficiently large constant d and any constant c ∈ (0, 1), there exists a graph
property Π such that testing Π in the bounded-degree graph model (with degree bound d) has
query complexity O(poly(log n)/ϵ), but tolerantly testing Π has query complexity Ω(nΩ(1−c) ),
provided that the tolerance parameter is not smaller than n−c . Furthermore, Π is efficiently
recognizable.

Proof. A small variant on the proof of [15, Thm. 1.3] yields an efficiently recognizable set
of strings Φ that is testable in O(1/ϵ) queries but tolerantly testing it requires Ω(nΩ(1−c) )
queries.32 Using Construction 5.2.1 with graphs that are locally self-ordered and locally
reversed self-ordered (as provided by Corollary 4.10), we obtain the desired graph property Π.
By Corollary 5.3 tolerantly testing Π requires Ω(nΩ(1) ) queries, whereas by Proposition 5.4
(non-tolerant) testing Π has query complexity poly(log n) · O(1/ϵ). The claim follows.      ◀


32
     Basically, the construction of [15] consists of repeating some m-bit long string poly(m) times and
     augmenting it with a PCP of Proximity (PCPP) [2, 11] of membership in some polynomial-time
     recognizable set that is hard to test. Essentially, the PCPP helps the tester, but it may be totally useless
     (when corrupted) in the tolerant testing setting. While [15] lets the PCPP occupy an o(1/ log log n)
     fraction of the final n-bit string, we let it occupy just a n−c fraction (and use m = nΩ(1−c) ). This
     requires using a different PCPP than the one used in [15]; e.g., using a strong PCPP with linear
     detection probability [10, Def. 2.2] will do, and such a PCPP is available [10, Thm. 3.3].




                                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:44


        Digest: Tightly reducing testing properties of strings to testing graph properties
        In continuation to (the main part of) Corollary 5.3, we highlight the fact that Construc-
        tion 5.2.1 not only reduces testing the string property Φ to testing the graph property Π, but
        rather does so in a rather tight manner. Specifically, for Φ, Π and QΦ , QΠ as in Corollary 5.3,
        it holds that QΦ (n, ϵ) and QΠ (Θ(n), Θ(ϵ)) agree up to a poly(log n) factor. In other words,
        for any property of strings Φ, there exists a property of bounded-degree graphs Π such that
        the (query and time) complexity of testing Φ is reflected in the (query and time) complexity
        of testing Π, where our notion of reflection allows for a polylogarithmic slackness. Recall
        that the transformation of strings in Φ to graphs in Π is (strongly/locally) efficient.

         6     Random Regular Graphs are Robustly Self-Ordered
        While Theorem 4.1 only asserts the existence of robustly self-ordered d-regular graphs, we
        next show that almost all d-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered. This extends work in
        probabilistic graph theory, which proves a similar result for the weaker notion of self-ordered
        (a.k.a asymmetric) graphs [5, 4].

        ▶ Theorem 6.1 (random d-regular graphs are robustly self-ordered). For any sufficiently
        large constant d, a random 2d-regular n-vertex graph is robustly self-ordered with probability
        1 − o(1).

        Recall that, with very high probability, these graphs are expanders. We mention that
        the proof of Theorem 4.1 actually established that n-vertex graphs drawn from a weird
        distribution (which has min-entropy Ω(n)) are robustly self-ordered with probability 1 − o(1).
        However, this is established by using the edge-coloring variant, and requires employing the
        transformation presented in Section 2.1. In contrast, the following proof works directly with
        the original (uncolored) variant, and is completely self-contained.

        Proof. The proof is quite similar to the proof Claim 4.1.1, but it faces complications that
        were avoided in the prior proof by using edge-colors and implicitly directed edges. Specifically,
        for candidate permutations π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n] (to be used in the construction) and all
        (non-trivial) permutations µ : [n] → [n], the proof of Claim 4.1.1 considered events of the
        form (∀j ∈ [d]) πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i))), whereas here we shall consider events of the form
        {πjb (i) : j ∈ [d] & b ∈ {±1}} = {µ(πjb (µ−1 (i))) : j ∈ [d] & b ∈ {±1}}. These multi-set equalities
        will be reduced to equalities among sequences by considering all possible ordering of these
        multi-sets. This amounts to taking a union bound over all possible ordering and results in a
        more complicated analysis (due to the πj−1 ’s) and much more cumbersome notation.
             To facilitate the proof, we use the standard methodology (cf. [13, Apdx. 2]) of first proving
        the result in the random permutation model, then transporting it to the configuration model
        (by using a general result of [24]), and finally conditioning on the event that the generated
        graph is simple (which occurs with positive constant probability). Indeed, both models
        generate multi-graphs that are not necessarily simple graphs (i.e., these multi-graphs may
        have self-loops and parallel edges). We also use the fact that the simple graphs that are
        generated by the configuration model (for degree d′ ) are uniformly distributed among all
        d′ -regular graphs.
             Recall that in the random permutation model a 2d-regular n-vertex multi-graph is generated
        by selecting uniformly and independently d permutations π1 , ..., πd : [n] → [n]. The multi-
                                                                         S
        graph, denoted G(π1 ,...,πd ) , consists of the edge multi-set j∈[d] {{i, πj (i)} : i ∈ [n]}, where the
        2j th (resp., (2j − 1)st ) neighbor of vertex i is πj (i) (resp., πj−1 (i)). Note that this multi-graph
                                                                                                                12:45


may have self-loops (due to πj (i) = i), which contributed two units to the degree of a vertex,
as well as parallel edges (due to πj (i) = πk (i) for j ̸= k and πj (i) = πk−1 (i) for any j, k).
We denote the j th neighbor of vertex i by gj (i); that is, gj (i) = πj/2 (i) if j is even, and
           −1
gj (i) = π(j+1)/2 (i) otherwise.
     Consider an arbitrary permutation µ : [n] → [n], and let T = {i ∈ [n] : µ(i) ̸= i} be its
set of non-fixed-point. We shall show that, with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(d · |T | · log n)) over
the choice of π = (π1 , ..., πd ), the size of the symmetric difference between Gπ and µ(Gπ ) is
Ω(|T |). Note that this difference is (half) the sum over i ∈ [n] of the size of the symmetric
difference between the multi-set of neighbors of vertex i in Gπ and the multi-set of neighbors
of vertex i in µ(Gπ ). We refer to the latter difference by the phrase the contribution of vertex
i to the difference between Gπ and µ(Gπ ).
     As a warm-up, we first show that each element of T contributes a non-zero number of
units to the difference (between Gπ and µ(Gπ )) with probability 1 − O(poly(d)/n)d/3 over
the choice of π. Consider the event that for some j, k ∈ [2d], the j th neighbor of i ∈ [n]
in µ(Gπ ) is different from the k th neighbor of i in Gπ . Note that x is the j th neighbor of
i in µ(Gπ ) if and only if µ−1 (x) is the k th neighbor of µ−1 (i) in Gπ , which holds if and
only if µ−1 (x) = gk (µ−1 (i)) (equiv., x = µ(gk (µ−1 (i)))). Recalling that i ∈ T contributes to
the difference (between Gπ and µ(Gπ )) if the multi-sets of its neighbors in Gπ and µ(Gπ )
differ, it follows that i ∈ T contributes to the difference if and only if for every permutation
σ : [2d] → [2d] there exists j ∈ [2d] such that gj (i) ̸= µ(gσ(j) (µ−1 (i))). Thus, the probability
of the complementary event (i.e., i does not contribute to the difference) is given by
     Prπ ∃σ ∈ Sym2d (∀j ∈ [2d]) gj (i) = µ(gσ(j) (µ−1 (i)))
                                                           

       = (2d)! · max Prπ (∀j ∈ [2d]) gj (i) = µ(gσ(j) (µ−1 (i))) .
                                                                      
                                                                                              (10)
                     σ∈Sym2d

Fixing σ that maximizes the probability, and denoting it σi , consider any Ji ⊆ [d] such
that for the j’s in Ji the multi-sets {j, ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉}’s are disjoint (i.e., {j, ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉} ∩
{k, ⌈σi (2k)/2⌉} = ∅ for any j ̸= k ∈ Ji ). Note that we may select Ji such that |Ji | ≥ d/3,
                                                                                            def
since taking j to Ji only rules out taking (to Ji ) any k such that ⌈σi (2k)/2⌉ = v = ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉
(equiv., k such that σi (2k) ∈ {2v − 1, 2v}). Using this proerty of Ji , we prove –
▷ Claim 6.1.1 (warm-up).         33
                                      (10) is upper-bounded by (2d)2d · (2/n)|Ji | .
Proof. We upper-bound (10) by
   (2d)! · max Prπ (∀j ∈ Ji ) g2j (i) = µ(gσ(2j) (µ−1 (i)))
                                                            
            σ
                Y
                   Prπj ,π⌈σi (2j)/2⌉ g2j (i) = µ(gσi (2j) (µ−1 (i)))
                                                                    
      = (2d)! ·                                                                                        (11)
                     j∈Ji

where the equality uses the disjointness of the multi-sets {j, ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉} for the j’s in Ji .
Next, we upper-bound (11) by
                                            (−1)σi (2j) mod 2
           Y                   h                                        i
   (2d)! ·   Prπj ,π⌈σi (2j)/2⌉ πj (i) = µ(π⌈σi (2j)/2⌉       (µ−1 (i))) < (2d)2d · (2/n)|Ji | , (12)
              j∈Ji

where Prπj ,πj [·] stands for Prπj [·] and π 1 stands for π, while the inequality is justified by
considering the following three cases (w.r.t each j ∈ Ji ).


33
     One may obtain a better bound of O(d/n)2d by analyzing (10) directly, by considering all the 2d
     events and accounting for their small dependency. On the other hand, we can obtain higher robustness
     parameter by considering smaller sets Ji ’s (say of size d/4), which suffice for counting vertices that
     contribute (say) d/4 units to the difference between Gπ and µ(Gπ ).




                                                                                                               CCC 2021
12:46


                  def
        1. If k = ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉ ̸= j, then, letting b = (−1)σi (2j) mod 2 , the corresponding factor in the
           l.h.s of (12) is

                Prπj ,πk πj (i) = µ(πkb (µ−1 (i)))
                                                  


           which equals 1/n by fixing πk , letting v = µ(πkb (µ−1 (i))), and using Prπj [πj (i) = v] = 1/n.
        2. If σi (2j) = 2j, then the corresponding factor in the l.h.s of (12) is

                Prπj πj (i) = µ(πj (µ−1 (i)))
                                            


           which is at most 1/(n − 1) since µ(i) ̸= i; specifically, fixing the value of πj (µ−1 (i)), and
           denoting this value by v, leaves πj (i) uniformly distributed in [n] \ {v}, which means that
           Prπj [πj (i) = µ(v)|v = πj (µ−1 (i))] ≤ 1/(n − 1) (where equality holds if µ(v) ̸= v).
        3. If σi (2j) = 2j − 1, then the corresponding factor in the l.h.s of (12) is

                Prπj πj (i) = µ(πj−1 (µ−1 (i)))
                                              


           which is less than 2/n. In this case, we consider two sub-cases depending on whether or
           not πj (i) = µ−1 (i), while noting that the first case occurs with probability 1/n whereas
           Prπj [πj (i) = µ(πj−1 (µ−1 (i)))|πj (i) ̸= µ−1 (i)] ≤ 1/(n − 1).
        Hence, each of the factors in the l.h.s of (12) is upper-bounded by 2/n, and the claim follows.
                                                                                                     ◁

        The general case. The same argument generalizes to a set I ⊆ T such that I ∩ µ(I) = ∅.
        In such a case we get

            Prπ (∀i ∈ I) (∃σi ∈ Sym2d ) (∀j ∈ [2d]) gj (i) = µ(gσi (j) (µ−1 (i)))
                                                                                 

              = (2d)!|I| · max Prπ (∀i ∈ I) (∀j ∈ [2d]) gj (i) = µ(gσi (j) (µ−1 (i)))
                                                                                   
                                                                                          (13)
                                σ1 ,...,σn

        ▷ Claim 6.1.2 (actual analysis). (13) is upper-bounded by

            (2d)2d·|I| · (2/(n − 2(|I| − 1)))|I|·d/3 .                                                                (14)

        Proof. For every i ∈ I = {i1 , ..., im }, we fixed a set Ji of size at least d/3 such that the
        multi-sets {j, ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉}’s are disjoint, and upper-bound (13) by
                      Y Y                      h                                                            i
           (2d)!m ·               Prπ1 ,...,π2d g2j (ik ) = µ(gσik(2j) (µ−1 (ik ))) |Ej,k (π1 , ...., π2d )
                        k∈[m]   j∈Jik
                                                                                                                       
                           m
                                 Y           Y                               σi′′ (2j) −1
              =     (2d)! ·                      Prπ1 ,...,π2d πj (ik ) = µ(πσ′ (2j) (µ (ik ))) |Ej,k (π1 , ...., π2d )(15)
                                                                                k
                                                                               ik
                                k∈[m]    j∈Jik

                          def                                   def
        where σi′ (2j) = ⌈σi (2j)/2⌉, and σi′′ (2j) = (−1)σi (2j) mod 2 , whereas Ej,k (π1 , ..., π2d ) is
                                                                               σi′′ (2j)
        an event that depends only on the value of πj and πσ′ k(2j) on the points i1 , ..., ik−1 and
                                                                                ik

        µ−1 (i1 ), ..., µ−1 (ik−1 ), respectively. Specifically, Ej,k (π1 , ..., π2d ) is the event

            (∀k ′ ∈ [k − 1]) g2j (ik′ ) = µ(gσi ′(2j) (µ−1 (ik′ )))
                                                     k


        which can be written as
                                                  σi′′ (2j)
            (∀k ′ ∈ [k − 1]) πj (ik′ ) = µ(πσ′ k′(2j) (µ−1 (ik′ ))).
                                                    i ′
                                                     k
                                                                                                           12:47


Now, when analyzing the foregoing conditional probability in (15), we consider two cases. If
j ̸= σi′k(2j), then we fix the value of each of these two permutations (i.e., πj and πσi′ (2j) )
                                                                                           k
on the corresponding k − 1 points that occur in the condition Ej,k , and the value of these
permutations on the k th points (i.e., ik and µ−1 (ik )) is restricted accordingly (i.e., to the
remaining n − (k − 1) values). Otherwise (i.e., j = σi′k(2j)), we fix the value of πj on these
2(k − 1) points. Hence, the argument in the warm-up analysis applies with n replaces by
either n − (k − 1) or n − 2(k − 1). It follows that (15) is upper-bounded by
               Y
    (2d)!m ·       (2/(2 − 2(m − 1)))|Jik | .
             k∈[m]

Using |Jik | ≥ d/3 for every k ∈ [m], the claim follows.                                            ◁

   Recall that (14) refers to a fixed set I ⊆ T such that I ∩ µ(I) = ∅, and that it constitutes
an upper bound on the probability (over the choice of π) that, for each i ∈ I there exists a
permutation σi : [2d] → [2d] such that gj (i) = µ(gσi (j) (µ−1 (i))) holds for all j ∈ [2d]. This
upper bound (i.e., (2d)2d·|I| · (2/(n − 2(|I| − 1)))|I|·d/3 ) simplifies to (2d)2d·|I| · (6/n)|I|·d/3 ,
provided that |I| ≤ n/3.
                      def
    Recalling that t = |T | ∈ [n], we shall upper-bound the probability (over the choice of
π) that T contains a ⌈t/2⌉-subset T ′ such that for each i ∈ T ′ there exists a permutation
σi : [2d] → [2d] such that gj (i) = µ(gσi (j) (µ−1 (i))) holds for all j ∈ [2d]. We do so by taking
a union bound over all ⌈t/6⌉-subsets I such that I ∩ µ(I) = ∅ and for each i ∈ I there exists a
permutation σi : [2d] → [2d] such that gj (i) = µ(gσi (j) (µ−1 (i))) holds for all j ∈ [2d]. (Note
that such a ⌈t/6⌉-subset I exists in each ⌈t/2⌉-subset T ′ , and that ⌈t/6⌉ < n/3.) Using the
aforementioned simplified form of (14), we conclude that, with probability at most
           
         t
              · (2d)2d·⌈t/6⌉ · (6/n)⌈t/6⌉·d/3 < 2t · (6 · (2d)6 /n)⌈t/6⌉·d/3 = exp(−Ω(dt log n))
      ⌈t/6⌉

over the choice of π, the set T contains no ⌈t/6⌉-subset I as above. This means that, with
probability at most exp(−Ω(dt log n)), less than t/2 of the indices i ∈ T contribute a non-zero
number of units to the difference (between Gπ and µ(Gπ )).
   Letting c′ = 1/2 and considering all (non-trivial) permutations µ : [n] → [n], we conclude
that the probability, over the choice of π, that Gπ is not c′ -robustly self-ordered is at most
    X n                               X
              · exp(−Ω(dt log n)) =          exp(−Ω((d − O(1)) · t log n))
          t
   t∈[n]                                   t∈[n]

                                      =    exp(−Ω((d − O(1)) · log n)),
and the claim follows for the permutation model (and for any sufficiently large d).
    As stated upfront, using the general result of [24, Thm. 1.3], we infer that a uniformly
distributed 2d-regular n-vertex multi-graph fails to be c′ -robustly self-ordered with probability
o(1). Lastly, recalling that such a 2d-regular multi-graph is actually a simple graph with
probability exp(−((2d)2 − 1)/4), the theorem follows.                                           ◀

Digest
The proof of Theorem 6.1 is quite similar to the proof Claim 4.1.1, but it faces two com-
plications that were avoided in the prior proof (by using edge-colors and implicitly directed
edges). Most importantly, the current proof has to handle equality between multi-sets instead
of equality between sequences. This is done by considering all possible ordering of these



                                                                                                          CCC 2021
12:48


        multi-sets, which amounts to taking a union bound over all possible ordering and results
        in more complicated analysis and notation. (Specifically, see the introduction of σi ’s and
        Ji ’s and the three cases analyzed in the warm-up.) In addition, since edges are defined
        by permutations over the vertex-set rather than by perfect matching, we have to consider
        both the forward and backward direction of each permutation, which results in further
        complicating the analysis and the notation. (Specifically, see the introduction of σi′ ’s and
        σi′′ ’s and the three cases analyzed in the warm-up.)

        An alternative proof of Theorem 4.2
        We mention that combining an extension of Theorem 6.1 with some of the ideas underlying
        the proof of Theorem 4.2 yields an alternative proof of Theorem 4.2 (i.e., an alternative
        construction of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs).
        ▶ Remark 6.2 (an alternative construction of d-regular robustly self-ordered graphs). On input
        1n , we set ℓ = O(log    n)
                          log log n , and proceeds in three steps.
        1. Extending the proof of Theorem 6.1, we show that for all sufficiently large constant d, for
             any set G of t = t(ℓ) < n = ℓΩ(ℓ) (2d-regular) ℓ-vertex graphs, with probability 1 − o(1),
             a random 2d-regular ℓ-vertex graph is both robustly self-ordered and far from being
             isomorphic to any graph in G. Note that, with probability 1 − o(1), such a graph is also
             expanding.
             Here two ℓ-vertex graphs are said to be far apart if they disagree on Ω(ℓ) vertex-pairs.
             The proof of Theorem 6.1 is extended by considering, for a random graph, the event that
             it is either not robustly self-ordered or is not far from an isomorphic copy of one of the t
            (fixed) graphs. The later event (i.e., being close to isomorphic to one of these graphs)
             occurs with probability o(t/n).
        2. Relying on Step 1, we find a sequence of n/ℓ robustly self-ordered 2d-regular ℓ-vertex
             graphs that are expanding and pairwise far from being isomorphic to one another.
             This is done by iteratively finding robustly self-ordered 2d-regular ℓ-vertex expanding
             graphs that are far from being isomorphic to all prior ones, where scanning all possible
             graphs and checking the condition can be done in time n · ℓdℓ/2 · (ℓ!) = poly(n).
        3. Using the sequence of n/ℓ graphs found in Step 2, we consider the n-vertex graph that
             consists of these ℓ-vertex graphs as its connected components, and use parts of the proof
             of Theorem 4.2 to show that this graph is robustly self-ordered. Specifically, we only need
             to consider cases that are analogous to Cases 2, 6 and 7. The treatment of the analogous
             cases is slightly simpler than in the proof of Theorem 4.2, since the graphs are somewhat
             simpler.
        Note that the resulting graphs are not locally constructable.
                                                                                                     12:49


Part II

The Case of Dense Graphs
Recall that when considering graphs of unbounded degree, we ask whether we can obtain
unbounded robustness parameters. In particular, we are interested in n-vertex graphs that
are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered, which means that they must have Ω(n2 ) edges.
    In Section 7 we prove the existence of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs, and show
that they imply Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered bounded-degree O(n2 )-vertex graphs. In Section 8,
we reduce the construction of the former (dense) n-vertex graphs to the construction of
non-malleable two-source extractors (with very mild parameters). We actually show two
reductions: The first reduction (presented in Section 8.1) requires the extractors to have
an additional natural feature, called quasi-orthogonality, and yields a construction of such
n-vertex graphs that runs in poly(n)-time. The second reduction (presented in Section 8.2)
does not make this requirement, and yields an algorithm that computes the adjacency
predicate of such n-vertex graphs in poly(log n)-time.
    In Section 9 we demonstrate the applicability of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex
graphs to property testing; specifically, to proving lower bounds (on the query complexity)
for the dense graph testing model. Lastly, in Section 10, we consider the construction of
Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs of maximum degree d(n), for every d : N → N
such that d(n) ∈ [Ω(1), n].

 7     Existence and Transformation to Bounded-Degree Graphs
It seems easier to prove that random n-vertex graphs are Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered (see
Proposition 7.1) than to prove that random bounded-degree graphs are Ω(1)-robustly self-
ordered (or even just prove that such bounded-degree graphs exist). In contrast, it seems
harder to construct Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs than to construct Ω(1)-robustly
self-ordered bounded-degree graphs. In particular, we show that Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered
n-vertex graphs can be easily transformed into O(n2 )-vertex bounded-degree graphs that
are Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered (see Proposition 7.2). We stress that the construction of
robustly self-ordered bounded-degree graphs that is obtained by combining the foregoing
transformation with Theorem 1.4 is entirely different from the constructions presented in the
first part of the paper.

Random graphs are robustly self-ordered
We first show that, with very high probability, a random n-vertex graph Gn = ([n], En ),
where En is a uniformly distributed subset of [n]
                                               2 , is Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered.

▶ Proposition 7.1 (robustness analysis of a random graph). A random n-vertex graph Gn =
([n], En ) is Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n)).

As stated above, the following proof is significantly easier than the proof provided for the
bounded-degree analogue (i.e., Theorem 6.1).

                                                                    def
Proof. For each (non-trivial) permutation µ : [n] → [n], letting T = {i ∈ [n] : µ(i) ̸= i} denote
its (non-empty) set of non-fixed-points, we show that, with probability 1 − exp(−Ω(n · |T |)),
the size of the symmetric different between a random n-vertex graph Gn = ([n], En ) and
µ(Gn ) is Ω(n · |T |).



                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:50


            For every u, v ∈ [n] such that u < v, let χu,v = χµu,v (Gn ) represent the event that the pair
        (µ(u), µ(v)) contributes to the symmetric difference between Gn and µ(Gn ); that is, χu,v = 1
        if exactly one of the edges {µ(u), µ(v)} and {u, v} is in Gn , since {u, v} is an edge of Gn if
        and only if {µ(u), µ(v)} is an edge of µ(Gn ). We shall prove that
                                                     
                       X                        n · |T | 
           PrGn                χµu,v (Gn ) <              = exp(−Ω(n · |T |)).                                      (16)
                                                  20
                      u<v∈[n]


        We prove (16) by using a ⌈|T |/3⌉-subset I ⊆ T such that I∩µ(I) = ∅. Let T ′ = T \(I∪µ−1 (I)),
        which implies T ′ ∩ I = ∅ and µ(T ′ ) ∩ I = ∅. Let J = ([n] \ T ) ∪ T ′ , and note that
        |J| = n − |T | + (|T | − 2 · ⌈|T |/3⌉) ≥ n − (2|T |/3) − 2 ≥ (n/3) − 2. Observe that, for
        every (u, v) ∈ J × I, it holds that u ̸= v and Pr[χu,v = 1] = 1/2, where the equality
        is due to {u, v} =  ̸ {µ(u), µ(v)}, which holds since (u, v) ∈ J × I but µ(u), µ(v) ∈ [n] \ I.
        Furthermore, the events the correspond to the pairs in J × I are independent, because the sets
        {{u, v} : (u, v) ∈ J × I} and {{µ(u), µ(v)} : (u, v) ∈ J × I} are disjoint; that is, (u, v) ∈ J × I
        implies (µ(u), µ(v)) ∈ ([n] \ I) × ([n] \ I). Hence (using n ≤ 3(|J| + 2) and |T | ≤ 3|I| (as well
        as 3(|J| + 2) · 3|I| < 9.9 · |J| · |I|)), the l.h.s. of (16) is upper-bounded by
                                                                                                                   
                          X                     3(|J| + 2) · 3|I|             X                       0.99 · |J| · |I| 
           PrGn                 χµ
                                  u,v (Gn ) <                       ≤ PrGn             χµ
                                                                                         u,v (Gn ) <
                                                       20                                                     2
                   (u,v)∈J×I                                                (u,v)∈J×I

                                                                   = exp(−Ω(|J| · |I|))

         which is exp(−Ω(n · |T |)). Having established (16), the claim follows by a union bound
        (over all non-trivial permutations µ : [n] → [n]); specifically, denoting the set of non-trivial
                                                                                 n
        permutations by Pn , we upper-bound the probability that Gn is not 20      -robust by
            X
                  PrGn [µ violates the condition in (16)]
           µ∈Pn
                          X n
                      ≤                 · (t!) · exp(−Ω(n · t))
                                    t
                          t∈[n]

                      <   n · max{nt · exp(−Ω(n · t))}
                                t∈[n]

                      =   exp(−Ω(n))

        where t represents the size of the set of non-fixed-points (w.r.t µ).                                           ◀


        Obtaining bounded-degree robustly self-ordered graphs

        We next show how to transform Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs to O(n2 )-vertex
        bounded-degree graphs that are Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered. Essentially, we show that the
        standard “degree reduction via expanders” technique works (when using a different color
        for the expanders’ edges, and then using gadgets to replace colored edges). Specifically, we
        replace each vertex in Gn = ([n], En ) by an (n − 1)-vertex expander graph and connect each
        of these vertices to at most one vertex in a different expander, while coloring the edges of
        the expanders with 1, and coloring the other edges by 2. Actually, the vertex v is replaced
        by the vertex-set Cv = {⟨v, u⟩ : u ∈ [n] \ {v}} and in addition to the edges of the expander,
        colored 1, we connect each vertex ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv to the vertex ⟨u, v⟩ ∈ Cu and color this edge 2 if
                                                                                                                    12:51


{u, v} ∈ En and 0 otherwise.34 This yields an n · (n − 1)-vertex O(1)-regular graph, denoted
G′n , coupled with an edge-coloring, denoted χ′ , which uses three colors. Using the hypothesis
that Gn is Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered, we prove that (G′n , χ′ ) is Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered
(in the colored sense).
▶ Proposition 7.2 (robustness analysis of the degree reduction). If Gn is Ω(n)-robustly
self-ordered, then (G′n , χ′ ) is Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered (in the colored sense of Definition 2.1).
Using Theorem 2.4 (after adding self-loops), we obtain a O(1)-regular O(n2 )-vertex graph
that is Ω(1)-robustly self-ordered (in the standard sense).

Proof. Denoting the vertex-set of G′n by V = v∈[n] Cv , we consider an arbitrary (non-
                                                   S

trivial) permutation µ′ : V → V , and the corresponding set of non-fixed-points T ′ . Intuitively,
if µ′ maps vertices of Cv to several Cw ’s, then we get a proportional contribution to the
difference between G′n and µ′ (G′n ) by the (1-colored) edges of the expander. Otherwise, µ′
induces a permutation µ over the vertices of Gn , and we get a corresponding contribution
via the (2-colored) edges of Gn . Lastly, non-identity mapping inside the individual Cv ’s are
charged using the (0-colored and 2-colored) edges that connect different Cv ’s. Details follow.
    For a permutation µ′ : V → V as above, let µ : [n] → [n] be a permutation that maximizes
the (average over v ∈ [n] of the) number of vertices in Cv that are mapped by µ′ to vertices
in Cµ(v) ; that is, for every permutation ν : [n] → [n], it holds that

       ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ V : µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cµ(v) ≥ ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ V : µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cν(v) .
                                          
                                                                                             (17)

We consider the following three cases.
         P                   ′             def               ′
Case 1:    v∈[n] |Bv | = Ω(|T |), where Bv = {⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv : µ (⟨v, u⟩) ̸∈ Cµ(v) }.
  (This refers to the case that many vertices are mapped by µ′ to an expander that is
   different from the one designated by µ, which represents the best possible mapping of
   whole expanders.)
                       def
   Letting Cv,w = {⟨v, u⟩ : µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cw }, we first observe that for every v it holds
   that maxw̸=µ(v) {|Cv,w |} ≤ 23 · (n − 1), because otherwise we reach a contradiction to the
   maximality of µ by defining ν(v) = w and ν(µ−1 (w)) = µ(v), where w is the element
   obtaining the maximum, and ν(x) = µ(x) otherwise.
   Next, observe that there exists Wv ⊆ [n] \ {µ(v)} such that Bv′ = w∈Wv Cv,w satisfies
                                                                            S

   both |Bv′ | ≤ 23 · (n − 1) and |Bv′ | ≥ |Bv |/3. Now, consider the sets Bv′ and Cv \ Bv′ :
   On the one hand, in µ′ (G′n ) there are Ω(|Bv′ |) 1-colored edges connecting µ′ (Bv′ ) and
   µ′ (Cv \ Bv′ ), due to the subgraph of µ′ (G′n ) induced by µ′ (Cv ) which equals subgraph
   of G′n induced by Cv (which, in turn, is an expander). On the other hand, in G′n there
   are no 1-colored edges between µ′ (Bv′ ) and µ′ (Cv \ Bv′ ), since µ′ (Bv′ ) ⊆ w∈Wv Cw and
                                                                                 S

   µ′ (Cv \ Bv′ ) ⊆ w∈[n]\Wv Cw .
                    S

   We conclude that, in this case, the difference between G′n and µ′ (Gn ) is v Ω(|Bv′ |) =
                                                                                   P
                          ′
   P
      v Ω(|Bv |) = Ω(|T |).
                            ′         ′           ′ def               ′
         P
Case 2:     v∈[n]:µ(v)̸=v |Cv | = Ω(|T |), where Cv = {⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv : µ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cµ(v) }.
  (This refers to the case that many vertices are mapped by µ′ to an expander that is
   designated by µ, but this expander is not the one in which they reside (i.e., µ has many
   non-fixed-points).)


34
     This is equivalent to first converting Gn into a n-vertex clique while coloring an edge 2 if and only if it
     is in En .




                                                                                                                   CCC 2021
12:52


              Letting γ > 0 be a constant such that Gn is γ · n-robustly self-ordered, we may assume
              that v∈[n]:µ(v)̸=v |Cv′ | ≥ (1 − 0.5 · γ) · v∈[n]:µ(v)̸=v |Cv |, since otherwise we are done by
                   P                                     P

              Case 1.
              By the γn-robust self-ordering of Gn , the difference between Gn and µ(Gn ) is at least
                 def
              ∆ = γn · |{v ∈ [n] : µ(v) ̸= v}|. Assuming, for a moment, that µ′ (Cv ) = Cv for every v
              such that µ(v) ̸= v, the difference between G′n and µ′ (G′n ) is ∆, where the difference is
              due to edges colored 2 (i.e., the edges inherited from Gn ). This amount is prorotional to
              the number of vertices in the current case, since

                           γn        X                         X
                  ∆ =         ·                |Cv | > γ ·               |Cv |.
                          n−1
                                   v:µ(v)̸=v                 v:µ(v)̸=v


           In general, µ′ (Cv ) = Cv may not hold for some v, and in this case we may loss the
           contribution of the 2-colored edges incident at vertices in v∈[n]:µ(v)̸=v (Cv \Cv′ ). Recalling
                                                                         S
                                                                              P
           that (by our hypothesis) the size of this set is at most 0.5 · γ · v:µ(v)̸=v |Cv |, we are left
           with a contribution of at least 0.5γ · v:µ(v)̸=v |Cv′ |.
                                                  P

           We conclude that, in this case, the difference between G′n and µ′ (Gn ) is
           Ω( v:µ(v)̸=v |Cv′ |) = Ω(|T ′ |).
              P

                            ′′        ′            ′′ def                ′
                  P
        Case 3:     v∈[n] |Cv | = Ω(|T |), where Cv = {⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv : µ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cv \ {⟨v, u⟩}}.
          (This refers to the case that many vertices are mapped by µ′ to a different vertex in the
           same expander in which they reside.)35
          (This case would have been easy to handle if the expanders used on the Cv ’s were robustly
           self-ordered. Needless to say, we want to avoid such an assumption. Instead, we rely on
           the fact that in G′n different vertices in Cv are connected to different Cu ’s.)
           We may assume that v∈[n] |Cv′′ | ≥ 2 · v∈[n] |{⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv : µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ̸∈ Cv }|, since
                                     P                    P

           otherwise we are done by either Case 1 or Case 2. Now, consider a generic ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv′′ ,
           and let w ̸= u be such that µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) = ⟨v, w⟩. Then, in µ′ (G′n ) an edge colored either 0
           or 2 connects ⟨v, w⟩ = µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) to µ′ (⟨u, v⟩), since ⟨v, u⟩ and ⟨u, v⟩ are so connected in
           G′n , whereas in G′n an (even-colored) edge connects ⟨v, w⟩ to ⟨w, v⟩ ∈ Cw . We consider
           two sub-cases.
                 If µ′ (⟨u, v⟩) ∈ Cu , then ⟨v, w⟩ contributes to the difference between µ′ (G′n ) and G′n ,
                 because in µ′ (G′n ) vertex ⟨v, w⟩ is connected (by its even-colored edge) to a vertex in
                 Cu whereas in G′n vertex ⟨v, w⟩ is connected (by its even-colored edge) to a vertex in
                 Cw .
                (Recall that w is uniquely determined by ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cn′′ , since µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) = ⟨v, w⟩, and so
                 this contribution can be charged to ⟨v, u⟩.)
                 If µ′ (⟨u, v⟩) ̸∈ Cu , then ⟨u, v⟩ contributes to the set x∈[n] {⟨x, y⟩ ∈ Cx : µ′ (⟨x, y⟩) ̸∈
                                                                          S

                 Cx }, which (by the hypothesis) has size at most 0.5 · v∈[n] |Cv′′ |
                                                                          P

              Hence, at least half of v∈[n] Cv′′ appears in the first sub-case, which implies that, in this
                                         S

              case, the difference between G′n and µ′ (Gn ) is at least 21 · v∈[n] |Cv′′ | = Ω(|T ′ |).
                                                                            P


        Hence, the difference between G′n and µ′ (Gn ) is Ω(|T ′ |).                                                 ◀


        35
             Note that if ⟨v, u⟩ ∈ Cv is not mapped by µ′ to Cv , then either µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ̸∈ Cµ(v) holds (i.e., Case 1)
             or µ′ (⟨v, u⟩) ∈ Cµ(v) such that µ(v) ̸= v (i.e., Case 2). Hence, if ⟨u, v⟩ ∈ T ′ is not counted in Cases 1
             and 2, then it must be counted in Case 3.
                                                                                                                           12:53


 8           Relation to Non-Malleable Two-Source Extractors
For n = 2ℓ , we reduce the construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered (dense) n-vertex graphs
to the construction of non-malleable two-source extractors for (ℓ, ℓ−O(1))-sources. Recall that
a random variable X is called an (ℓ, k)-source if X is distributed over [2ℓ ] and has min-entropy
at least k (i.e., Pr[X = i] ≤ 2−k for every i ∈ [2ℓ ]).36 A function E : [2ℓ ] × [2ℓ ] → {0, 1}m is
called a (standard) two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor if, for every two independent (ℓ, k)-sources X
and Y , it holds that E(X, Y ) is ϵ-close to the uniform distribution over {0, 1}m , denoted Um .
Our notion of a non-malleable two-source extractor, presented next, is a restricted case of
the notions considered in [8, 7].37
▶ Definition 8.1 (non-malleable two-source extractors). A function nmE : [2ℓ ] × [2ℓ ] → {0, 1}m
is called a non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor if, for every two independent (ℓ, k)-sources
X and Y , and for every two functions f, g : [2ℓ ] → [2ℓ ] that have no fixed-point (i.e., f (z) ̸= z
and g(z) ̸= z for every z ∈ [2ℓ ]), it holds that (nmE(X, Y ), nmE(f (X), g(Y ))) is ϵ-close to
(Um , nmE(f (X), g(Y )); that is,
    1 X                                                   −m
         ·         Pr[(nmE(X, Y ), nmE(f (X), g(Y ))) = (α, β)] − 2     · Pr[nmE(f (X), g(Y )) = β] ≤ ϵ.         (18)
     2
             α,β

 The parameter ϵ is called the error of the extractor.
We shall be interested in the special case in which f and g are permutations. In this case, the
foregoing condition (i.e., (18)) can be replaced by requiring that (nmE(X, Y ), nmE(f (X), g(Y )))
is 2ϵ-close to the uniform distribution over {0, 1}m+m .38 Furthermore, we shall focus on
non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractors that output a single bit (i.e., m = 1), and in this
case non-triviality mandates ϵ < 0.5. In general, we view ϵ as a constant, but view ℓ and k
as varying (or generic) parameters, and focus on the case of k = ℓ − O(1).
     Recall that constructions of non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractors with much better
parameters are known [7, Thm. 1]. In particular, these constructions support k = ℓ − ℓΩ(1) ,
negligible error (i.e., ϵ = exp(−ℓΩ(1) )), and m = ℓΩ(1) . We stress that, as is the norm in the
context of randomness extraction, the extracting function is computable in polynomial-time
(i.e., in poly(ℓ)-time).
     We shall show that any non-malleable two-source (ℓ − O(1), 0.49)-extractor (for sources
over [2ℓ ]) yields Ω(2ℓ )-robustly self-ordered O(2ℓ )-vertex graphs. Actually, we shall show two
such constructions: The first construction runs in poly(2ℓ )-time, and the second construction
provides strong constructability (a.k.a local computability) as claimed in Theorem 1.4.
Both constructions use a similar underlying logic, which is more transparent in the first
construction.

8.1          The first construction
For the first construction, we need the extractor to satisfy the following natural (and
quite minimal) requirement, which we call quasi-orthogonality. We say that an extractor
nmE : [2ℓ ] × [2ℓ ] → {0, 1} is quasi-orthogonal (with error ϵ) if the following conditions hold:


36
   Indeed, for the sake of simplicity (of our arguments), we do not require that ℓ ∈ N, but rather only that
   2ℓ ∈ N; consequently, we consider distributions over [2ℓ ] rather than over {0, 1}ℓ .
37
   In particular, in [8, 7] it is only required that one of the two functions f, g : [2ℓ ] → [2ℓ ] has no fixed-points.
   There seems to be no concrete reason to prefer one of these three variants over the others. We mention
   that Definition 8.1 is strictly weaker than the definition of [8] (even in its simplified form [7, Def. 1.3];
   see Appendix).
38
   In this case, f (X) and g(Y ) have min-entropy at least k, which implies that nmE(f (X), g(Y )) is ϵ-close
   to the uniform distribution over {0, 1}m .



                                                                                                                          CCC 2021
12:54


         1. The residual function obtained from nmE by any fixing of one of its two arguments is almost
            unbiased: For every x ∈ [2ℓ ] and every σ ∈ {0, 1} it holds that |{y ∈ [2ℓ ] : nmE(x, y) = σ}| ≤
            (0.5 + ϵ) · 2ℓ ; ditto for every y ∈ [2ℓ ] and the corresponding set {x ∈ [2ℓ ] : nmE(x, y) = σ]}.
         2. The residual functions obtained from nmE by any two different             fixings of one of its two
                                                                                 ℓ 
            arguments are almost uncorrelated: For every {x, x′ } ∈ [22 ] it holds that |{y ∈ [2ℓ ] :
                                                                                     ℓ 
            nmE(x, y) ̸= nmE(x′ , y)}| ≥ (0.5−ϵ)·2ℓ ; ditto for every {y, y ′ } ∈ [22 ] and the corresponding
            set {x ∈ [2ℓ ] : nmE(x, y) ̸= nmE(x, y ′ )]}.
        As shown in Proposition 8.2, any non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor can be transformed
        (in poly(2ℓ )-time) into a quasi-orthogonal one at a small degradation in the parameters (i.e.,
        ϵ increases by an additive term of O(2−(ℓ−k) ) and 2ℓ decreases by an additive term of O(2k )).
        Note that poly(2ℓ )-time is acceptable when one aims at constructing O(2ℓ )-vertex graphs;
        however, aiming at strong/local constructability (as in Theorem 1.4), we shall avoid such a
        transformation in the second construction (presented in Section 8.2).

        ▶ Proposition 8.2 (transforming non-malleable two-source extractors into ones that are
        quasi-orthogonal). For every k ≤ ℓ − 3, there exists a poly(2ℓ )-time transformation that
        given a non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor nmE : [2ℓ ] × [2ℓ ] → {0, 1}, returns a non-
        malleable two-source (k, ϵ′ )-extractor nmE : [n′ ] × [n′ ] → {0, 1} such that n′ ≥ 2ℓ − O(2k ) and
        nmE′ is quasi-orthogonal with error ϵ′ = ϵ + O(2k /n′ ).

        Proof. Essentially, nmE′ is obtained from nmE by simply discarding inputs that violate the
        quasi-orthogonality conditions. Letting n = 2ℓ , first note that the number of x’s that violate
        the first condition is at most 2k+1 , because otherwise we obtain a contradiction to the
        hypothesis that nmE is a two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor (by letting X be uniform on the x’s that
        satisfy |{y ∈ [n] : nmE(x, y) = σ}| > (0.5 + ϵ) · n for either σ = 0 or σ = 1, and Y be uniform
        on {0, 1}n ). Next, consider the residual (k, ϵ)-extractor nmE1 : [n1 ] × [n1 ] → {0, 1}, where
        n1 ≥ n − 2k+1 , obtained by omitting the exceptional x’s. Note that nmE1 satisfies the first
        quasi-orthogonality condition with respect to the first argument with error ϵ. Doing the same
        for the second argument yields a residual (k, ϵ)-extractor nmE2 : [n2 ] × [n2 ] → {0, 1}, where
        n2 ≥ n1 − 2k+1 and nmE2 satisfies the first quasi-orthogonality condition (for both arguments)
                           k+1
        with error ϵ + 2n1 . Likewise, we claim that there are at most 2k disjoint pairs {x, x′ }’s
        that violate the second condition (i.e., |{y ∈ [n2 ] : nmE2 (x, y) ̸= nmE2 (x′ , y)}| ≥ (0.5 − ϵ) · n2 ),
        because otherwise we obtain a contradiction to the hypothesis that nmE2 is a non-malleable
        two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor (by using a function that maps each such x to its matched x′ ).
        And, again, we consider a residual extractor obtained by omitting the exceptional pairs.
        Doing the same for the y’s, we obtained the desired extractor.                                        ◀


            Recall that non-malleable two-source extractors with much stronger parameters than we
        need (i.e., min-entropy ℓ − ℓΩ(1) , negligible error, and ℓΩ(1) bits of output), were constructed
        in [7, Thm. 1], but these extractors are not quasi-orthogonal. Employing Proposition 8.2, we
        obtain a quasi-orthogonal non-malleable two-source (ℓ − 4, 0.1)-extractor that can be used in
        the construction of Theorem 8.3. Essentially, the construction consists of a bipartite graph,
        with 2ℓ vertices on each side, such that the edges between the two sides are determined by
        the extractor. In addition, we add a clique on one of the two sides so that the two sides are
        (robustly) distinguishable (see Fugure 1). We stress that the resulting 2ℓ+1 -vertex graph is
        Ω(2ℓ )-robustly self-ordered as long as the non-malleable extractor is quasi-orthogonal and
        works for very mild parameters; that is, we only require error that is bounded away from 1/2
        with respect to min-entropy ℓ − O(1).
                                                                                                     12:55




   Figure 1 Illustrating the construction of Theorem 8.3.


▶ Theorem 8.3 (using a quasi-orthogonal non-malleable two-source extractor to obtain a
Ω(2ℓ )-robustly self-ordered O(2ℓ )-vertex graph). For a constant ϵ ∈ (0, 0.5) varying ℓ ≥ k
such that k ≤ ℓ − 2 + log2 (0.5 − ϵ) = ℓ − O(1), suppose that nmE : [2ℓ ] × [2ℓ ] → {0, 1}
is a quasi-orthogonal (with error ϵ) non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ)-extractor. Then, the
2ℓ+1 -vertex graph G = (V1 ∪ V0 , E) such that Vσ = {⟨σ, i⟩ : i ∈ [2ℓ ]} and
                                              
                                              V1
    E = {{⟨1, i⟩, ⟨0, j⟩} : nmE(i, j) = 1} ∪                                             (19)
                                              2

is Ω(|V1 ∪ V0 |)-robustly self-ordered. Furthermore, the claim holds even if the non-malleability
condition (i.e., (18)) holds only for permutations f and g.

Indeed, the first set of edges, denoted E ′ , corresponds to a bipartite graph between V1 and
V0 that is determined by nmE, and the second set corresponds to a 2ℓ -vertex clique. Note
that the extraction parameters are extremely weak; that is, the min-entropy may be very
high (i.e., k = ℓ − O(1)), the error may be an arbitrary non-trivial constant (i.e., ϵ < 1/2),
and we only extract one bit (i.e., m = 1).

Proof. Let V = V1 ∪ V0 , and consider an arbitrary (non-trivial) permutation µ : V → V .
Intuitively, if µ maps a vertex of V1 to V0 , then the difference in degrees of vertices in the
two sets (caused by the clique edges) contributes at least ((2ℓ − 1) − 2ϵ · 2ℓ )/2 units to the
symmetric difference between G and µ(G), where here we use the first quasi-orthogonality
condition. On the other hand, if µ maps ⟨1, i⟩ ∈ V1 to V1 \ {⟨1, i⟩}, then the difference in
the neighborhoods caused by the bipartite graph contributes at least (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ /2 units
to the symmetric difference between G and µ(G). To prove this, we distinguish between
the case that µ has relatively few non-fixed-points (in either V0 or V1 ), which is analyzed
using the second quasi-orthogonality condition, and the case that µ has relatively many
non-fixed-points (in both V0 and V1 ), which is analyzed using the non-malleability condition.
Details follow.
    Let T = {v ∈ V : µ(v) ̸= v} denote the set of non-fixed-points of µ. Then, we consider
two types of vertices: Those that belong to the set T ′ = σ∈{0,1} {v ∈ Vσ : µ(v) ̸∈ Vσ } ⊆ T
                                                             S

and those that belong to T \ T ′ . The threshold for distinguishing these cases is set to
K = (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ−2 = Ω(|V |).




                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:56


        Case 1: |T ′ | ≥ K.
          (This refers to the case that many vertices are mapped by µ to the opposite side of the
           bipartite graph (V, E ′ ), where “many” means Ω(|V |).)
           Each vertex in T ′ contributes (1 − 2ϵ) · 2ℓ − 1 units to the symmetric difference between
           G and µ(G), because the degree of each vertex in V1 is at least (2ℓ − 1) + (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ ,
           whereas the degree of each vertex in V0 is at most (0.5 + ϵ) · 2ℓ , where we use the first
           quasi-orthogonality condition, which implies that the number of bipartite edges incident
           at each vertex is at least (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ and at most (0.5 + ϵ) · 2ℓ .
           Hence, the symmetric difference between G and µ(G) is at least ((1 − 2ϵ) · 2ℓ − 1) · |T ′ | =
           Ω(|V |) · |T ′ |, since 2ℓ = Ω(|V |). Using the case’s hypothesis, we have |T ′ | = Ω(|V |) =
           Ω(|T |), which means that in this case the difference between G and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T |.
           We stress that the difference between G and µ(G) is at least Ω(|V |) · |T ′ | also if the case
           hypothesis does not hold.
        Case 2: |T ′ | < K.
          (This refers to the case that few vertices are mapped by µ to the opposite side of the
           bipartite graph (V, E ′ ), where “few” means less than K ≤ |V |/20 (assuming ϵ ≤ 0.1).)
           For every σ ∈ {0, 1}, let Vσ′ = Vσ ∩ µ(Vσ ) and Tσ = Vσ′ ∩ T . Indeed, (T ′ , T0 , T1 ) is a
           three-way partition of T . Note that the size of the symmetric difference between G and
           µ(G) is lower-bounded by

               |{(v, u) ∈ V1′ × V0′ : nmE(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= nmE(v, u)}| ,                                   (20)

           since, for any (v, u) ∈ V1′ × V0′ , it holds that µ(v) neighbors µ(u) in G if and only if
           nmE(µ(v), µ(u)) = 1, whereas µ(v) neighbors µ(u) in µ(G) if and only if v neighbors u in
           G which holds if and only if nmE(v, u) = 1.
           We consider two sub-cases according to whether or not min(|T0 |, |T1 |) is relatively large.
           The threshold for distinguishing these sub-cases is also set to K = (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ−2 ; note
           that K = Ω(|V |) and K ≥ 2k .
           Case 2.1: min(|T0 |, |T1 |) < K.
             In this case we shall use the (second condition of) quasi-orthogonality of nmE.
             Suppose, without loss of generality, that |T0 | ≤ |T1 |, which implies |T0 | < K. Then,
             the contribution of each vertex v ∈ T1 to (20) equals
                 |{u ∈ V0′ : nmE(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= nmE(v, u)}|
                    ≥    |{u ∈ V0′ : nmE(µ(v), u) ̸= nmE(v, u)}| − |T0 |
                    ≥    |{u ∈ V0 : nmE(µ(v), u) ̸= nmE(v, u)}| − |T ′ | − |T0 |
                    ≥    (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ − 2 · K
                     = (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ−1
             where the first inequality uses µ(u) = u for u ∈ V0′ \ T0 , the second inequality uses
             |V0′ | ≥ |V0 | − |T ′ |, the third inequality uses µ(v) ̸= v along with the (second condition
             of) quasi-orthogonality of nmE (and the hypotheses regarding |T ′ | and |T0 |), and the
             equality is due to K = (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ−2 .
             Hence, in this case, the total contribution to (20) is (0.5 − ϵ) · 2ℓ−1 · |T1 |, which is
             Ω(|V |) · (|T | − |T ′ |), since |T1 | ≥ (|T | − |T ′ |)/2.
           Case 2.2: min(|T0 |, |T1 |) ≥ K.
             In this case we shall use the non-malleable feature of nmE.
             Specifically, for each σ ∈ {0, 1}, let µσ denote the restriction of µ to Tσ . Essentially,
             using K ≥ 2k , the non-malleability condition of the (k, ϵ)-extractor nmE implies

                  |{(i, j) ∈ T0 × T1 : nmE(i, j) ̸= nmE(µ0 (i), µ1 (j))}| ≥ (0.5 − ϵ) · |T0 | · |T1 |.
                                                                                                         12:57


       This can be seen by letting X and Y be uniform over T0 and T1 , respectively, and
       combining the fact that Pr[nmE(µ0 (X), µ1 (Y )) ̸= U1 ] = 0.5 with the non-malleability
       condition (while noting that µ0 : T0 → µ(T0 ) and µ1 : T1 → µ(T1 ) have no fixed-
       points).39
       Hence, in this case, the total contribution to (20) is (0.5 − ϵ) · |T0 | · |T1 | = Ω(|V |) ·
       (|T | − |T ′ |), where we use min(|T0 |, |T1 |) = Ω(|V |).
     Hence, in both sub-cases, the difference between G and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · (|T | − |T ′ |).

Recall that (by the last comment at Case 1) the difference between G and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T ′ |.
Combining this lower-bound with the conclusion of Case 2, the difference between G and
µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T |.                                                                      ◀

Digest
Note that the quasi-orthogonality of nmE was used in Cases 1 and 2.1, whereas the non-
malleability of nmE (w.r.t derangements) was used in Case 2.2. In particular, Case 1 only
uses the first condition of quasi-orthogonality, and does so in order to infer that the degrees
of all vertices in the bipartite graph are approximately equal. In Case 2.1 the second quasi-
orthogonality condition is used in order to assert that the neighborhoods of two different
vertices in Vσ are significantly different. This is useful only when the number of non-fixed-
points in V1−σ is relatively small. When the number of non-fixed-points is large but no
vertex is mapped to the other side (i.e., T ′ = ∅), we only use Case 2.2, which does not refer
to quasi-orthogonality at all. Hence, we have the following –
▶ Remark 8.4 (a special case of Theorem 8.3). For bipartite graphs G = (V, E) such that
V = V0 ∪ V1 and E ⊆ V0 × V1 , we consider the special case of robust self-ordering that refers
only to permutations µ : V → V that are derangements that preserve the bipartition of V
(i.e., µ has no fixed-points and µ(V0 ) = V0 ).40 In this case, assuming (only) that nmE is a
non-malleable two-source (ℓ, ϵ)-extractor (i.e., the case of k = ℓ), implies that, for any such µ,
the size of the symmetric difference between G and µ(G) is (0.5 ± ϵ) · |V0 | · |V1 |. In particular,
the quasi-orthogonality condition is not necessary, the proof of Theorem 8.3 simplifies, since
T ′ = ∅ and Tσ = Vσ = Vσ′ hold, and the size of the symmetric difference between G and µ(G)
equal the quantity in (20).
Interestingly, the special case of Theorem 8.3 asserted in Remark 8.4 can be reversed in the
sense that a bipartite graph that is robustly self-ordered in the foregoing restricted sense is
actually a non-malleable two-source (ℓ, 0.5 − Ω(1))-extractor.

▶ Proposition 8.5 (a reversal of the special case of Theorem 8.3 (i.e., of Remark 8.4)). Let
G = (V0 ∪ V1 , E) be a bipartite graph such that |V0 | = |V1 | and E ⊆ V0 × V1 . Let V = V0 ∪ V1 ,
and suppose that for every derangement µ : V → V such that µ(V0 ) = V0 it holds that
the size of the symmetric difference between G and µ(G) is (0.5 ± ϵ) · |V0 | · |V1 |. Then,
F : V0 × V1 → {0,  √1} such that F (x, y) = 1 if and only if {x, y} ∈ E is a non-malleable
two-source (ℓ, ϵ + 2ϵ + o(1))-extractor.

                         √ holds also if G is augmented by complete graph on the vertex-set
Needless to say, the claim
V1 . Note that we lose a 2ϵ + o(1) term in the reversal.


39
   Formally, we should extend µ0 and µ1 to (arbitrary) derangements f and g, respectively. (Note
   that we may assume, w.l.o.g., that |Tσ ∪ µ(Tσ )| ≤ |Vσ | − 2.) Lastly, note that (18) implies that
   Pr[nmE(X, Y ) ̸= nmE(f (X), g(Y ))] ≥ Pr[U1 ̸= nmE(f (X), g(Y ))] − ϵ = 0.5 − ϵ.
40
   That is, the requirement regarding the symmetric difference between G and µ(G) is made only for
   permutations µ that have no fixed-points and satisfy µ(V0 ) = V0 .


                                                                                                        CCC 2021
12:58


        Proof. Let (f, g) and (X, Y ) be as in Definition 8.1, and note that in this case X and Y are
        independent distributions that are each uniformly distributed on [2ℓ ]. Define µ : V → V such
        that µ(z) = f (z) if z ∈ V0 and µ(z) = g(z) otherwise, and note that µ is a derangement that
        preserves the partition of V . Recall that (µ(x), µ(y)) contributes to the symmetric difference
        between G and µ(G) if and only if F (µ(x), µ(y)) ̸= F (x, y), since µ(x) is connected to µ(y)
        in µ(G) if and only if x is connected to y in G. Hence, by the hypothesis, we have

            Pr[F (X, Y ) ̸= F (µ(X), µ(Y ))] = 0.5 ± ϵ.                                                    (21)
                       def
        Letting pµσ,τ = Pr[(F (X, Y ), F (µ(X), µ(Y ))) = (σ, τ )], we have pµ0,1 + pµ1,0 = 0.5 ± ϵ, and
        using the fact that (X, Y ) and (µ(X), µ(Y )) are identically distributed we have pµ1,0 = pµ0,1
        (since pµ1,1 + pµ1,0 = pµ1,1 + pµ0,1 ). Hence, pµ0,1 = 0.25 ± 0.5ϵ. Lastly, we show that pµ1,1 + pµ1,0 =
        0.5 ± ϵ/2 + o(1), and conclude that pµ1,1 = 0.25 ± (0.5ϵ + ϵ/2 + o(1)); it follows that F is
              p                                                             p
                                                    √
        a non-malleable (two-source) (ℓ, ϵ + 2ϵ + o(1))-extractor.
                                                                                             def
            To show that pµ1,1 + pµ1,0 = 0.5 ± ϵ/2 + o(1), we first note that p = pµ1,1 + pµ1,0 =
                                                       p

        Pr[F (X, Y ) = 1] is actually oblivious of µ. Hence, by considering a random derangement µ
        that preserves V0 (i.e., µ(V0 ) = V0 ), we observe that, with overwhelmingly high probability
        (over the choice of µ), it holds that {(x, y) ∈ V0 × V1 : F (x, y) ̸= F (µ(x),pµ(y))} has size
        (2p(1−p)±o(1))·|V0 |·|V1 |. Confronting this with (21), we infer that p = 0.5±( ϵ/2+o(1)). ◀

        Corollary
        Combining Theorem 8.3 with the non-malleable two-source extractors of [7, Thm. 1], while
        using Proposition 8.2, we obtain an efficient construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs
        (alas not a strongly explicit (aka locally computable) one).

        ▶ Theorem 8.6 (constructing Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs). There exist an
        algorithm that, on input n, works in poly(n)-time and outputs an explicit description of an
        Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered O(n)-vertex graph. Furthermore, each vertex in this graph has
        degree at least 0.24 · n and at most 0.76 · n.

        The degree bounds follow by observing that the vertices in the graph described in Theorem 8.3
        have degree at least (0.5 − ϵ) · n/2 and at most (1.5 + ϵ) · n/2, whereas [7, Thm. 1] provides
        for ϵ = o(1).

        8.2     The second construction
        Combining Theorem 8.3 with the non-malleable two-source extractors of [7, Thm. 1], while
        using Proposition 8.2, we obtained an efficient construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered
        n-vertex graphs (see Theorem 8.6). However, this construction is not locally computable (as
        postulated in Theorem 1.4), because the non-malleable two-source extractors of [7, Thm. 1]
        are not quasi-orthogonal and the transformation of Proposition 8.2 runs in time that is
        polynomial in the size of the resulting graph.
           To avoid the foregoing transformation and prove Theorem 1.4, we employ a variant on
        the construction presented in Theorem 8.3. Rather than connecting two sets of vertices
        using a bipartite graph that corresponds to a quasi-orthogonal non-malleable two-source
        extractor, we connect three sets of vertices such that one pair of vertex-sets is connected by
        a (not necessarily quasi-orthogonal) non-malleable two-source extractor, whereas the other
        two pairs are connected by bipartite graphs that are merely quasi-orthogonal. In analogy to
                                                                                                                     12:59


the definition of a quasi-orthogonal (two-source) extractor, we say that a bipartite graph on
the vertex-set X ∪ Y is quasi-orthogonal (with error ϵ) if the following two conditions hold
regarding its adjacency predicate B : X × Y → {0, 1}:
 1. The degree of each vertex is approximately half the number of the vertices on the other
    side: For each x ∈ X (resp., y ∈ Y ), it holds that |{y ∈ Y : B(x, y) = 1}| = (0.5 ± ϵ) · |Y |
    (resp., |{x ∈ X : B(x, y) = 1}| = (0.5 ± ϵ) · |X|).
 2. Each pair of vertices on one side neighbors approximately a quarter of the vertices on the
    other side: For every x = ̸ x′ ∈ X, it holds that |{y ∈ Y : B(x, y) ̸= B(x′ , y)}| = (0.5 ± ϵ) · |Y |.
    Similarly, for y ̸= y ′ ∈ Y .
We note that the inner-product (mod 2) extractor [9], denoted E2 : {0, 1}ℓ × {0, 1}ℓ → {0, 1},
corresponds to a quasi-orthogonal bipartite graph for the case X = Y = {0, 1}ℓ \ {0ℓ }. We
will however need quasi-orthogonal bipartite graphs with different-sized sides, which can
be obtained by a simple variant. Specifically, for the case of X = {0, 1}ℓ \ {0ℓ } and Y =
{0, 1}ℓ+2 \ {0ℓ+2 }, we use the function B(x, y) = E2 (G(x), y), where G : {0, 1}ℓ → {0, 1}ℓ+2
is a small-bias generator that satisfies G(x) ̸= 0ℓ+2 and G(x) ̸= G(x′ ) for every x ̸= 0ℓ and
x′ ̸= x (see Proposition 8.8, and note that G(a, b, c, d) = (a, b, c, d, E2 (a, b), E2 (c, d)) will do).
We stress that the foregoing construction is strongly explicit (i.e., locally computable).
    We shall also assume that the (bipartite graph corresponding to the) non-malleable
extractor nmE : [2ℓ − 1] × [2ℓ − 1] → {0, 1} has linear degrees in the sense that for every x
it holds that |{y ∈ [2ℓ − 1] : nmE(x, y) = 1}| ≥ ϵ′ · 2ℓ for some constant ϵ′ > 0. This can be
enforced by starting with an arbitrary non-malleable two-source (k, ϵ′ )-extractor (e.g., the
one of [7, Thm. 1]) and resetting pairs in m = ϵ′ · 2ℓ fixed perfect matchings to 1 (i.e., for
each (x, y) in one of these matching, we reset nmE(x, y) ← 1).41 This increases the error of
the extractor by an additive term of m/2k = 2ℓ−k · ϵ′ , which we can afford (e.g., ϵ′ = 0.01
and k = ℓ − 4, yields extraction error ϵ < 0.2). We stress that this transformation preserves
polynomial-time computability of the extracting function.

▶ Theorem 8.7 (using a non-malleable two-source extractor with linear degrees to obtain a
Ω(2ℓ )-robustly self-ordered O(2ℓ )-vertex graph). For any constants ϵ, ϵ′ ∈ (0, 0.5) and varying
k ≤ ℓ − 4, where ℓ ∈ N, suppose that nmE : [2ℓ − 1] × [2ℓ − 1] → {0, 1} is a non-malleable two-
source (k, ϵ)-extractor such that for every x it holds that |{y ∈ [2ℓ − 1] : nmE(x, y) = 1}| > ϵ′ · 2ℓ .
Further suppose that B : [2ℓ − 1] × [2ℓ+2 − 1] → {0, 1} is quasi-orthogonal with error 0.1 · ϵ′ .
Then, the (6 · 2ℓ − 3)-vertex graph G = (V0 ∪ V1 ∪ V2 , E) such that Vσ = {⟨σ, i⟩ : i ∈ [2ℓσ − 1]},
where ℓ0 = ℓ1 = ℓ and ℓ2 = ℓ + 2, and
                                                                                    
                                                                                               V1       V2
     E = {{⟨1, i⟩, ⟨0, j⟩} : nmE(i, j) = 1} ∪ {{⟨σ, i⟩, ⟨2, j⟩} : B(i, j) = 1, σ ∈ {0, 1}} ∪        ∪        (22)
                                                                                               2        2

 is Ω(|V |)-robustly self-ordered, where V = V0 ∪ V1 ∪ V2 . Furthermore, each vertex in this
graph has degree at least 0.3 · |V | and at most 0.9 · |V |.

Using the foregoing ingredients (including the non-malleable extractor of [7, Thm. 1]),
Theorem 1.4 follows (see also Remark 8.9). Looking at (22), note that the first set of edges
corresponds to a bipartite graph between V1 and V0 that is determined by nmE, the second
set corresponds the bipartite graphs between Vσ (for σ ∈ {0, 1}) and V2 that are determined
by B, and the other two sets correspond to cliques on V1 and on V2 . (See Figure 2.)


41
     For example, we may use the matchings {(z, z + i) : z ∈ [2ℓ − 1]} for i ∈ [m], where addition is mod 2ℓ − 1.
     In addition, starting from an extractor that is defined over ℓ-bit strings, we may omit one of these
     strings (and obtain an extractor defined over [2ℓ − 1]).




                                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:60




              Figure 2 Illustrating the construction of Theorem 8.7.


        Proof. Recall that V = V0 ∪ V1 ∪ V2 , and consider an arbitrary (non-trivial) permutation
        µ : V → V . Intuitively, if µ maps a vertex of V0 (or V1 ) to V2 , then the difference in degrees
        of vertices in the two sets (caused by the |V2 |-clique edges) contributes Ω(|V |) units to the
        symmetric difference between G and µ(G), where here we use the first quasi-orthogonality
        condition of B. A similar argument, which uses the V1 -clique edges and relies on the linear
        degrees of nmE, applies to a vertex of Vσ mapped to V1−σ for any σ ∈ {0, 1}. On the other
        hand, if for some σ ∈ {0, 1, 2} the bijection µ maps ⟨σ, i⟩ ∈ Vσ to Vσ \ {⟨σ, i⟩}, then the
        difference in the neighborhoods caused by one of the two relevant bipartite graphs contributes
        Ω(|V |) units to the symmetric difference between G and µ(G). Here, we distinguishes between
        the case that µ has relatively few non-fixed-points in either V0 or V1 , which is analyzed
        using the second quasi-orthogonality condition of B, and the case that µ has relatively many
        non-fixed-points in both V0 and V1 , which is analyzed using the non-malleability condition of
        nmE. Indeed, the structure of the proof is similar to the one of Theorem 8.3, but the details
        are different in many aspects, and so we provide them below.
            Let T = {v ∈ V : µ(v) ̸= v} denote the set of non-fixed-points of µ. Then, we consider
        two types of vertices: Those that belong to the set T ′ = σ∈{0,1,2} {v ∈ Vσ : µ(v) ̸∈ Vσ } ⊆ T
                                                                     S

        and those that belong to T \ T ′ . The threshold for distinguishing these cases is set to
        K = (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V0 |/4 = Ω(|V |).42 Recall that ϵ denotes the extraction error of nmE,
        whereas ϵ′ is the fractional degree bound associated with its linear degrees feature, and 0.1 · ϵ′
        is the quasi-orthogonality error of B.
        Case 1: |T ′ | ≥ K.
          (This refers to the case that many vertices are mapped by µ to a different part of the
           three-way partition (V0 , V1 , V2 ) of V , where “many” means Ω(|V |).)
           Each vertex in T ′ contributes Ω(|V |) units to the symmetric difference between G and
           µ(G), because of the differences in the degrees of vertices in the three parts. Specifically:


        42
             The threshold is set depending on the quasi-orthogonality error of B. In the proof of Theorem 8.3, the
             threshold was set depending on the quasi-orthogonality error of nmE (which equaled its extraction error).
                                                                                                                12:61


      Vertices in V2 have degree at least (|V2 | − 1) + (0.5 − 0.1ϵ′ ) · (|V0 | + |V1 |) > (5 −
      0.2ϵ′ ) · |V0 | − O(1), where the first term is due to the clique edges and the second
      term is due to the bipartite graphs connecting V2 to V0 and V1 (and relies on the first
      quasi-orthogonality condition of B).
      Vertices in V0 have degree at most |V1 | + (0.5 + 0.1ϵ′ ) · |V2 | < (3 + 0.4ϵ′ ) · |V0 | + O(1),
      where the first term is due to the edges (determined by nmE) connecting V0 to V1 and
      the second term is due to the bipartite graph connecting V0 to V2 .
      Vertices in V1 have degree at least (|V1 | − 1) + ϵ′ · |V0 | + (0.5 − 0.1ϵ′ ) · |V2 | > (3 + 0.6ϵ′ ) ·
      |V0 | − O(1) and at most (|V1 | − 1) + |V0 | + (0.5 + 0.1ϵ′ ) · |V2 | < (4 + 0.4ϵ′ ) · |V0 |. In
      both cases, the first term is due to clique edges, the second term is due to the edges
      connecting V1 to V0 (as determined by nmE), and the third term is due to the edges
      connecting V1 to V2 (as determined by B). The crucial fact is that the linear degrees
      of nmE provides a non-trivial lower bound (of ϵ′ · |V0 |) on the second term.
   Hence, the difference in the degrees of vertices in the different parts is at least 0.2ϵ′ ·
   |V0 | − O(1), where the minimum is due to the difference between the degrees of vertices
   in V1 and the degrees of vertices in V0 .
   It follows that the symmetric difference between G and µ(G) is at least (0.2ϵ′ · |V0 | −
   O(1)) · |T ′ | = Ω(|V |) · |T ′ |, since |V0 | = Ω(|V |) and ϵ′ = Ω(1). Using the case’s hypothesis,
   we have |T ′ | = Ω(|V |) = Ω(|T |), which means that in this case the difference between G
   and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T |.
   We stress that the difference between G and µ(G) is at least Ω(|V |) · |T ′ | also if the case
   hypothesis does not hold.
Case 2: |T ′ | < K.
  (This refers to the case that few vertices are mapped by µ to a different part of the
   three-way partition (V0 , V1 , V2 ) of V .)
   For every σ ∈ {0, 1, 2}, let Vσ′ = Vσ ∩ µ(Vσ ) and Tσ = Vσ′ ∩ T . Indeed, (T ′ , T0 , T1 , T2 ) is a
   four-way partition of T . Note that the size of the symmetric difference between G and
   µ(G) is lower-bounded by

           |{(v, u) ∈ V1′ × V0′ : nmE(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= nmE(v, u)}|
           + |{(v, u) ∈ V1′ × V2′ : B(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= B(v, u)}|                                         (23)
           + |{(v, u) ∈ V0′ × V2′ : B(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= B(v, u)}| ,

   since, for any (v, u) ∈ V1′ × V0′ , it holds that µ(v) neighbors µ(u) in G if and only if
   nmE(µ(v), µ(u)) = 1, whereas µ(v) neighbors µ(u) in µ(G) if and only if v neighbors u in
   G which holds if and only if nmE(v, u) = 1. Ditto for the other two cases.
   We consider two sub-cases according to whether or not min(|T0 |, |T1 |) is relatively large.
   The threshold for distinguishing these sub-cases is also set to K = (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V0 |/4;
   note that K = Ω(|V |) and K > 0.1 · |V0 | > 2ℓ−4 ≥ 2k .

   Case 2.1: min(|T0 |, |T1 |) < K.
     In this case we shall use the quasi-orthogonality of B.
     Suppose, without loss of generality, that |T0 | ≤ |T1 |, which implies |T0 | < K.
     Depending on the relative sizes of T1 and T2 , we shall use either the quasi-orthogonal
     bipartite graph between V1 and V2 or the quasi-orthogonal bipartite graph between V2
     and V0 .




                                                                                                               CCC 2021
12:62


                 1. On the one hand, if |T1 | > |T2 |, then we consider the quasi-orthogonal bipartite
                    graph between V1 and V2 . The contribution of each vertex v ∈ T1 to (23) equals
                       |{u ∈ V2′ : B(µ(v), µ(u)) ̸= B(v, u)}|
                          ≥    |{u ∈ V2′ : B(µ(v), u) ̸= B(v, u)}| − |T2 |
                          >    |{u ∈ V2 : B(µ(v), u) ̸= B(v, u)}| − |T ′ | − |T1 |
                          ≥    (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V2 | − K − |V0 |
                           > 0.6 · |V0 |
                    where the first inequality uses µ(u) = u for u ∈ V2′ \ T2 , the second inequality
                    uses |V0′ | ≥ |V0 | − |T ′ | and the hypothesis |T2 | < |T1 |, the third inequality uses
                    µ(v) ̸= v along with the (second condition of) quasi-orthogonality of B (and
                    the hypotheses |T ′ | < K and the fact that |T1 | ≤ |V1 | = |V0 |), and the fourth
                    inequality uses ϵ′ < 0.5 and |V2 | > 4 · |V0 |. So the total contribution in this
                    sub-case is |T1 | · Ω(|V |) ≥ (|T | − |T ′ |) · Ω(|V |), since |T1 | ≥ max(|T0 |, |T2 |) and
                    |T0 | + |T1 | + |T2 | = |T | − |T ′ |.
                 2. On the other hand, if |T1 | ≤ |T2 |, then we consider the quasi-orthogonal bipartite
                    graph between V2 and V0 . The contribution of each vertex v ∈ T2 to (23) equals
                         |{u ∈ V0′ : B(µ(u), µ(v)) ̸= B(u, v)}|
                          ≥    |{u ∈ V0′ : B(u, µ(v)) ̸= B(u, v)}| − |T0 |
                          ≥    |{u ∈ V0 : B(u, µ(v)) ̸= B(u, v)}| − |T ′ | − |T0 |
                          ≥ (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V0 | − 2 · K
                          = (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V0 |/2
                    where the first inequality uses µ(u) = u for u ∈ V0′ \ T0 , the second inequality
                    uses |V0′ | ≥ |V0 | − |T ′ |, the third inequality uses µ(v) ̸= v along with the (second
                    condition of) quasi-orthogonality of B (and the hypotheses regarding |T ′ | and |T0 |),
                    and the equality is due to K = (0.5 − 0.1 · ϵ′ ) · |V0 |/4. So the total contribution in
                    this sub-case is |T2 | · Ω(|V |) ≥ (|T | − |T ′ |) · Ω(|V |), since |T2 | ≥ |T1 | ≥ |T0 |.
                Hence, the total contribution (of Case 2.1) to (23) is Ω(|V |) · (|T | − |T ′ |).
              Case 2.2: min(|T0 |, |T1 |) ≥ K.
                In this case we shall use the non-malleable feature of nmE.
                Specifically, for each σ ∈ {0, 1}, let µσ denote the restriction of µ to Tσ . Essentially,
                using K ≥ 2k , the non-malleability condition of the (k, ϵ)-extractor nmE implies

                     |{(i, j) ∈ T0 × T1 : nmE(i, j) ̸= nmE(µ0 (i), µ1 (j))}| ≥ (0.5 − ϵ) · |T0 | · |T1 |.

                This can be seen by letting X and Y be uniform over T0 and T1 , respectively, and
                combining the fact that Pr[nmE(µ0 (X), µ1 (Y )) ̸= U1 ] = 0.5 with the non-malleability
                condition (while noting that µ0 : T0 → µ(T0 ) and µ1 : T1 → µ(T1 ) have no fixed-
                points).43
                Hence, in this case, the total contribution to (23) is (0.5 − ϵ) · |T0 | · |T1 | = Ω(|V |2 ),
                where we use min(|T0 |, |T1 |) = Ω(|V |).
              Hence, in both sub-cases, the difference between G and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · (|T | − |T ′ |).


        43
             Formally, we should extend µ0 and µ1 to (arbitrary) derangements f and g, respectively. (Note
             that we may assume, w.l.o.g., that |Tσ ∪ µ(Tσ )| ≤ |Vσ | − 2.) Lastly, note that (18) implies that
             Pr[nmE(X, Y ) ̸= nmE(f (X), g(Y ))] ≥ Pr[U1 ̸= nmE(f (X), g(Y ))] − ϵ = 0.5 − ϵ.
                                                                                                                       12:63


Recall that (by the last comment at Case 1) the difference between G and µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T ′ |.
Combining this lower-bound with the conclusion of Case 2, the difference between G and
µ(G) is Ω(|V |) · |T |. As for the degree bounds, note that each vertex has degree at most
(|V2 | − 1) + (0.5 − 0.1ϵ′ ) · (|V0 | + |V1 |) = (5 + 0.2ϵ′ ) · |V0 | + O(1), and at least (0.5 − 0.1ϵ′ ) · |V2 | <
(2 − 0.4ϵ′ ) · |V0 | − O(1), where maximum (resp., minimum) is obtained by vertices in V2
(resp., V0 ).                                                                                                     ◀

Digest
Compared to the construction used in Theorem 8.3, the construction in Theorem 8.7 decouples
the non-malleable feature from the quasi-orthogonality feature, using non-malleable extractors
for connecting one pair of vertex-sets and quasi-orthogonal functions to connect the other
two pairs. The current analysis is slightly more complex because it has to handle the fact
that these features hold for different pairs. Specifically, the quasi-orthogonality of B is used
in Cases 1 and 2.1, whereas the non-malleability of nmE is used in Case 2.2. In particular,
Case 1 only uses the first condition of quasi-orthogonality, and does so in order to infer
that the degrees of all vertices in the bipartite graph determined by B are approximately
equal. In Case 2.1 the second quasi-orthogonality condition is used in order to assert that
the neighborhoods of two different vertices in Vσ (for every σ ∈ {0, 1, 2}) are significantly
different. This is useful only when the number of non-fixed-points in the other side of the
graph B is relatively small.
    In light of the key role that quasi-orthogonal unbalanced bipartite graphs play in The-
orem 8.7 and given their natural appeal, it feel adequate to provide a general construction of
these graphs, which generalizes the construction outlined before Theorem 8.7 (for the case of
ℓ′ = ℓ + 2).
                                                                                          def
▶ Proposition 8.8 (quasi-orthogonal unbalanced bipartite graphs). For Sℓ = {0, 1}ℓ \ {0ℓ } let
G : Sℓ → Sℓ′ be small-bias generator with bias ϵ such that G(s) ̸= G(s′ ) for every s =
                                                                                      ̸ s′ , and
let E2 denote the inner-product mod 2 function. Then, the bipartite graph described by the
adjacency predicate B : Sℓ × Sℓ′ → {0, 1} such that B(x, y) = E2 (G(x), y) is quasi-orthogonal
with error ϵ.

(Note that the hypothesis implies ϵ > 1/|Sℓ′ |. The definition of quasi-orthogonal bipartite
graphs appears before Theorem 8.7.)

Proof Sketch. Our starting point is the fact that E2 : Sℓ′ × Sℓ′ → {0, 1} is quasi-orthogonal
with error 1/|Sℓ′ |. The quasi-orthogonality feature of the first argument of B follows as a
special case of the corresponding feature of E2 . Turning to fixings of the second argument of
E2 and letting X be uniform over Sℓ , we observe that, for every y ∈ Sℓ′ , the bit B(G(X), y)
is a linear combination of the bits of G(X), and hence Pr[B(G(X), y) = 1] = 0.5 ± ϵ. Similarly,
for y ̸= y ′ , it holds that B(G(X), y) ⊕ B(G(X), y ′ ) = B(G(X), y ⊕ y ′ ) is linear combination
of the bits of G(X).                                                                            ◀

▶ Remark 8.9 (obtaining Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs, for every n). Theorem 8.7
provides a construction of Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered n-vertex graphs, for every n of the form
6 · 2ℓ − 3, where ℓ ∈ N. A construction for every n ∈ N can be obtained by using a few minor
modifications.
     Rather than using |V2 | = 2ℓ+2 − 1 = 4 · (|V0 | + 1) − 3, we may use |V2 | = n − 2 · |V0 | such
     that |V0 | = Ω(n). Specifically, we still use |V0 | = 2ℓ − 1, for ℓ = log2 n − Θ(1), along with
     |V2 | ∈ [4 · |V0 |, 10 · |V0 |]. Doing so requires decreasing the quasi-orthogonality error of B
     to 0.04ϵ′ so that 0.04ϵ′ · |V2 | ≤ 0.4 · |V0 | still holds.


                                                                                                                      CCC 2021
12:64


              More importantly, we need a construction of a quasi-orthogonal bipartite graph with
              an adjacency predicate B : [2ℓ − 1] × [n′ ] → {0, 1} such that n′ = n − 2 · (2ℓ − 1) ≥
              2n/3. The solution is to associated [n′ ] with an easily enumerable small-bias space
              S ⊆ {0, 1}ℓ+4 \ {0ℓ+4 } and use B(x, y) = E2 (G(x), y), where E2 and G are as in
              Proposition 8.8. Specifically, for t = log2 log2 ℓ and D = ⌈n′ · 2t /2ℓ+4 ⌉, we let S contain
              the n′ lexicographically first strings in S ′ × {0, 1}ℓ+4−t , where S ′ is a small-bias sample
              space of size D over {0, 1}t that is found by exhaustive search.44

        8.3        Obtaining efficient self-ordering
        We say that a self-ordered graph G = ([n], E) is efficiently self-ordered if there exists a
        polynomial-time algorithm that, given any graph G′ = (V ′ , E ′ ) that is isomorphic to G, finds
        the unique bijection ϕ : V ′ → [n] such that ϕ(G′ ) = G (i.e., the unique isomorphism of G′
        and G). Indeed, this isomorphism orders the vertices of G′ in accordance with the original
        (or target) graph G.
            Recall that in the case of bounded-degree graphs, we relied on the existence of a polynomial-
        time isomorphism test (see [29]) for efficiently self-ordering the robustly self-ordered graphs
        that we constructed. We cannot do so in the dense graph case, since a general polynomial-
        time isomorphism test is not known (see [1]). Instead, we augment the construction asserted
        in Theorem 1.4 so to obtain dense Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs that are efficiently
        self-ordered.45

        ▶ Theorem 8.10 (strengthening Theorem 1.4). There exist an infinite family of dense Ω(n)-
        robustly self-ordered graphs {Gn }n∈N and a polynomial-time algorithm that, given n ∈ N and
        a pair of vertices u, v ∈ [n] in the n-vertex graph Gn , determines whether or not u is adjacent
        to v in Gn . Furthermore, these graphs are efficiently self-ordered, and the degrees of vertices
        in Gn reside in [0.06n, 0.73n].

        Proof. Our starting point is the construction of m-vertex graphs that are Ω(m)-robustly
        self-ordered (see Theorem 1.4, which uses Theorem 8.7). Recall that the vertices in these
        graphs have degree that ranges between 0.3 · m and 0.9 · m (see Theorem 8.7).
            The idea is to use two such graphs, G1 and G2 , one with m vertices and the other
        with 4 · m vertices, where m = n/5, and connect them in a way that assists finding the
        ordering of vertices in each of these two graphs. Specifically, we designate a set, denoted S1 , of
          def p                                                                 def
        s = 2 log2 n vertices in G1 = ([m], E1 ), and a set, denoted S2 , of ℓ = 2s ∈ [log2 n, 2 log2 n]
                                                                                     

        vertices in G2 = ({m + 1, ..., 5m}, E2 ), and use them as follows:
            Connect each vertex in S2 to two different vertices in S1 , while noting that each vertex
            in S1 is connected to 2ℓ/s = o(ℓ) vertices of S2 .
                                                 def
              Connect each vertex in R1 = [m] \ S1 to a different set of neighbors in S2 such that each
              vertex in R1 has at least ℓ/2 neighbors in S2 .


        44
             Note that for every z = (z ′ , z ′′ ) ∈ {0, 1}ℓ+4 \ {0ℓ+4 } and Y = (Y ′ , Y ′′ ) that is uniformly distributed
             over S such that |z ′ | = |Y ′ | = t it holds that
                                                 ′     ′             ′′   ′′
                 E[(−1)E2 (z,Y ) ] = E[(−1)E2 (z ,Y ) ] · E[(−1)E2 (z ,Y ) ]
           where the absolute value of each of the factors is o(1) if the corresponding fixed string (i.e., z ′ or z ′′ )
           is non-zero. Specifically, note that Y ′ (resp., Y ′′ ) is o(1)-close to being uniformly distributed over S ′
           (resp., {0, 1}ℓ+4−t ).
        45
           Unlike in the bounded degree case (see Section 4.4), we do not know how to construct Ω(n)-robustly
           self-ordered graphs that support local self-ordering. We mention that Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs
           with information-theoretically local self-ordering do exist [22].
                                                                                                        12:65




   Figure 3 The construction of Theorem 8.10.


                                  def
    Connect each vertex in R2 = {m + 1, ..., 5m} \ S2 to a different set of neighbors in R1
    such that each vertex in R2 has two neighbors in R1 and each vertex in R1 has at most
    eight neighbors in R2 .
(See Figure 3.) Denote the resulting graph by G = ([n], E), and note that the vertices of
G1 have degree at most 0.9 · m + ℓ, whereas the vertices of G2 have degree at least 0.3 · 4m.
Given an isomorphic copy of the G, we can find the unique isomorphism (i.e., its ordering)
as follows:
 1. Identify the vertices that belong to G1 by virtue of their lower degree.
 2. Identify the set S1 as the set of vertices that belong to G1 and have 2ℓ/s = o(ℓ) neighbors
    in G2 .
    (Recall that each vertex in R1 has at least ℓ/2 neighbors in S2 .)
 3. Identify the set S2 as the set of vertices that belong to G2 and have (two) neighbors in
    S1 .
 4. For each possible ordering of S1 , order the vertices of S2 by their neighborhood in S1 ,
    and order the vertices of R1 according to their neighborhood in S2 .
    If the resulting ordering (of S1 ∪ R1 ) yields an isomorphism to G1 , them continue.
    Otherwise, try the next ordering of S1 .
 5. Order the vertices of R2 according to their neighborhood in R1 .
Note that by the asymmetry of G1 , there exists a unique ordering of its vertices, and a
unique ordering of S1 that fits it and leads the procedure to successful termination. One
the other hand, the number of possible ordering of S1 is s! = no(1) , which means that the
procedure is efficient.
    It is left to show that the graph G is Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered. Let γ ∈ (0, 1] be a constant
such that that G1 (resp., G2 ) is γ · m-robustly self-ordered (resp., γ · 4m-robustly self-ordered).
Then, fixing an arbitrary permutation µ : [n] → [n], and letting T = {v ∈ [n] : µ(v) ̸= v}, we
consider the following cases.
Case 1: |{v ∈ [m] : µ(v) ∈ [m]}| > γ · |T |/10.
   In this case, we get a contribution of at least Ω(m · |T |) units to the symmetric difference
   between G and µ(G), because of the difference in degree between vertices in [m] and
   outside [m]. (Recall that the former have degree at most 0.9 · m + ℓ < m, whereas the
   latter have degree at least 0.3 · 4m = 1.2 · m.)
           def
Case 2: t = |{v ∈ [m] : µ(v) ∈ [m]}| ≤ γ · |T |/10.
   In this case, at least (1 − 0.1γ) · |T | vertices in T are mapped by µ to the side in which
   they belong (i.e., each of these vertices v satisfies v ∈ [m] if and only if µ(v) ∈ [m]).
            def                                       def
    Let T1 = {v ∈ T ∩ [m] : µ(v) ∈ [m]} and T2 = {v ∈ T \ [m] : µ(v) ̸∈ [m]}. Then, the

                                                                                                       CCC 2021
12:66


           vertices in T1 contribute at least |T1 | · γ · m − t · m units to the symmetric difference
           between G and µ(G), where the negative term is due to possible change in the incidence
          with vertices that did not maintain their side. Similarly, the vertices in T2 contribute
           at least |T2 | · γ · 4m − t · 4m units to the symmetric difference. Hence, it total, we get a
           contribution of at least (|T | − 2t) · γ · m − t · 5m = Ω(m · |T |).
        The claims follows.46                                                                         ◀

        Digest
        The n-vertex graph constructed in the proof of Theorem 8.10 is proved to be Ω(n)-robustly
        self-ordered by implicitly using the following claim.

        ▷ Claim 8.11 (combining two Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graphs). For i ∈ {1, 2}, let Gi =
        (Vi , Ei ) be an Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graph, and consider a graph G = (V1 ∪V2 , E1 ∪E2 ∪E)
        such that E contain edges with a single vertex in each Vi ; that is, G consists of G1 and G2
        and an arbitrary bipartite graph that connects them. If the maximun degree in G of each
        vertex in V1 is smaller by an Ω(n) term from the minimum degree of each vertex in V2 , then
        G is Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered.

        Indeed, Claim 8.11 is analogous to Claim 4.3 (which refers to bounded-degree graphs). We
        also comment that Ω(n)-robustly self-ordered graph maintain this feature also when o(n)
        edges are added (and/or removed) from the incidence of each vertex.

         9        Application to Testing Dense Graph Properties
        In Section 5, we demonstrated the applicability of robustly self-ordered bounded-degree
        graphs to the study of testing graph properties in the bounded-degree graph model. In the
        current section, we provide a corresponding demonstration for the regime of dense graphs.
        Hence, we refer to testing graph properties in the dense graph model, which was introduced
        in [18] and is surveyed in [16, Chap. 8]. In this model, graphs are represented by their
        adjacency predicate, and distances are measured as the ratio of the number of differing
        incidences to the maximal number of edges.

        Background
        We represent a graph G = ([n], E), by the adjacency predicate g : [n] × [n] → {0, 1} such
        that g(u, v) = 1 if and only if {u, v} ∈ E, and oracle access to a graph means oracle access
        to its adjacency predicate (equiv., adjacency matrix). The distance between the graphs
        G = ([n], E) and G′ = ([n], E ′ ) is defined as the fraction of entries (in the adjacency matrix)
        on which the two graphs disagree.

        ▶ Definition 9.1 (testing graph properties in the dense graph model). A tester for a graph
        property Π is a probabilistic oracle machine that, on input parameters n and ϵ, and oracle
        access to an n-vertex graph G = ([n], E) outputs a binary verdict that satisfies the following
        two conditions.
         1. If G ∈ Π, then the tester accepts with probability at least 2/3.
         2. If G is ϵ-far from Π, then the tester accepts with probability at most 1/3, where G is ϵ-far
            from Π if for every n-vertex graph G′ = ([n], E ′ ) ∈ Π the adjacency matrices of G and G′
            disagree on at least ϵ · n2 entries.


        46
             Note that the degree of each vertex in G1 is at least 0.3m = 0.06n, whereas the degree of each vertex in
             G2 is at most 0.9 · 4m + s < 0.73n.
                                                                                                      12:67


The query complexity of a tester for Π is a function (of the parameters n and ϵ) that represents
the number of queries made by the tester on the worst-case n-vertex graph, when given the
proximity parameter ϵ.

Our result
We present a general reduction of testing any property Φ of (bit) strings to testing a
corresponding graph property Π. Loosely speaking, n-bit long strings will be encoded as part
         √                                                   √                              √
of an O( n)-vertex graph, which is constructed using Ω( n)-robustly self-ordered Θ( n)-
vertex graphs. This reduction is described in Construction 9.2 and its validity is proved in
Lemma 9.3. Denoting the query complexities of Φ and Π by QΦ and QΠ , respectively, we
get QΦ (n, ϵ) ≤ QΠ (O(n1/2 ), Ω(ϵ)). Thus, lower bounds on the query complexity of testing Φ,
which is a property of “ordered objects” (i.e., bit strings), imply lower bounds on the query
complexity of testing Π, which is a property of “unordered objects” (i.e., graphs).
    Our starting point is the construction of m-vertex graphs that are Ω(m)-robustly self-
ordered. Actually, wishing Π to preserve the computational complexity of Φ, we use a
construction of graphs that are efficiently self-ordered, as provided by Theorem 8.10. Recall
that the vertices in these graphs have degree that ranges between 0.06 · m and 0.73 · m.
    The idea is to use two such graphs, G1 and G2 , one with m vertices and the other with
                             √
49 · m vertices, where m = n, and encode an n-bit string in the connection between them.
Specifically, we view the latter string as a m-by-m matrix, denoted (si,j )i,j∈[m] , and connect
the ith vertex of G1 to the j th vertex of G2 if and only if si,j = 1.
▶ Construction 9.2 (from properties of strings to properties of dense graphs). Suppose that
{Gm = ([m], Em )}m∈N is a family of Ω(m)-robustly self-ordered graphs. For every n ∈ N, we
         √
let m = n, and proceed as follows.
    For every s ∈ {0, 1}n views as (si,j )i,j∈[m] ∈ {0, 1}m×m , we define the graph G′s =
    ([50m], Es′ ) such that

          Es′ = Em ∪ {{m + i, m + j} : {i, j} ∈ E49m } ∪ {{i, m + j} : i, j ∈ [m] ∧ si,j = 1} (24)

      That is, G′s consists of a copy of Gm and a copy of G49m that are connected by a bipartite
      graph that is determined by s.
                                            S
      For a set of strings Φ, we define Π = n∈N Πn as the set of all graphs that are isomorphic
      to some graph G′s such that s ∈ Φ; that is,

          Πn = {π(G′s ) : s ∈ (Φ ∩ {0, 1}n ) ∧ π ∈ Sym50m }                                  (25)

    where Sym50m denote the set of all permutations over [50m].
Note that, given a graph of the form π(G′s ), the vertices of Gm are easily identifiable (as
having degree at most 0.73m + m < 1.8m).47 The foregoing construction yields a local
reduction of Φ to Π, where locality means that each query to G′s can be answered by making
a constant number of queries to s. The (standard) validity of the reduction (i.e., s ∈ Φ if
and only if G′s ∈ Π) is based on the fact that Gm and G49m are asymmetric.
    In order to be useful towards proving lower bounds on the query complexity of testing Π,
we need to show that the foregoing reduction is “distance preserving” (i.e., strings that are
far from Φ are transformed into graphs that are far from Π). The hypothesis that Gm and
G49m are Ω(m)-robustly self-ordered is pivotal to showing that if the string s is far from Φ,
then the graph G′s is far from Π.


47
     In contrast, the vertices of G49m have degree at least 0.06 · 49m > 2.9m.




                                                                                                     CCC 2021
12:68


        ▶ Lemma 9.3 (preserving distances). If s ∈ {0, 1}n is ϵ-far from Φ, then the 50m-vertex
        graph G′s (as defined in Construction 9.2) is Ω(ϵ)-far from Π.

        Proof. We prove the contrapositive. Suppose that G′s is δ-close to Π. Then, for some r ∈ Φ
        and a permutation π : [50m] → [50m], it holds that G′s is δ-close to π(G′r ), which means
        that these two graphs differ on at most δ · (50m)2 vertex pairs. If π(i) = i for every i ∈ [2m],
        then s must be O(δ)-close to r, since si,j = 1 (resp., ri,j = 1) if and only if i is connected to
        m + j in G′s (resp., in π(G′r ) = G′r ).48 Unfortunately, the foregoing condition (i.e., π(i) = i
        for every i ∈ [2m]) need not hold in general.
            In general, the hypothesis that π(G′r ) is δ-close to G′s implies that π maps at most O(δm)
        vertices of [m] to {m + 1, ..., 2m}, and maps to [m] at most O(δm) vertices that are outside
        it. This is the case because each vertex of [m] has degree smaller than 0.73m + m < 1.8m,
        whereas the other vertices have degree at least 0.06 · 49m > 2.9m.
            Turning to the vertices i ∈ [m] that π maps to [m] \ {i}, we upper-bound their number
        by O(δm), since the difference between π(G′r ) and G′s is at most δ · (50m)2 , whereas the
        hypothesis that Gm is c · m-robustly self-ordered implies that the difference between π(G′r )
        and G′s (or any other graph G′w ) is at least

              ∆ = c · m · |{i ∈ [m] : π(i) ̸= i}| − m · |{i ∈ [m] : π(i) ̸∈ [n]}|.

        (Hence, |{i ∈ [m] : π(i) ̸= i}| ≤ ∆+m·O(δm)
                                              cm     = O(δm).) The same considerations apply to
        the vertices i ∈ {m + 1, ..., 2m} that π maps to {m + 1, ..., 2m} \ {i}; their number is also
        upper-bounded by O(δm).
           For every k ∈ {1, 2}, letting Ik = {i ∈ [m] : π((k − 1) · m + i) = (k − 1) · m + i}, observe
                    def
        that D = |{(i, j) ∈ I0 × I1 : ri,j ̸= si,j }| ≤ δ · (50m)2 , since ri,j ̸= si,j implies that π(G′r )
        and G′s differ on the vertex-pair (i, m + j). Recalling that m − |Ik | = O(δm), it follows that

              |{(i, j) ∈ [m] : ri,j ̸= si,j }| ≤ ((m − |I1 |) − (m − |I2 |)) · m + D = O(δm2 ).

        Hence, s is O(δ)-close to r ∈ Φ, and the claims follows.                                                       ◀

         10         The Case of Intermediate Degree Bounds
        While Section 2–6 study bounded-degree graphs and Sections 7–9 study dense graphs (i.e.,
        constant edge density), in this section we shall consider graphs of intermediate degree bounds.
        That is, for every d : N → N such that d(n) ∈ [Ω(1), n], we consider n-vertex graphs of
        degree bound d(n). In this case, the best robustness we can hope for is Ω(d(n)), and we shall
        actually achieve it for all functions d.

        ▶ Theorem 10.1 (robustly self-ordered graphs for intermediate degree bounds). For every d :
        N → N such that d(n) is computable in poly(n)-time, there exists an efficiently constructable
        family of graphs {Gn }n∈N such that Gn has maximal degree d(n) and is Ω(d(n))-robustly
        self-ordered.

        We prove Theorem 10.1 in three parts, each covering a different regime of degree-bounds (i.e.,
        d(n)’s). Most of the range (i.e., d(n) = Ω(log n)0.5 ) is covered by Theorem 10.2, whereas
        Theorem 10.3 handles small degree-bounds (i.e., d(n) = O(log n)0.499 ) and Theorem 10.5


        48
             Hence, G′s is δ-close to G′r implies that |{i, j ∈ [n] : si,j ̸= ri,j }| ≤ δ · (50m)2 , which means that s is
             (50m)2 δ                              √
                n     -close to r. (Recall that m = n.)
                                                                                                              12:69


handles the degree-bounds that are in-between. One ingredient in the proof of Theorem 10.5
is a transformation of graphs that makes them expanding, while preserving their degree and
robustness parameters up to a constant factor. This transformation, which is a special case
of Theorem 10.4, is of independent interest.
▶ Theorem 10.2 (robustly self-ordered graphs for large degree bounds). For every d : N →
                          √
N such that d(n) ≥ O( log n) is computable in poly(n)-time, there exists an efficiently
constructable family of graphs {Gn }n∈N such that Gn has maximal degree d(n) and is Ω(d(n))-
robustly self-ordered.
                                                                                        √
The graphs will consist of connected components of size d(n), and in this case d(n) = Ω( log n)
is necessary, since these components must be different.

Proof Sketch. We combine ideas from Construction 9.2 with elements of the proof of
Theorem 4.2. Specifically, as in Construction 9.2, we shall use constructions of m-vertex and
9m-vertex graphs that are Ω(m)-robustly self-ordered, but here we set m = d(n)/10 and use
n/d(n) different d(n)-vertex graphs that are based on the foregoing two graphs. As in the
proof of Theorem 4.2, these (10m-vertex) graphs will be far from being isomorphic to one
another and will form the connected components of the final n-vertex graph.
   Our starting point is the construction of m-vertex graphs that are Ω(m)-robustly self-
ordered. Specifically, we may use Theorem 8.6 and note that in this case the vertices in these
m-vertex graph have degree that ranges between 0.24 · m and 0.76 · m. Furthermore, these
graphs have extremely high conductance; that is, in each of these graphs, the number of
edges crossing each cut (in the graph) is at least Ω(m) times the number of vertices in the
smaller side (of the cut).
                                                                         def
    The idea is to use two such graphs, G1 and G2 , one with m = 0.1 · d(n) vertices and the
other with 0.9 · d(n) = 9 · m vertices, and connect them in various ways as done in Section 4.2.
Specifically, using an error correcting code with constant rate and constant relative distance
                                            2
and weight, denoted C : [2k ] → {0, 1}m , we obtain a collection of 2k ≥ n/d(n) strongly
connected d(n)-vertex graphs such that the ith graph consists of copies of G1 and G2 that
are connected according to the codeword C(i); more specifically, we use the codeword C(i)
(viewed as an m-by-m matrix) in order to determine the connections between the vertices of
G1 and the first 0.1 · d(n) vertices of G2 . The final n-vertex graph, denoted G, consists of
n/d(n) connected components that are the first n/d(n) graphs in this collection.49
    The analysis adapts the analysis of the construction presented in the proof of Theorem 4.2.
                                  (i)
Towards this analysis, we let Gj denote the ith copy of Gj ; that is, the copy of Gj that is
part of the ith connected component of G. Hence, for each i ∈ [n/d(n)], the ith connected
component of G is isomorphic to a graph that consists of copies of G1 = ([m], E1 ) and
                                                                               (i)
G2 = ({m + 1, ..., 10m}, E2 ) such that for every u, v ∈ [m] the vertex u (of G1 ) is connected
                             (i)
to the vertex m + v (of G2 ) if and only if C(i)u,v = 1. Loosely speaking, considering an
arbitrary permutation µ : [n] → [n], we proceed as follows.50
    The discrepancy between the degrees of vertices in copies of G1 and G2 (i.e., degree
    smaller than 0.76m + m versus degree at least 0.24 · 9m) implies that each vertex that
    resides in a copy of G1 and is mapped by µ to a copy of G2 yields a contribution of
    Ω(d(n)) units to the symmetric difference between G and µ(G).

                                                                             √
49
   Note that we used 2k ≥√n/d(n) and m2 = O(k), where m = 0.1 · d(n) > k. This setting allows for
   handling any d(n) ≥ O( log n).
50
   These cases are analogous to the cases treated in the proof of Theorem 4.2, with the difference that we
   merged Cases 2&3 (resp., Cases 4&5) into our second (resp., third) case.




                                                                                                             CCC 2021
12:70


            Let µ′ (i) (resp., µ′′ (i)) denote the index of the connected component to which µ maps
                                                           (i)             (i)
            a plurality of the vertices that reside in G1 (resp., of G2 ). Then, the extremely high
                                                                                        (i)                (i)
            conductance of G1 (resp., G2 ) implies that the vertices that resides in G1 (resp., of G2 )
            and are mapped by µ to a connected component different from µ′ (i) (resp., µ′′ (i)) yields
            an average contribution of Ω(d(n)) units per each of these vertices.
                                                                    (i)        (i)
            The lower bound on the number of edges between G1 and G2 implies that every i such
                      ′         ′′                                  2
            that µ (i) ̸= µ (i) yields a contribution of Ω(d(n) ) units, where we assume that few
            vertices fell to the previous case (i.e., are mapped by µ in disagreement with the relevant
            plurality vote). (Analogously to the proof of Theorem 4.2, each of these few exceptional
            vertices reduces the contribution by at most d(n) units.)
            The Ω(d(n))-robust self-ordering of G1 (resp., G2 ) implies that each vertex that reside
                  (i)               (i)                                                     (µ′ (i)
            in G1 (resp., of G2 ) and is mapped by µ to a different location in G1                  (resp., in
              (µ′′ (i)
            G2         ) yields a contribution of Ω(d(n)) units. Again, this assumes that few vertices fell
            to the penultimate case, whereas each of these few vertices reduces the contribution by
            one unit (per each vertex in the current case).
            The distance between the codewords of C implies that every i such that µ′ (i) = µ′′ (i) ̸= i
            yields a contribution of Ω(d(n)2 ), where we assume that few vertices fell to the previous
            cases.
        As in the proof of Theorem 4.2, there may be a double counting across the different cases,
        but this only means that we overestimate the contribution by a constant factor. Overall the
        size of the symmetric difference is Ω(d(n)) times the number of non-fixed-points of µ.              ◀

        Handling smaller degree bounds
        Theorem 10.2 is applicable only for degree bounds that are at least O(log n)0.5 . A different
        construction allows handling degree bounds up to O(log n)0.499 , which leaves a small gap
        (which we shall close in Theorem 10.5).

        ▶ Theorem 10.3 (robustly self-ordered graphs for small degree bounds). For every every
        constant ϵ > 0, and every d : N → N such that d(n) ∈ [Ω(1), (log n)0.5−ϵ ] is computable in
        poly(n)-time, there exists an efficiently constructable family of graphs {Gn }n∈N such that
        Gn has maximal degree d(n) and is Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered.
                                                                                Θ(log n)
        In this case, the graphs will consist of connected components of size d(n)·log log n > d(n).


                                        defΘ(log n)                    ϵ
        Proof Sketch. Setting m(n) = d(n)·log    log n > d(n) · (log n) , we proceed in three steps.
        1. We first tighten the proof of Theorem 6.1 such that it establishes that, with probability
           at least 1 − exp(−Ω(d(n) · log m(n)) = 1 − o(1), a d(n)-regular m(n)-vertex multi-
           graph generated by the random permutation model is Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered and
           expanding. The fact that the proof extends to a varying degree bound is implicit in the
           proof of Theorem 6.1, and the higher robustness is obtained by using smaller sets Ji ’s
           (see Footnote 33).
           Then, we extend the argument (as done in Step 1 of Remark 6.2) and show that, for
           any set G of t < n multi-graphs (which is each d(n)-regular and has m(n) vertices), with
           probability at least 1 − t · exp(−Ω(d(n) · log m(n)) = 1 − o(1), a random d(n)-regular
           m(n)-vertex multi-graph (as generated above) is both Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered and
           expanding and far from being isomorphic to any multi-graph in G. Here two d(n)-regular
           m(n)-vertex multi-graphs are said to be far apart if they disagree on Ω(d(n) · m(n))
           vertex-pairs. (Note that the probability that such a random multi-graph is close to being
                                                                                                             12:71


     isomorphic to a fixed multi-graph is at most exp(−Ω(d(n) · m(n) log(m(n)/d(n)))) =
     o(1/n2 ), where the last inequality is due to the setting of m(n).)51
     Note that this multi-graph may have parallel edges and self-loops, but their number can
     be upper-bounded with high probability. Specifically, for t = 1/ϵ, with probability at
     least 1 − O(d(n)t /m(n)t−1 ), no vertex has t (or more) self-loops and no vertex is incident
     to t + 1 (or more) parallel edges. Hence, omitting all self-loops and all parallel edges
     leaves us with a simple graph that is both Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered (and expanding)
     and far from being isomorphic to any graph in G.
2. Next, using Step 1, we show that one can construct in poly(n)-time a collection of n/m(n)
   graphs such that each graph is d(n)-regular, has m(n) vertices, is Ω(d(n))-robustly self-
   ordered and expanding, and the graphs are pairwise far from being isomorphic to one
   another.
   As in Step 2 of Remark 6.2, this is done by iteratively finding robustly self-ordered
   d(n)-regular m(n)-vertex expanding graphs that are far from being isomorphic to all prior
   ones, while relying on the fact that m(n)d(n)·m(n) = poly(n) (by the setting of m(n)).
 3. Lastly, we use the graphs constructed in Step 2 as connected components of an n-vertex
    graph, and obtain the desired graph.
Note that we have used m(n) > (log n)ϵ · d(n) and d(n) · m(n) · log m(n) = Θ(log n), which
is possible if (and only if) d(n) ≤ (log n)0.5−Θ(ϵ) .                                   ◀


Obtaining strongly connected graphs

The graphs constructed in the proofs of Theorems 10.2 and 10.3 consists of many small
connected components; specifically, we obtain n-vertex graphs of maximum degree d(n) with
connected components of size max(O(d(n)), o(log n)) that are Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered.
We point out that the latter graphs can be transformed into ones with asymptotically maximal
expansion (under any reasonable definition of this term), while preserving their maximal
degree and robustness parameter (up to a constant factor). This is a consequence of the
following general transformation.

▶ Theorem 10.4 (the effect of super-imposing two graphs). For every d, d′ : N → N and
ρ : N → R, let G and G′ be n-vertex graphs such that G is ρ(n)-robustly self-ordered and
has maximum degree d(n), and G′ has maximum degree d(n). Then, the graph obtained by
super-imposing G and G′ is (ρ(n) − d′ (n))-robustly self-ordered and has maximum degree
d(n) + d′ (n).

Note that Theorem 10.4 is not applicable to the constructions of bounded-degree graphs
obtained in the first part of this paper, because their robustness parameter was a constant
smaller than 1. (This is due mostly to Construction 2.3, but also occurs in the proof of
Theorem 4.2.)52 A typical application of Theorem 10.4 may use d′ (n) = ρ(n)/2 ≥ 3. (Recall
that ρ(n) ≤ d(n) always holds.)



51
   For starters, the probability that an edge that appears in the fixed multi-graph appears in the random
   graph is d(n)/m(n). Intuitively, these events are sufficiently independent so to prove the claim; for
   example, we may consider the neighborhoods of the first m(n)/2 vertices in the random graph, and an
   iterative process in which they are determined at random conditioned on all prior choices.
52
   In contrast, the construction of Theorem 10.3, which builds upon the proof of Theorem 6.1, does yield
   Ω(d)-robustly self-ordered graphs of maximum degree d, for sufficiently large constant d.




                                                                                                            CCC 2021
12:72


        Proof. Fixing any permutation µ of the vertex set, note that the contribution of each
        non-fixed-point of µ to the symmetric difference between G ∪ G′ and µ(G ∪ G′ ) may decrease
        by at most d′ (n) units due to G′ .                                                      ◀

        Closing the gap between Theorems 10.2 and 10.3
        Recall that these theorems left few bounding functions untreated; essentially, these were
        functions d : N → N such that d(n) ∈ [(log n)0.499 , O(log n)0.5 ]. We close this gap now.

        ▶ Theorem 10.5 (robustly self-ordered graphs for the remaining degree bounds). For every
        d : N → N such that d(n) ∈ [(log n)1/3 , (log n)2/3 ] is computable in poly(n)-time, there exists
        an efficiently constructable family of graphs {Gn }n∈N such that Gn has maximal degree d(n)
        and is Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered.

        In this case, the graphs will consist of connected components of size 2 log n.

        Proof Sketch. We apply the proof strategy of Theorem 10.2, while using the graphs obtained
        by combining Theorems 10.2 and 10.4. Specifically, setting ℓ = log n, while noting that
        d(n) ≥ ℓ1/3 ≫ O(log ℓ)1/2 , we use the construction of ℓ-vertex Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered
        graphs of degree at most d(n)/2 that are expanding, which is obtained by combining the
        latter two results. Furthermore, we shall use the fact that these graphs have degree at
        least d(n)/200, and will also use the same construction with degree bound d(n)/300. Using
        these two graphs, we shall construct n/2ℓ different ℓ-vertex graphs that are far from being
        isomorphic to one another, and these will form the connected components of the final n-vertex
        graph.
            Our starting point is the construction of ℓ-vertex graphs that, for some constant γ ∈ (0, 1),
        are γ · d(n)-robustly self-ordered and have maximum degree d(n)/4 and minimum degree
        d(n)/100. Such graphs are obtained by Theorem 10.2, while setting m = d(n)/40. Using
        Theorem 10.4 (with d′ (n) = γ · d(n)/4), we transform these graphs to ones of maximum
        degree d(n)/2 and asymptotically maximal conductance (i.e., in each of these graphs, the
        number of edges crossing each cut (in the graph) is at least Ω(d(n)) times the number of
        vertices in the smaller side (of the cut)). We denote the resulting graph G1 , and apply the
        same process while setting m = d(n)/600 so to obtain a graph of maximum degree d(n)/300,
        denoted G2 .
            Next, we connect G1 and G2 in various ways so to obtain n/2ℓ graphs that are far
        from being isomorphic to one another. This is done by a small variation on the proof of
        Theorem 10.2. Specifically, we fix d(n)/2 disjoint perfect matchings between the vertices of G1
        and the vertices G2 , and use the error correcting code to determine which of these ℓ · d(n)/2 =
        ω(log n) edges to include in the code. More specifically, using an error correcting code with
        constant rate and constant relative distance and weight, denoted C : [2k ] → {0, 1}ℓ·d(n)/2 ,
        we obtain a collection of n/2ℓ < 2k strongly connected 2ℓ-vertex graphs such that the ith
        graph consists of copies of G1 and G2 that are connected according to the codeword C(i);
        that is, the (r, c)th bit of the codeword C(i) (viewed as an d(n)/2-by-ℓ matrix) determines
        whether the cth edge of the rth matching is included in the ith graph. The final n-vertex
        graph, denoted G, consists of these n/2ℓ graphs as its connected components.
            The analysis is almost identical to the analysis provided in the proof of Theorem 10.2,
        since the key facts used there hold here too (although the construction is somewhat different).
        The key facts are that the degrees of vertices in G1 and G2 differ in Ω(d(n)) units, that
        the relative conductance of the connected components is Ω(d(n)), that G1 and G2 are both
        Ω(d(n))-robustly self-ordered, and that the bipartite graphs (used in the different connected
        components) are far away from one another.                                                     ◀
                                                                                                     12:73


     References
1    L. Babai. Graph isomorphism in quasipolynomial time. In 48th ACM Symposium on the
     Theory of Computing, pages 684–697, 2016.
2    E. Ben-Sasson, O. Goldreich, P. Harsha, M. Sudan, and S. Vadhan. Robust pcps of proximity,
     shorter pcps, and applications to coding. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36 (4):889–974, 2006.
3    A. Bogdanov, K. Obata, and L. Trevisan. A lower bound for testing 3-colorability in bounded-
     degree graphs. In 43rd IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 93–102,
     2002.
4    B. Bollobas. The asymptotic number of unlabelled regular graphs. J. Lond. Math. Soc.,
     26:201–206, 1982.
5    B. Bollobas. Distinguishing vertices of random graphs. North-Holland Mathematics Studies,
     62:33–49, 1982.
6    J. Bourgain and A. Gamburd. Uniform expansion bounds for cayley graphs of SL2 (fp ). Annals
     of Mathematics,, pages 625–642, 2008.
7    E. Chattopadhyay, V. Goyal, and X. Li. Non-malleable extractors and codes, with their many
     tampered extensions. In 48th STOC, pages 285–298, 2016.
8    M. Cheraghchi and V. Guruswami. Non-malleable coding against bit-wise and split-state
     tampering. In 11th TCC, pages 440–464, 2014.
9    B. Chor and O. Goldreich. Unbiased bits from sources of weak randomness and probabilistic
     communication complexity. SIAM Journal on Computing, 17(2):230–261, 1988.
10   I. Dinur, O. Goldreich, and T. Gur. Every set in p is strongly testable under a suitable
     encoding. In 10th ITCS, pages 30:1–30:17, 2019.
11   I. Dinur and O. Reingold. Assignment-testers: Towards a combinatorial proof of the pcp-
     theorem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 36(4):975–1024, 2006.
12   Y. Dodis and D. Wichs. Non-malleable extractors and symmetric key cryptography from weak
     secrets. In 41st STOC, pages 601–610, 2009.
13   D. Ellis. Lecture 13: The expansion of random regular graphs. Lecture notes, Algebraic
     Methods in Combinatorics, 2011.
14   P. Erdos and A. Renyi. Asymmetric graphs. Acta Mathematica Hungarica, 14(3):295–315,
     1963.
15   E. Fischer and L. Fortnow. Tolerant versus intolerant testing for boolean properties. Theory
     of Computing, 2(9):173–183, 2006.
16   O. Goldreich. Introduction to Property Testing. Cambridge University Press, 2017.
17   O. Goldreich. On testing hamiltonicity in the bounded degree graph model. ECCC, TR19-109,
     2020.
18   O. Goldreich, S. Goldwasser, and D. Ron. Property testing and its connection to learning and
     approximation. Journal of the ACM, pages 653–750, 1998.
19   O. Goldreich, M. Krivelevich, I. Newman, and E. Rozenberg. Hierarchy theorems for property
     testing. Computational Complexity, 21(1):129–192, 2012.
20   O. Goldreich and D. Ron. Property testing in bounded degree graphs. Algorithmica, 32(2):302–
     343, 2002.
21   O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson. Constructing large families of pairwise far permutations:
     Good permutation codes based on the shuffle-exchange network. ECCC, TR20-192, 2020.
22   O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson. Non-adaptive vs adaptive queries in the dense graph testing
     model. ECCC, TR20-160, 2020.
23   O. Goldreich and A. Wigderson. Robustly self-ordered graphs: Constructions and applications
     to property testing. ECCC, TR20-149, 2020.
24   C.S. Greenhill, S. Janson, J.H. Kim, and N.C. Wormald. Permutation pseudographs and
     contiguity. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing, 11:273–298, 2002.
25   S. Hoory, N. Linial, and A. Wigderson. Expander graphs and their applications. Bulletin
     (New Series) of the American Mathematical Society, 43(4):439–561, 2006.




                                                                                                    CCC 2021
12:74


        26     J.H. Kim, B. Sudakov, and V.H. Vu. On the asymmetry of random regular graphs and random
               graphs. Random Structures & Algorithms, 21(3-4):216–224, 2002.
        27     A. Lubotzky. Discrete groups, expanding graphs and invariant measures. Progress in mathem-
               atics, 125, 1994.
        28     A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak. Ramanujan graphs. Combinatorica, 8:261–277, 1988.
        29     E.M. Luks. Isomorphism of graphs of bounded valence can be tested in polynomial time.
               Journal of Computer and System Science, 25(1):42–65, 1982.
        30     M. Parnas, D. Ron, and R. Rubinfeld. Tolerant property testing and distance approximation.
               Journal of Computer and System Science, 72(6):1012–1042, 2006.
        31     R. Rubinfeld and M. Sudan. Robust characterization of polynomials with applications to
               program testing. SIAM Journal on Computing, 25(2):252–271, 1996.


        Appendix: On Definitions of Non-Malleable Two-Source Extractor
        Recall that Definition 8.1 differs from [7, Def. 1.3] only in the scope of the “tampering
        functions” f and g. Whereas Definition 8.1 requires both f and g to have no fixed-point,
        in [7, Def. 1.3] it is only required that either f or g has no fixed-point. In both cases, the
        extraction condition is captured by (18) and is applied to the eligible functions f and g (and
        to random variables X and Y of sufficiently high min-entropy).
            We show that Definition 8.1 is strictly weaker than [7, Def. 1.3]. To see this, let
        E : {0, 1}n−1 × {0, 1}n → {0, 1}m be a non-malleable extractor under [7, Def. 1.3] (say, for
        constant error and constant deficiency). Actually, we will only use the hypothesis that (18)
        holds for f and g such that g has no fixed-point (i.e., we make no requirement of f ). Now,
        let E ′ (bx′ , y) = E(x′ , y), where b ∈ {0, 1}.
         1. Clearly, E ′ violates (18) for g(y) = y and f (bx′ ) = bx′ , where b = 1 − b, since
            E ′ (f (bx′ ), g(y)) = E(x′ , y) = E ′ (bx′ , y). Hence, E ′ does not satisfy [7, Def. 1.3].
         2. To see that E ′ satisfies Definition 8.1, consider any f and g that have no fixed-points,
            and distributions X = (B, X ′ ) and Y of low deficiency. Define a random process F :
            {0, 1}n−1 → {0, 1}n such that F (x′ ) = f (bx′ ), where b is selected according to the residual
            distribution of B conditioned on X ′ = x′ (i.e., Pr[F (x′ ) = z] = Pr[f (X) = z|X ′ = x′ ]).
            Then, letting f ′ (x) (resp., F ′ (x′ )) be the (n − 1)-bit suffix of f (x) (resp., of F (x′ )), we
            have

                 (E ′ (X, Y ), E ′ (f (X), g(Y ))) = (E(X ′ , Y ), E(f ′ (BX ′ ), g(Y )))
                                                  = (E(X ′ , Y ), E(F ′ (X ′ ), g(Y ))),

             which is close to (Um , E(F ′ (X ′ ), g(Y ))), by the hypothesis regrading E (since
             g has no fixed-point), while also using a convexity argument (for F ′ ). Using
             (Um , E(F ′ (X ′ ), g(Y ))) = (Um , E ′ (F (X ′ ), g(Y ))) = (Um , E ′ (f (X), g(Y ))), we conclude
             that (E ′ (X, Y ), E ′ (f (X), g(Y ))) is close to (Um , E ′ (f (X), g(Y ))).
