Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 134:1–30, 2021              34th Annual Conference on Learning Theory




                                 SGD Generalizes Better Than GD
                                (And Regularization Doesn’t Help)
Idan Amir                                                                         idanamir@mail.tau.ac.il
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University
Tomer Koren                                                                    tkoren@tauex.tau.ac.il
Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University and Google Research, Tel Aviv
Roi Livni                                                                           rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University


Editors: Mikhail Belkin and Samory Kpotufe


                                                        Abstract
     We give a new separation result between the generalization performance of stochastic gradient
     descent (SGD) and of full-batch gradient descent (GD) in the fundamental stochastic convex op-
     timization model. While for SGD it is well-known that 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) iterations suffice for obtaining a
     solution with ε excess expected risk, we show that with the same number of steps GD may overfit
     and emit a solution with Ω (1) generalization error. Moreover, we show that in fact Ω (1/ε4 ) iter-
     ations are necessary for GD to match the generalization performance of SGD, which is also tight
     due to recent work by Bassily et al. (2020). We further discuss how regularizing the empirical risk
     minimized by GD essentially does not change the above result, and revisit the concepts of stability,
     regularization, implicit bias and the role of the learning algorithm in generalization.


1. Introduction
The setting of Stochastic Convex Optimization (SCO) assumes a learner that observes a finite
sample of convex functions drawn i.i.d. from some unknown distribution and in turn has to provide
a parameter that minimizes the expected function with respect to the true and unknown distribution.
This is a very simple and clean setting that has received considerable attention in the last two decades
which culminated in remarkable bounds for both the statistical sample complexity as well as the
optimization complexity.
    The two most common and well-known optimization methods in SCO are Gradient Descent (GD)
and Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In the first method, one optimizes the empirical risk over
a sample by computing iteratively the full-batch gradient; the second method is a “lighter” version
that samples at each iteration a fresh new example that is used to form an unbiased estimate of
the gradient. Perhaps surprisingly, even though SGD may seem like a noisy, inaccurate version
of GD, it is well known (e.g., Hazan (2019)) that the former enjoys an optimal rate and converges
after 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) iterations to an ε-optimal solution with respect to the true underlying distribution,
independently of the dimension of the problem. This in turn makes it highly suitable for large-scale
optimization where the computational costs of the iterations should be taken into account (Bottou
and Bousquet, 2011).
    Even more surprisingly, while SGD is relatively well understood in terms of its sample complexity
bounds, our understanding of full-batch GD is still lacking; in fact, it has remained an open question
whether GD can obtain the same dimension-independent guarantees attained by SGD. While this
question has been studied under various assumptions such as smoothness and strong convexity (Hardt
et al., 2016; Bousquet and Elisseeff, 2002), in its general case it has remained largely unresolved.

© 2021 I. Amir, T. Koren & R. Livni.
                                           Amir Koren Livni




Our contributions. In this work, we give a new separation result between the generalization
performance of SGD and of full-batch GD in the context of SCO. We show that if one runs GD for
𝑂 (1/ε2 ) iterations (with any fixed learning rate) the algorithm may overfit and exhibit a constant
gap between empirical error and true error, and in fact, no less than Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations are necessary
for it to generalize to within ε. Interestingly, this last bound turns out to be tight and matches the
upper bound implied by a recent stability analysis of GD due to Bassily et al. (2020). In contrast, as
discussed above, SGD (with a suitable step size) generalizes after merely 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) steps. Thus, SGD
is not merely a “light” noisy version of GD—it is in fact a superior algorithm that enjoys improved
generalization guarantees. To the best of our knowledge, this result is the first to provide such a
quantitative separation in generalization performance between these two natural algorithms.
    We then proceed to study the role of regularization in optimization. Regularization is known
to be a key aspect in SCO: in particular, Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) demonstrated that, while an
empirical risk minimizer (ERM) might overfit, regularized-ERMs do not. As such, it is natural
to ask whether adding regularization to the optimization algorithm improves its performance. We
show that applying GD to a regularized empirical risk (and choosing the natural learning rates for
this setting) would in general require the learner to achieve empirical error 𝑂 ( ε2 ) in order to enjoy
generalization error ε. Overall, then, order of Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations are still necessary for full-batch
GD even with added regularization.
    Finally, as we further discuss in Section 5 below, our construction allows us to revisit and draw
new insights on some of the existing notions and tools in theoretical machine learning such as
regularization, stability, implicit bias, and their role towards generalization within the framework of
SCO.

Our techniques. The technical heart of our work is a new generalization lower bound for GD
that builds upon the two works of Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) and Bassily et al. (2020). The
work of Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) was the first to demonstrate that in SCO an empirical risk
minimizer may fail to learn. More formally, they showed that even though a regularized ERM can
learn with dimension-independent sample complexity, Ω (log 𝑑) examples are necessary so that any
ERM will not overfit; This was later improved by Feldman (2016) to Ω (𝑑). However, there is still
a gap between showing that an abstract ERM can potentially fail and analyzing the performance of
concrete algorithm such as GD. In detail, the result of Feldman (2016) shows a learning problem
where there are some “bad” solutions but in contrast there are simpler and easier to find “good”
solutions and it is not expected that a reasonable algorithm will overfit in that problem (in fact,
in its most naive form the initialization at zero is an optimal point). The work of Shalev-Shwartz
et al. (2009) demonstrates an example where there is a unique minimum. Hence, any empirical risk
minimizer will fail to learn. However, even this result is limited and cannot be used to rule out the
performance of GD. Indeed while the minimum is bad and unique, there still are many approximately
good solutions and only at a very high level of accuracy the algorithm starts to fail. In fact, only at
an exponentially small training accuracy we obtain a guarantee of overfitting. As such, a reasonable
                                                              √
algorithm such as, say, gradient descent reaching to 𝑂 (1/ 𝑛) optimization accuracy (which is the
generalization error to begin with) will not fail. In fact, it will not fail as long as we run it for less
than 2𝑂 (𝑛) iterations.
     The second work we rely on is the work of Bassily et al. (2020) that demonstrated that GD may
be an unstable algorithm (Bousquet and Elisseeff, 2002)—a necessary condition for an algorithm
to overfit. Utilizing these two constructions we construct a new example where GD is unstable

                                                    2
                                  SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




and converges to one of the “bad” ERM solutions. We point out that mere instability and lack of
uniform convergence are not sufficient for an algorithm to overfit. Indeed, Bassily et al. (2020) also
demonstrated that SGD is unstable (on the same example on which GD is shown to be unstable),
but at the same time, SGD comes with provable guarantees and does not overfit. Therefore,
constructing such an example, even though utilizes previous constructions, does not follow some
generic reduction.

2. Problem Setup and Background
We consider the standard setting of stochastic convex optimization. A learning problem consists of
a fixed domain W𝑑 ⊆ ℝ 𝑑 in 𝑑-dimensional Euclidean space, and a loss function 𝑓 : W𝑑 × Z → ℝ,
parameterized by a parameter space Z, where for each fixed 𝑧 ∈ Z we assume the function 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧)
as a function of 𝑤 is 𝐿-Lipschitz and convex. We will treat throughout 𝐿 as a constant; in particular,
in all our constructions 𝐿 will be fixed, and will not depend on other parameters of the problem
(specifically, 𝑑, η, 𝑇 and 𝑛, as discussed next). We will normally choose W𝑑 to be the unit-ball in
ℝ 𝑑 . If the dimension is fixed, and there is no room for confusion we will also suppress dependence
on 𝑑 and write
                                     W = {𝑤 : k𝑤k ≤ 1 : 𝑤 ∈ ℝ 𝑑 }.
    In this setting, a learner is provided with a sample 𝑆 = 𝑧 1 , . . . , 𝑧 𝑛 of i.i.d. examples drawn from
an unknown distribution 𝐷 and needs to optimize the true risk (or expected risk, or true loss) which
we define:
                                         𝐹 (𝑤) = 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧)].                                           (1)
                                                   𝑧∼𝐷

More formally, given the sample 𝑆 the learner should return, in expectation, a parameter 𝑤 𝑆 with
ε-optimal true loss. Namely,

                                     𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 )] ≤ min 𝐹 (𝑤★) + ε.
                                   𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛            ★ 𝑤 ∈W

For high probability rates, note that 𝑓 is Lipschitz, hence bounded in the unit ball and we will mostly
care about lower bounds. In turn, bounds in expectation can be readily turned into probability bounds
using standard Markov inequality.
    We also follow the standard algorithmic assumption in optimization which assumes the existence
of a first order oracle for 𝑓 . Namely, for any 𝑤, 𝑧 ∈ W × Z the learner has access to a procedure that
provides her with the value 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) and with the subgradient ∇ 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) with respect to 𝑤 (Nemirovsky
and Yudin (1983); see also Hazan (2019); Bubeck (2015) for a more extensive background).
Stochastic Gradient Descent. Perhaps one of the most well studied optimization methods in SCO
is Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). In this method, the algorithm iteratively chooses a parameter
𝑤 𝑡 (we will always take 𝑤 0 = 0) and at step 𝑡 makes the update
                                                                                𝑇
                                                                           1 X SGD
                  𝑤 SGD
                    𝑡+1 = ΠW   𝑤 SGD
                                 𝑡   − η ∇ 𝑓 (𝑤 SGD
                                                𝑡   , 𝑧    )
                                                        𝑡+1 ,     𝑤 SGD
                                                                    𝑆   :=      𝑤𝑡 .
                                                                             𝑇
                                                                                𝑡=1

where ΠW is the Euclidean projection over the set W. It is well known (see for example Shalev-
                                                                                               √
Shwartz and Ben-David (2014); Hazan (2019)) that if one runs SGD with a learning rate η = Θ (1/ 𝑛)
for 𝑇 = 𝑛 iterations then the output 𝑤 SGD
                                       𝑆   has:

                                                     3
                                          Amir Koren Livni




                                                                 √
                              𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹 (𝑤 SGD
                                        𝑆 )] ≤ min 𝐹 (𝑤★) + 𝑂 (1/ 𝑛).                               (2)
                            𝑆∼𝐷                ★ 𝑤 ∈W

In particular, for ε > 0 SGD succeeds to learn to within ε-accuracy with an order of Ω (1/ε2 ) calls
to a first order oracle, and Ω (1/ε2 ) samples.

Empirical risk. An alternative method to stochastic gradient descent is to optimize the empirical
risk over a sample 𝑆, defined next:
                                                       𝑛
                                                1X
                                       𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) =    𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧 𝑖 ).                                     (3)
                                                𝑛
                                                    𝑖=1


Using standard discretization and covering techniques one can show that if 𝑛 = Ω (𝑑/ε2 ) then any
algorithm that optimizes 𝐹𝑆 to accuracy ε will also have roughly 𝑂 ( ε) test error (e.g., Shalev-Shwartz
and Ben-David (2014)). In fact, when 𝑛 = Θ (𝑑/ε2 ) the empirical loss approximates the true loss
uniformly, for all 𝑤 ∈ W. Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) showed that a dependence on 𝑑 in the
uniform convergence rate is necessary, and Feldman (2016) proved that a linear dependence is in
fact tight. We emphasize that the dimension dependence is necessary only for uniform convergence;
indeed, SGD which does not rely on such arguments, does not exhibit dimension dependencies.

Gradient Descent. A concrete way to minimize the empirical risk in Eq. (3) is with (full-batch)
Gradient Descent. We consider the following update rule

                                                                              𝑇
                                                                     1 X GD
                     𝑤 GD
                       𝑡+1 = ΠW   𝑤 GD
                                    𝑡  − η ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 GD
                                                  𝑡  )   ,    𝑤 GD
                                                                𝑆 :=      𝑤𝑡 .                      (4)
                                                                       𝑇
                                                                          𝑡=1


The output of GD is then given by the averaged sequence, 𝑤 GD
                                                           𝑆 . The optimization error of GD is
governed by the following equation for any choice of parameters η and 𝑇 (see for example, Hazan
(2019); Bubeck (2015)):
                                                                       
                                                                      1
                             𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 GD ) ≤  min   𝐹  (𝑤 ★
                                                         ) + 𝑂   η +      .                         (5)
                                                                     η𝑇
                                   𝑆              𝑆
                                          𝑤 ★ ∈W


In particular, with a choice η = 𝑂 ( ε) and 𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) we can optimize 𝐹𝑆 up to accuracy ε > 0.
Using the naive dimension-dependent sample complexity bound, we have that if 𝑛 = 𝑂 (𝑑/ε2 ),
𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε2 ), η = 𝑂 ( ε) we can bound both the optimization error as well as generalization error and
achieve true loss of order ε. Recently Bassily et al. (2020) provided the first, dimension-independent,
generalization bound:

Theorem (Bassily et al., 2020, Thm 3.2). Let 𝐷 be an unknown distribution over Z and suppose
𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) is 𝑂 (1)-Lipschitz and convex w.r.t. 𝑤 ∈ W where W is the unit ball in ℝ 𝑑 then running GD
over an i.i.d. sample 𝑆 with step size η for 𝑇 rounds yields the following guarantee

                                                                  √        η𝑇
                                                                             
                                                                       1
                       𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD
                               𝑆 )] ≤ 𝑤min  𝐹 (𝑤★) + 𝑂           η 𝑇+    +      .                   (6)
                      𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛            ★ ∈W                           η𝑇    𝑛

                                                   4
                                  SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




    In particular, for 𝑛 = 1/ε2 , choosing η = ε3 and 𝑇 = Ω (1/ε4 ) provides:

                                  𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD
                                          𝑆 )] ≤ min 𝐹 (𝑤★) + 𝑂 ( ε).
                                𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛            ★      𝑤 ∈W


Notice the suboptimality in terms of ε. The above bound requires 𝑇 = Ω (1/ε4 ), which is suboptimal
compared with the guarantee of Eq. (2) for SGD, as well as the dimension dependent generalization
bound that requires 𝑇 = Ω (1/ε2 ). We will show that the above bound is in fact tight. Namely, if
𝑛 = 𝑂 (log 𝑑) then for any learning rate we need at least 𝑇 = Ω (1/ε4 ) iterations for GD to achieve
𝑂 ( ε) true loss.

Regularization. It is customary, when minimizing the empirical error, to add a regularization
term in order to avoid overfitting. Concretely, given 𝑆 = {𝑧 1 , . . . , 𝑧 𝑛 }, we consider the regularized
empirical loss
                                                        𝑛
                                           λ         1X
                                 𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤) = k𝑤k 2 +        𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧 𝑖 ).                                  (7)
                                           2         𝑛
                                                                    𝑖=1

We will consider the following update rule of GD that is known to achieve fast optimal rates for
strongly convex functions (in particular, regularized). At step 𝑡 we take the update rule:

                                                                                     𝑇
               λGD             λGD                      λGD               λGD
                                                                                     X         2𝑡
             𝑤 𝑡+1 = ΠW 𝑤 𝑡          − η 𝑡+1 ∇𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡                                             𝑤 λGD ,
                                                             
                                                              ) ,       𝑤𝑆      :=                             (8)
                                                                                           𝑇 (𝑇 + 1) 𝑡
                                                                                     𝑡=1

               2
where η 𝑡 = λ (𝑡+1) .
    The above learning rate was suggested by Lacoste-Julien et al. (2012) where they also demon-
strated the optimization guarantee:
                                                                             
                                           λGD                      ★   1
                               𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 𝑆         ) ≤ min 𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 ) + 𝑂      .                                  (9)
                                                     𝑤★                λ𝑇

     As for the test error, utilizing Eq. (9) one can bound via the empirical error (see Shalev-Shwartz
et al. (2009, Eq. (24))) (as well as relating the loss of the regularized objective and the non-regularized
objective), and achieve the following bound:
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                     λGD                          1   1
                         𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆         )] ≤ min           ★
                                                      𝐹 (𝑤 ) + 𝑂 √ +    +λ .                                  (10)
                       𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛                   𝑤 ★ ∈W            λ 𝑇 λ𝑛
                                                                                         √
    Similar to before, if we wish to tighten the above bound, we need to choose λ = 𝑂 (1/ 𝑛) and
set 𝑇 = 𝑂 (𝑛2 ) = 𝑂 (1/ε4 ). We will again show a matching lower bound.


3. Main Results
We proceed to present our main results which provide accompanying lower bounds to Eqs. (6)
and (10) respectively.

                                                          5
                                           Amir Koren Livni




3.1. Gradient Descent
The proof of the following result is provided in Appendix A.1.

Theorem 3.1. Fix η, 𝑇 and 𝑛. For 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 · 2𝑛+5 + 20 · η2𝑇 2 , there exists a Lipschitz convex function
𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧), and a distribution 𝐷 over Z, such that if 𝑤 GD 𝑆 is defined as in Eq. (4), then:

                                                                        √
                                                                                  
                                 GD                                           1
                       𝔼   [𝐹 (𝑤    )] ≥  min   𝐹 (𝑤 ★
                                                       )  + Ω   min   η  𝑇 +    , 1    .         (11)
                     𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛
                                 𝑆       𝑤 ★ ∈W                              η𝑇

    Tuning the parameters η and 𝑇, we obtain that for any learning rate, to achieve ε true risk we
need at least 𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε4 ) iterations. Together with the upper bound in Eq. (6), we observe that
𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε4 ), and 𝑛 = 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) provide optimal rates. The √
                                                            main technical novelty of our work is
in deriving the first term. Namely, we provide a novel Ω ( η 𝑇) generalization lower bound. The
second term follows from the standard optimization guarantees for GD, which we repeat in the proof.

3.2. Regularized Gradient Descent
We next turn to the question of regularized Gradient Descent. As discussed, it is known that
while standard ERM may be liable to overfitting, regularization (and in particular strongly convex
regularization) can induce stability which in turn allows learning. We then ask the question if
an analogous result appears for algorithmic settings such as GD. Namely, if we optimize over
the regularized objective do we guarantee improvement in the performance. Therefore, we now
consider the performance of GD on the regularized objective as in Eq. (8). The proof is provided in
Appendix A.2.

Theorem 3.2. Fix 𝑛, λ > 0 and 𝑇, and assume 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 · 2𝑛+5 · 𝑛. Suppose we run GD over the
regularized objective as in Eq. (7) and we output 𝑤 λGD as defined in Eq. (8). Then there exist a
distribution 𝐷 over convex Lipschitz functions, 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) such that:
                                                                         
                              λGD                                   1
                                               𝐹 (𝑤 ) + Ω min √ + λ, 1 .
                                                 ★
                     𝔼 𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ min                                                       (12)
                    𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛               𝑤 ★ ∈W                     λ 𝑇

In particular, since ∆λ,𝑆 := 𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 λ𝑆GD ) − min 𝑤 𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤) ≤ λ1𝑇 we obtain that
                                                                 (r                   )!
                                                                      ∆λ,𝑆
                              𝐹 (𝑤 λ𝑆GD ) ≥ min 𝐹 (𝑤★) + Ω min               + λ, 1
                                        
                    𝔼                                                                      .      (13)
                  𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛                  𝑤 ∈W
                                            ★                          λ

    Optimizing over the choice of λ and 𝑇, we obtain, again, that at least 𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε4 ) iterations are
needed to converge to an ε test error, which is comparable to the guarantee provided for unregularized
GD in Eq. (6).
    Eq. (13) complements the upper bound of Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009, Eq. 24). Taken together,
                                                                  √
we observe here that 𝑂 ( ε)-training error guarantees at best 𝑂 ( ε)-test error. Note that in contrast
with Eq. (6) whose last term deteriorates from over-training, under regularization we obtain the
reversed effect, and the generalization error stems from under-training (see Section 5, for further
discussion). We also mention here the result of Sridharan et al. (2008) that showed that, in contrast
to SCO, in (general) linear models, regularized objectives do enjoy a fast rate and the test error is
linear in the train error.

                                                   6
                                      SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




4. Constructions and Proof Overview
In this section we give a brief overview over the proof techniques, deferring the complete proofs to
Appendix A. As discussed above, the main technical contribution of our work is the first term in
Eq. (11); namely, in showing that
                                                                 √
                                    𝐹 (𝑤 GD
                                         𝑆  ) − 𝐹 (𝑤 ★
                                                       ) = Ω ( η  𝑇).                          (14)

The other terms are standard terms that bound the optimization errors of GD. We therefore focus the
exposition here on the derivation of Eq. (14).
     The proof relies on two relevant constructions that were presented in Bassily et al. (2020) and
Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009): the former provides a lower bound for the stability of GD, while the
latter demonstrates a case where uniform convergence fails. Naturally, since both phenomena are
necessary to obtain a generalization error, our construction carefully tailors these two ingredients to
obtain the final result.
     Let us briefly overview the two constructions that we build upon. We begin with the work of
Bassily et al. (2020).
GD is unstable: To demonstrate instability of GD, Bassily et al. (2020) constructed the following
example that consists of the following two functions:

                       𝑣(𝑤) = γ𝑣 · 𝑤, and 𝑢(𝑤) = max 0, max 𝑤(𝑘) ,
                                                         
                                                                                             (15)
                                                                              𝑘 ∈ [𝑑 ]

where 𝑣 = (−1, −1, . . . , −1) and γ is an arbitrarily small scalar. Suppose that with some very small
probability (order of 1/𝑛) we observe 𝑣, and note that the gradient of 𝑣 slightly perturbs GD from
initialization (at zero) towards the positive orthant. The other function we observe is 𝑢 w.p. 1 − 1/𝑛.
     Now to show instability, note that on a typical sample 𝑣(𝑤) will not appear with roughly
probability 1/𝑒. If it is not observed, GD will not move from the origin. On the other hand,
if we do observe the function 𝑣(𝑤) in the sample, then after the first iteration that perturbs us
from zero, all coordinates become positive. At the second iteration, we will observe the gradient
∇2 = γ𝑣 + 𝑒 1 . Taking γ to be negligibly small, that means that 𝑤 2 ≈ 𝑤 1 − η𝑒 1 , and in turn, since now
                                                                                                       √
𝑤 2 (1) = −η ≤ 0, we have that ∇3 = γ𝑣 + 𝑒 2 , etc.1 (Also note that for a sufficiently small γ < 1/ 𝑑,
the Lipschitz property holds.) As such the algorithm will√eventually converge to 𝑤𝑇 ≈ − 𝑇𝑡=1 η𝑒 𝑡 .
                                                                                                 P

             √ one example leads to a solution that is η 𝑇 far away and the algorithm is unstable
Thus, changing
if η = Ω (1/ 𝑇). One can observe that averaging will not help.
     Note though, that the different minima for which the algorithm converges to are all generalizing.
In fact all minima are generalizing, hence the example alone is not enough to ensure overfitting.
Uniform convergence fails: The other construction we build upon is by Shalev-Shwartz et al.
(2009) which demonstrates that ERM may overfit. Their idea is to consider a distribution over
𝑧 ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑 where each coordinate 𝑧(𝑘) is 0 or 1 with equal probabilities and a loss function of the
form:
                                               X 𝑑
                                    𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧) =      𝑧(𝑘)𝑤 2 (𝑘).
                                                          𝑘=1

 1. In our construction, we want to avoid subgradients hence we consider an alternative variant that ensures a well defined
    gradient at each point. But for the sake of exposition, let us assume that we are provided with the above subgradient
    oracle.


                                                            7
                                            Amir Koren Livni




The main observation is that if 𝑑 is large enough then on a sample {𝑧 1 , . . . , 𝑧 𝑛 } of size 𝑛 (logarithmic
in 𝑑) we expect to see at least one coordinate where 𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘) = 0 for all 𝑖. We will refer to such a
coordinate as a bad coordinate. Note that for any bad coordinate 𝑘, the solution 𝑤 = 𝑒 𝑘 will achieve
zero training error, whereas it has expected loss of 1/2. Here, however, note that gradient descent
will be stable; in particular, the origin is already a minimum. We note that this can be remedied
and Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) also show how this example can be altered to make sure the bad
minimum is unique hence gradient descent will eventually converge to the bad minimum, but their
construction will overfit only if we run gradient descent for an exponential number of steps. We, on
                                                                                                     √
the other hand, want to show that GD will fail even when it is tuned to achieve, say, 𝑂 (1/ 𝑛) error.
Putting both together:      For the sake of exposition, we will show a slightly easier, albeit suboptimal,
lower bound of:
                                        𝐹 (𝑤 GD              2
                                             𝑆 ) − 𝐹 (𝑤 ) ≥ η 𝑇,
                                                       ★

While the above lower bound doesn’t match the upper bound of√Bassily et al. (2020), note that it is
still enough to show that gradient descent with step size η = 1/ 𝑇 might overfit. We next move on
to show the above lower bound.
     Since we need both overfitting minima as well as instability of GD, then naturally we would like
to incorporate both constructions together. The most straightforward idea is consider
                                                 𝑑
                                                 X
        𝑓˜(𝑤, 𝑧) = 𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧) + γ𝑣 · 𝑤 + 𝑢(𝑤) =           𝑧(𝑘)𝑤(𝑘) 2 + γ𝑣 · 𝑤 + max 0, max 𝑤(𝑘) .
                                                                                
                                                                                       𝑘 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                                 𝑘=1
     As before, the first step drifts the vector 𝑤 to the positive orthant. Note, that whenever a bad
coordinate is drifted by 𝑢(𝑤), we are inflicted a true loss by 𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧𝑖 ). However, if a good coordinate
is drifted, the first and last term would counter-act: namely, at the second iteration ∇𝑢 drifts the first
coordinate, then the gradient of ∇𝑔 forces (w.h.p.) the first coordinate back to zero unless its a bad
coordinate (which will hapen with negligable probability). The construction, thus, fails.
     In order to make the above construction work, we need to correlate the bad coordinates with
the coordinates that are drifted from zero. This will ensure that the subgradient of 𝑢 pushes only
coordinates on which 𝑔 is not active. Before we continue with this idea, we would like to point
out here that even in this construction, if the first order oracle is allowed to see the whole sample
in advance, and choose the subgradient of 𝑢 adversarially then GD could overfit on this example
(In particular, the adversary can choose as subgradient any bad coordinate). In fact, against such a
first-order oracle even SGD will fail. This is not allowed though, as the first-order oracle needs to
return a subgradient given a single instance 𝑓 (𝑤, 𝑧), without dependence on the sample.
     We next move on to discuss how we correlate the bad coordinates in Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009)
with the drift in the construction of Bassily et al. (2020). At each example we draw 𝑧 ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑 as
in Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) (w.p. 1/2 each coordinate is 0 or 1) we then also draw a perturbing
vector 𝑣 𝑧 but now we make sure it perturbs to a positive value only coordinates 𝑘 on which 𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘) = 0,
on the other hand for all coordinates 𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘) = 1 the vector 𝑣 𝑧 will in fact have a strong and reverse
effect.
     Concretely, letting γ be an arbitrarily small scalar we let 𝑣 𝑧 (𝑘) = −1 for 𝑧(𝑘) = 0 and 𝑣 𝑧 (𝑘) = 𝑛
for all 𝑘 such that 𝑧(𝑘) = 1. For this choice of 𝑣 𝑧 it can be seen that for the average vector
𝑣 𝑆 = 𝑛1 𝑧 ∈𝑆 𝑣 𝑧 , we have that 𝑣 𝑆 (𝑘) < 0 if and only if 𝑧(𝑘) = 0 for every 𝑧 ∈ 𝑆. Next, our
          P
distribution draws at each iteration the function
                                   𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) = 𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧) + γ𝑣 𝑧 · 𝑤 + 𝑢(𝑤),

                                                       8
                                      SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




where again γ should be thought of as negligibly small. This leads to the empirical loss:
                                𝑛 𝑑
                              1 XX
                                    𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘)𝑤(𝑘) 2 + γ𝑣 𝑆 · 𝑤 + max 0, max 𝑤(𝑘) .
                                                                  
                   𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) =
                              𝑛                                       𝑘 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                 𝑖=1 𝑘=1

Again, if 𝑑 is large enough then there are “many” bad coordinates on which 𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘) = 0 for all 𝑖. We
will need to choose 𝑑 to ensure that at least 𝑇 such coordinate exist. Our choice of 𝑣 𝑆 ensures that at
                                            P𝑛
the first iteration, all coordinates where 𝑖=1  𝑧 𝑖 (𝑘) = 0 are perturbed to a positive value. From that
iteration on, the term max{𝑤 𝑖 , 0} will induce over 𝑤 GD𝑡  the dynamic depicted in the construction of
Bassily et al. (2020): 𝑤 GD     ≈ 𝑤 GD − η𝑒 where 𝑖 is the 𝑡’th bad coordinate. Eventually, taking 𝑇
                                    𝑡        𝑖        𝑡
                            𝑡+1        P 𝑡
iterations we obtain a true loss of 12 𝑇𝑡=1 η2 = 21 η2𝑇.
                                           √
    Since we actually want a loss     of η  𝑇 we need to alter the above construction and we choose a
                                    p                          √
function that behaves more like 𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧𝑖 ), the gradient of 𝑔 is slightly less well behaved and may
also cause instability in the “good” coordinates, so some consideration need to be taken care of. We
refer the reader to Appendix A.1 for the full proof.
Overview of Theorem 3.2: The proof of Theorem 3.2 exploits roughly the same objective. Certain
care need to be taken because of projections. In particular, because over the regularized objective
the first iterations take steps of order 𝑂 (1/λ) we necessarily drive out of the unit ball and projections
happen – in distinction from GD without regularization. Again for sake of exposition we will
consider the last iterate and prove a weaker bound of 1/( λ2𝑇).
    Therefore, for simplicity of the analysis let us start by considering GD over the regularized
objective without projections. This algorithm is in fact of interest of its own right and comes with
comparable guarantees. Therefore let us consider the update rule

                      𝑤 𝑡+1 = 𝑤 𝑡 − η 𝑡+1 ∇𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ) = (1 − λη 𝑡+1 )𝑤 𝑡 + η 𝑡 ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ).

where η 𝑡 = 2/( λ (𝑡 + 1)). A simple proof by induction yields the following update rule:
                   2               2
    𝑤 𝑡+1 = (1 −        )𝑤 𝑡 +            ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 )
                  𝑡+2          λ (𝑡 + 2)
                              𝑡−1
              𝑡        2     X                                2(𝑡 + 1)
          =                       (𝑡 0 + 1)∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 0 ) +                   ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 )    (induction hyp.)
            𝑡 + 2 λ𝑡 (𝑡 + 1) 0                            λ (𝑡 + 1) (𝑡 + 2)
                               𝑡 =0
                                  𝑡
                      2         X
          =                       (𝑡 0 + 1)∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 0 ).
              λ (𝑡 + 1) (𝑡 + 2) 0
                               𝑡 =0

Therefore, again considering the last iterate we have that

                                      " 𝑑                 #                    𝑇
                                                                                     !      
                                       X                       1           1  X           1
       𝐹 (𝑤) ≥ 𝔼 [𝑔(𝑤, 𝑧)] = 𝔼               𝑧(𝑖)𝑤(𝑖) 2              2
                                                              = k𝑤𝑇 k = Θ 2 4      2
                                                                                  𝑡 =Θ 2 .
                                                               2          λ 𝑇            λ 𝑇
                                       𝑖=1                                    𝑡=0
                                                                       √
As before, carefully replacing 𝑔 with a function that behaves closer to 𝑔 leads to the tight bound.
    Projections interfere with the above analysis as they contract the vectors and in turn reduce
their norm. But if we scale the objective correctly, we can ensure that for enough (say half) of the
iterations projections do not occur.

                                                              9
                                           Amir Koren Livni




    Finally, the analysis above is greatly simplified by the update step suggested in Lacoste-Julien
et al. (2012). It might seem as if our proof greatly rely on this learning rate. We mention that
a similar analysis can be done for learning rate η 𝑡 = 1/λ𝑡 (and taking the average) as well as for
fixed step size η ≈ 1/λ𝑇. Nevertheless we leave it as an open problem if there is some first-order
optimization method that achieves rate of 𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) (see Section 5).

4.1. The Construction
We next provide in detail our main construction. We fix 𝑛, 𝑑 ≥ 1 and parameters 𝑧 = ( α, ε, γ) ∈
{0, 1} 𝑑 × ℝ 𝑑 × ℝ3 are such that 0 < ε1 < . . . < ε𝑑 , α ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑 and γ1 , γ2 , γ3 > 0. Define a family
of convex functions 𝑓 (16) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ as follows:
                                                                                       (
                                                                                            1
                                                                                         − 2𝑛 if α (𝑖) = 0;
                   sX
   𝑓 (16) (𝑤; 𝑧) =           α (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖)) + γ1 𝑣 α · 𝑤 + γ3 𝑟 ε (𝑤), with 𝑣 α (𝑖) =
                    𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                                                                         +1   if α (𝑖) = 1,
                                                                                                      (16)
where ℎγ : ℝ → ℝ and 𝑟 ε : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ are defined as
                     (
                       0       𝑎 ≥ −γ2 ;
                                          and 𝑟 ε (𝑤) = max 0, max {𝑤(𝑖) − ε𝑖 } .
                                                           
            ℎγ (𝑎) =
                       𝑎 + γ2 𝑎 < −γ2 ,                        𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

Observe that 𝑓 (16) (𝑤; 𝑧) are convex, as they are a vector composition of convex functions and since the
`2 -norm is non-decreasing in each argument, (see e.g., (Boyd and Vandenberghe, 2014, p. 86)). Note   √
also that 𝑓 (16) (𝑤; 𝑧) are 3-Lipschitz over the Euclidean unit ball for a sufficiently small γ1 ≤ 1/ 𝑑
and γ3 = 1.
     We will consider an α that is distributed uniformly over {0, 1} 𝑑 ; that is, we draw α ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑
uniformly at random and pick the function 𝑓 (16) (𝑤; ( α, ε, γ)). The corresponding expected population
risk is then
                                  𝐹(16) (𝑤) = 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (16) (𝑤; ( α, ε, γ))].
                                               α∼𝐷

     Now let 𝑆 be an i.i.d. sample of size 𝑛 drawn from this distribution; we think of 𝑆 as a multiset
of items from {0, 1} 𝑑 . Let 𝐹𝑆 be the associated empirical risk:
                                             1X
                                  𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) =         𝑓 (16) (𝑤; ( α, ε, γ)).                       (17)
                                             𝑛
                                                α ∈𝑆

We next provide the key Lemma we will use for the proof of Theorem 3.1 that describes the iteration
of GD over Eq. (17) (an analogue results is used in the case of Theorem 3.2). For the Lemma, given
a sample 𝑆, let us denote by I = {𝑖 : ∀α ∈ 𝑆, α (𝑖) = 0} and we will denote I = {𝑖1 , . . . , 𝑖 𝐾 }. We
will also denote 𝑣¯ = 𝑛1 α ∈𝑆 𝑣 α .
                        P

Lemma 4.1. Let D be a distribution over 𝑧 = ( α, ε, γ) where α ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑 is chosen uniformly and,
                                           γ      γ
suppose γ2 = 2γ1 η𝑇, 0 < ε1 < . . . < ε𝑑 < 2𝑛1 η, 2𝑛1 𝑇 < 1, γ1 ≤ √ 1 and γ3 = 1 are all chosen
                                                                          2 𝑑 η𝑇
deterministically and also that 𝐾 ≤ 43η2 . Consider 𝐹𝑆 as in Eq. (17). Then for all 1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ min{𝑇, 𝐾 }:
                                                                                     𝑡−1
                                                                                     X
                   ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 GD
                          𝑡 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ + 𝑒 𝑖𝑡   where,       𝑤 GD
                                                              𝑡  = −η𝑡 · γ1 𝑣¯ − η         𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .
                                                                                     𝑠=1


                                                       10
                                      SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




Assuming that 𝑇 > 𝐾 then for all 𝐾 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇:
                                                                                       𝐾
                                                                                       X
                         ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 GD
                                𝑡 ) = γ1 𝑣¯       where,     𝑤 GD
                                                               𝑡  = −η𝑡 · γ1 𝑣¯ − η           𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .
                                                                                        𝑠=1

    Lemma 4.1 provides a description of the dynamics of GD over the above loss function with the
distribution 𝐷. One can observe that if the set I is “large” (which
                                                               √ is the set of bad coordinates),
then GD converges approximately to a√vector k η 𝑖 ∈I 𝑒 𝑖 k = η 𝐾. As such, if 𝐾 = 𝑂 (𝑇), then
                                                  P
the algorithm is inflicted loss of 𝑂 ( η 𝑇), as desired. The proof of Lemma 4.1 is provided in
Appendix C.

5. Discussion
In this work we studied the role of the optimization algorithm in learning. We showed that while
SGD successfully finds a “good” optima that also generalizes, GD minimizes the empirical risk but
may suffer large test error. It is not by coincidence that we turned to stochastic convex optimization.
Indeed, SCO is perhaps one of few learning models where such a phenomena can exist. Specifically,
in setting such as PAC-learning, regression, and general linear models learning follows from uniform
convergence. Namely, learnability requires sample complexity that ensures that every minimum of
the empirical risk is also an approximate minimum of the true risk. In turn, learning is reduced to
empirical risk optimization.2
     In contrast, both in SCO as well as in practice, learning looks much different. In practice, it is
a prevalent situation that the learner needs to observe far less examples than free parameters, and
learning algorithms fully capable of overfitting still succeed to learn (Zhang et al., 2016; Neyshabur
et al., 2014). Also, sometimes perfect-fitting and interpolation induce generalization (Belkin et al.,
2019, 2018) and in other cases early stopping is the source of generalization (Prechelt, 1998; Cataltepe
et al., 1999). Making the optimization algorithm a key component in the question of generalization.
     While under “luckiness”-type distributional assumptions such phenomena can indeed be recre-
ated even in the most simplistic settings of learning, SCO is a highly attractive theoretical model
in this context, and one of few, that exhibits similar phenomena without distributional assumptions,
and not less important using the same optimization algorithms as often invoked in practice. As such
it is natural to try and study these phenomena in the setting of SCO and to understanding exactly
the role of optimization algorithms/regularization/stability as well as perhaps implicit bias and such.
We next discuss some of these conclusions as well as future work and open questions:
The (dimension dependent) sample complexity of GD? As discussed, it is well known that given
𝑂 (𝑑/ε2 ) examples, GD (or in fact any ERM algorithm) trained on the dataset will reach ε-test error.
This work demonstrated that dependence on the dimension is necessary if we are provided with
𝑂 (log 𝑑) examples.3 Feldman (2016) showed that Ω (𝑑) examples are necessary so that all ERM
algorithms will succeed. This leaves an exponential gap and we leave it as an open question whether
GD trained over Ω (log 𝑑) examples may overfit. In particular, since GD is unstable (Bassily et al.,
 2. Of course, even in these simplistic models under distributional assumptions one can emulate phenomena where the
    algorithm matters. Specifically if we allow to incorporate assumptions that the algorithm is luckily biased towards the
    right solution then indeed the algorithm matters, but here we try to focus on distribution independent generalization
    guarantees, and avoid such luckiness-type results.
 3. Here we refer to GD as GD with iteration complexity 𝑂 (1/ε2 ) and learning rate 𝑂 ( ε).


                                                           11
                                         Amir Koren Livni




2020), and uniform convergence does not apply (Feldman, 2016), such a result can potentially lead
to a new proof technique for generalization. On the other hand, showing that GD overfits even with
𝑂 (𝑑) examples will also be a significant improvement.

Early stopping vs. perfect fitting. As discussed, early stopping and perfect fitting are two (con-
tradictory) important ingredients in the process of optimizing learning algorithms. In Theorem 3.2
we showed that GD, over a strongly convex objective, needs to be trained to 𝑂 ( ε2 ) train-accuracy
in order to reach 𝑂 ( ε)-test accuracy. In contrast note that the upper bound in Eq. (6) contains a
term, 𝑂 ( η𝑇/𝑛), that deteriorates due to over training (i.e. 𝑇 → ∞). Remarkably, both terms rely on
stability (i.e. for strongly convex optimization we need high training accuracy for stability, and in
the general case, over-training deteriorates the stability).
     The last term in Eq. (6) is the only term for which our main result Theorem 3.1 does not present
a matching lower bound, and it is then an open question whether early-stopping is necessary in the
setting of stochastic convex optimization. We observe though, that using a construction of Shalev-
Shwartz et al. (2009) one can show that some sort of early stopping is indeed necessary. We provide
a proof in Appendix A.3:

Theorem 5.1 (informal, see Theorem A.8 for exact statement). For every η, 𝑇 and 𝑛, for 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 ·2𝑛+5 ,
there exists a distribution 𝐷 over convex functions such that

                                                                      22𝑛
                                                                         
                            𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD     min 𝐹 (𝑤) ≥ Ω
                                    𝑆 )] − 𝑤                       1−       .
                           𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛             ∈W                       η𝑇

    The “early stopping” terms in the above lower bound and in the upper bound presented in Eq. (6)
leaves an exponential gap. It would be interesting to close this gap and to understand the exact effect
of early stopping in convex optimization.

The role of regularization. We provided here a lower bound that shows that standard algorithms
for minimizing regularized objectives don’t have any advantage over GD in terms of generalization
as long as both are tuned to induce stability. The lower bound we provide is for a specific choice
of learning rate and averaging technique which are common and provide optimal guarantees for
minimizing regularized objectives. It is an interesting question whether we can provide a similar
lower bound for any choice of dynamic learning rate and averaging technique. More broadly, we
would like to understand the limitations of first-order optimization methods over the empirical risk.
The main take though of the theorem remains, that the lower bound of Eq. (13) is applicable not
only to abstract regularized-ERM but in fact to a well–used optimization algorithm with explicit
regularization.

The implicit bias of Gradient Descent. One of the most promising tools for understanding
generalization in machine learning is the implicit bias or implicit regularization of optimization
algorithms (Neyshabur et al., 2014; Gunasekar et al., 2018a,b,c). This term refers to the algorithms
preference towards certain structured solutions which in turn seem to induce generalization.
    We would like to revisit this paradigm in the context of SCO. In this work we showed that
GD may overfit, but this is in contrast with Bassily et al. (2020)’s result that with a learning rate
η = 𝑂 ( ε3 ) and 𝑇 = 𝑂 (1/ε4 ), it succeeds to learn. Moreover, having seen in Theorem 3.2 that adding
regularization is not effective, it is natural, then, to conjecture that the conservative learning rate
η = 𝑂 ( ε3 ) injects implicitly regularization, which in turn accounts for generalization.

                                                  12
                                SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




     However, the work of Dauber et al. (2020) demonstrated that for GD (with any learning rate that
yields some optimization guarantee, in particular the above) there is no implicit-bias that accounts
for the solution of the algorithm. In other words, no matter what is the learning rate and number
of iterations, GD cannot be interpreted as minimizing some regularized version of the original loss
function. This result, though, is true only if we don’t take the distribution of the data into account
and it is an interesting future study to understand if some distribution dependent implicit bias can
explain the generalization of GD. We note, though, that in general, Dauber et al. (2020) did show
that there are successful learning algorithms (in fact, SGD) that generalize but their performance
does not stem from their bias (even if we take the distribution into account).


Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Assaf Dauber, Vitaly Feldman and Kunal Talwar for helpful
discussions. This work was partially supported by the Israeli Science Foundation (ISF) grants
2549/19 and 2188/20, by the Len Blavatnik and the Blavatnik Family foundation, by the Yandex
Initiative in Machine Learning at Tel Aviv University, and partially funded by an unrestricted gift
from Google. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this work
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of Google.


References
Raef Bassily, Vitaly Feldman, Cristóbal Guzmán, and Kunal Talwar. Stability of stochastic gradient
  descent on nonsmooth convex losses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33,
  2020.

Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Partha Mitra. Overfitting or perfect fitting? risk bounds for
 classification and regression rules that interpolate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05161, 2018.

Mikhail Belkin, Alexander Rakhlin, and Alexandre B Tsybakov. Does data interpolation contradict
 statistical optimality? In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pages 1611–1619. PMLR, 2019.

Léon Bottou and Olivier Bousquet. The tradeoffs of large-scale learning. Optimization for machine
  learning, page 351, 2011.

Olivier Bousquet and André Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. Journal of machine learning
  research, 2(Mar):499–526, 2002.

Stephen P. Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press,
  2014. ISBN 978-0-521-83378-3.

Sébastien Bubeck. Convex optimization: Algorithms and complexity. Found. Trends Mach. Learn.,
  8(3-4):231–357, 2015.

Zehra Cataltepe, Yaser S Abu-Mostafa, and Malik Magdon-Ismail. No free lunch for early stopping.
  Neural computation, 11(4):995–1009, 1999.

                                                 13
                                        Amir Koren Livni




Assaf Dauber, Meir Feder, Tomer Koren, and Roi Livni. Can implicit bias explain generalization?
  stochastic convex optimization as a case study. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Vitaly Feldman. Generalization of ERM in stochastic convex optimization: The dimension strikes
  back. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pages 3576–3584,
  2016.

Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D. Lee, Daniel Soudry, and Nathan Srebro. Characterizing implicit bias
  in terms of optimization geometry. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
  1827–1836. PMLR, 2018a.

Suriya Gunasekar, Jason D Lee, Nathan Srebro, and Daniel Soudry. Implicit bias of gradient descent
  on linear convolutional networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018:
  9461–9471, 2018b.

Suriya Gunasekar, Blake Woodworth, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Behnam Neyshabur, and Nathan Srebro.
  Implicit regularization in matrix factorization. In 2018 Information Theory and Applications
  Workshop (ITA), pages 1–10. IEEE, 2018c.

Moritz Hardt, Ben Recht, and Yoram Singer. Train faster, generalize better: Stability of stochastic
 gradient descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1225–1234. PMLR,
 2016.

Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05207, 2019.

Simon Lacoste-Julien, Mark Schmidt, and Francis Bach. A simpler approach to obtaining an 𝑜(1/𝑡)
  convergence rate for the projected stochastic subgradient method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.2002,
  2012.

Arkadiı̆ Semenovich Nemirovsky and David Borisovich Yudin. Problem complexity and method
  efficiency in optimization. Wiley-Interscience, 1983.

Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. In search of the real inductive bias: On the
  role of implicit regularization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6614, 2014.

Lutz Prechelt. Early stopping-but when? In Neural Networks: Tricks of the trade, pages 55–69.
  Springer, 1998.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to
  algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, Nathan Srebro, and Karthik Sridharan. Stochastic convex
  optimization. In COLT, 2009.

Karthik Sridharan, Shai Shalev-Shwartz, and Nathan Srebro. Fast rates for regularized objectives.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 21:1545–1552, 2008.

                                                14
                                  SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530, 2016.


Appendix A. Proofs
A.1. Proof of Theorem 3.1
The proof is an immediate corollary of the following two lower bounds. As one can pick the dominant
term between the bounds and thus obtain the desired result. The first Theorem is the technical heart
of our lower bound, and the rest of this section is devoted to prove it.
Theorem A.1. For every η > 0, 𝑇 ≥ 1 and 𝑛, if 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 · 2𝑛+5 , then there exists a function
𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ convex and 3-Lipschitz in 𝑤 ∈ ℝ 𝑑 for every 𝑧 ∈ Z, and there exists a distribution
𝐷 over Z such that: if 𝑆 ∼ 𝐷 𝑛 is an i.i.d sample drawn from the distribution 𝐷 𝑛 , then:
                                                                 √ 1
                          𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD                      1
                                    𝑆 )] − min 𝐹 (𝑤) ≥ 16 min η 𝑇, 3 .
                          𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛               𝑤 ∈W

    The next lower bound is a well known consequence of the optimization error as well as a standard
information-theoretic lower bound. We provide a detailed proof in Appendix B.1.
Lemma A.2. There exists a function 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ convex and 1-Lipschitz in 𝑤 ∈ ℝ 𝑑 , and a
distribution 𝐷 such that if 𝑑 > 18η2𝑇 2 then:
                                                                  n 1 o
                            𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD )] − min  𝐹 (𝑤) ≥  1
                                                              min     ,9 .
                          𝑆∼𝐷
                                      𝑆       𝑤 ∈W         36      η𝑇
Proof of Theorem A.1. The proof is divided into two parts. The first, and central part, is for
η ≤ √1 and the other is for η > √1 .
     4 3                           4 3
                         1
Case 1 - Assume η ≤      √  :   Without loss of generality we assume that
                        4 3

                                                           1           2𝑛
                                2𝑛 · max{16, min{2𝑇,          }} ≤ 𝑑 ≤      .
                                                          3η2          2η 2
Indeed, we can assume this as we can always embed the example in any larger dimension.
    Next, recall that I = {𝑖 : ∀α ∈ 𝑆, α (𝑖) = 0} and we denote I = {𝑖1 , . . . , 𝑖 𝐾 } where 𝐾 is the
cardinality of I. We start with a probabilistic claim on 𝐾.
Claim A.3. Suppose that log(2η2 𝑑) ≤ 𝑛 ≤ min log 16
                                                        𝑑
                                                                         𝑑
                                                                                      
                                                             , log min{2𝑇 ,1/(3η2 ) }
                                                                                        . Then with proba-
bility at least 3/4, it holds that min{𝑇, 1/6η2 } ≤ 𝐾 ≤ 3/4η2 .
                                                                                  𝑆 is 2−𝑛 . Thus, the
Proof. The probability that a given index 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑] is such that α𝑖 = 0 for all α ∈ p
                                          −𝑛
expected number of such indices is µ = 2 𝑑 and the standard deviation is σ = 2−𝑛 (1 − 2−𝑛 )𝑑 ≤
√
  µ. By an application of Chebyshev’s inequality we obtain

            Pr(𝐾 ≤ 12 µ 𝐾 ≥ 32 µ)) ≤ Pr(𝐾 ≤ µ − 2σ 𝐾 ≥ µ + 2σ) ≤ 41 for µ ≥ 16.
                        Ð                               Ð

                               1                            3
                    since 2 µ ≥ min{𝑇, 1/(6η )} and 2 µ ≤ 3/(4η ) whenever log(2η 𝑑) ≤ 𝑛 ≤
This gives the claim                                2                    2                   2

log min{2𝑇 ,1/3η2 } . Lastly, note that our application of Chebyshev’s inequality holds for µ ≥ 16, thus
          𝑑

                          𝑑
we conclude that 𝑛 ≤ log( 16 ).                                                                        

                                                     15
                                                              Amir Koren Livni




       Note that the condition of Claim A.3 is satisfied when 16 ≤ 1/3η2 , which holds for η ≤ √1 .
                                                                                               4 3
We can now lower bound the expected population risk of the GD iterates. It will be convenient
to replace the sequence 𝑤 𝑡 with the following approximating sequence: define a new sequence,
𝑤 10 , 𝑤 20 , . . . , 𝑤𝑇0 , by setting
                                              ( P
                                               −η 𝑡−1 𝑒 𝑖𝑠 1 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ min{𝑇, 𝐾 };
                                       𝑤 𝑡0 =    P𝑠=1
                                               −η 𝑠=1 𝑒 𝑖𝑠 𝐾 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇 .
                                                  𝐾


Denote 𝑤 𝑆0 = 𝑇1             0                                      0
                       𝑡=1 𝑤 𝑡 . Using Lemma 4.1 it is clear that 𝑤 𝑡 − 𝑤 𝑡 = η𝑡 · γ1 𝑣¯ . Now observe that
                      P𝑇

                                                                                  √
                                              k𝑤 𝑡0 − 𝑤 𝑡 k ≤ γ1 η𝑡 k 𝑣¯ k ≤ γ1 η𝑡 𝑑,                                          (18)

where we have used the fact that 0 ≤ | 𝑣¯ 𝑖 | ≤ 1 for any 𝑖. In addition, since 𝑓 (16) (𝑤) is 3-Lipschitz we
have

                       𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ 𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆0 ) − 3k𝑤 𝑆0 − 𝑤 𝑆 k                                                 (3-Lipschitz)
                                                                          𝑇
                                                                      3   X
                                        ≥ 𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆0 ) −                       k𝑤 𝑡0 − 𝑤 𝑡 k               (triangle inequality)
                                                                      𝑇
                                                                          𝑡=1
                                                                √
                                        ≥ 𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆0 ) − 3γ1 η𝑇 𝑑.                                                     (Eq. (18))

Note that for any 𝑤 ∈ W
                     s X               
     𝐹(16) (𝑤) ≥ 𝔼        α (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤(𝑖)) + γ1 𝔼 [𝑣 α ] · 𝑤 + 𝑟 ε (𝑤)
                                2                                                                                     (𝑟 ε (𝑤) ≥ 0)
                      α∼𝐷
                             𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                            s X                                                    X                                        
                  ≥ 𝔼                   α (𝑖)ℎ2 (𝑤(𝑖))
                                                   γ
                                                                                   1
                                                                      + 21 γ1 1 − 2𝑛     𝑤(𝑖)                                  1
                                                                                                       ( 𝔼 [𝑣 α (𝑖)] = 12 1 − 2𝑛   )
                      α∼𝐷
                             𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                                                       𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                                                                √                                              √
                            s X                                  
                                        α (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖)) − 21 γ1 𝑑,
                                                                                                                P𝑑
                  ≥ 𝔼                                                                                       (    𝑖=1 𝑤(𝑖) ≥ −      𝑑)
                      α∼𝐷
                             𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                                                       √           √
                                                 𝑤(𝑖) ≥ −k𝑤k 1 ≥ − 𝑑 k𝑤k 2 ≥ − 𝑑 for 𝑤 ∈ W.
                                           P𝑑
where in the last inequality we used that 𝑖=1
Putting both observations together this implies
                                                                    √          √
                                   s X                     
                  𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ 𝔼         α (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖)) − 21 γ1 𝑑 − 3γ1 η𝑇 𝑑.
                                                 2    0
                                         α∼𝐷
                                                       𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

Applying the reverse triangle inequality we also have the inequality:
       sX                          sX                      sX
                                                        2
               α (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖)) ≥
                     2    0              α (𝑖) (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖)) −
                                                  0             α (𝑖) (ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)) − 𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)) 2 .
           𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                                𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                                𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

Next, observe that |ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)) − 𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)| ≤ γ2 = 2γ1 η𝑇 since 𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖) ≤ 0 for any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑], thus:
                                                             √              √
                             s X                      
                                                     2
         𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ 𝔼              α (𝑖)(𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖)) − 12 γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑
                                                0
                            α∼𝐷
                                        𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]


                                                                            16
                                      SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




                          k𝑤 𝑆0 k          √          √
                      ≥             − 12 γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑,                (Jensen’s inequality with 𝔼 [α (𝑖)] = 12 )
                               2
where a simple observation of α (𝑖) = α2 (𝑖) ensures that the first term is convex. From the definition
of 𝑤 𝑡0 it is clear that for any 𝑡0 < min{𝐾, 𝑇 } it holds that 𝑤 𝑡0 (𝑖 𝑠 ) = −η for 𝑠 < 𝑡0 and 𝑡 > 𝑡0 . Therefore,
setting 𝑡0 = 21 min{𝐾, 𝑇 } we have the following inequality
                                                              (
                             1                      0           −η 21 min{𝑇, 𝐾 } < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇;
                      ∀𝑠 < min{𝐾, 𝑇 } :          𝑤 𝑡 (𝑖 𝑠 ) ≤
                             2                                  0      𝑜.𝑤.
Therefore, the average iterate holds 𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖 𝑠 ) ≤ − 21 η for any 𝑠 < 12 min{𝐾, 𝑇 }. With this in hand, we
can conclude:
                             p                     √              √                          q
         𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ √1 η min{𝐾, 𝑇 } − 12 γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑                  (k𝑤 𝑆0 k ≥ 12 η 12 min{𝐾, 𝑇 })
                         2 2
                             q                      √              √
                      ≥ √1 η min{ 61η2 , 𝑇 } − 12 γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑                        (using Claim A.3)
                         2 2
                                √                √              √                      √            √
                      ≥ 14 min η 𝑇, 13 − 12 γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑.
                              
                                                                                     (2 2 < 4 and 6 < 3)
As the above inequality holds with probability at least√3/4 (Claim A.3), taking the expectation into
account and the fact that in any case 𝐹(16) (𝑤) ≥ − 12 γ1 𝑑 and that min 𝑤 ∈W 𝐹(16) (𝑤) ≤ 𝐹(16) (0) = 0,
we attain that
                                                       3
                                                             √          √            √
                𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹(16) (𝑤 𝑆 )] − min 𝐹(16) (𝑤) ≥ 16  min η 𝑇, 13 − γ1 𝑑 − 5γ1 η𝑇 𝑑
              𝑆∼𝐷                    𝑤 ∈W
                                                            √
                                                   ≥ 18 min η 𝑇, 13 .
                                                    √       1
                                                                  √
For a sufficiently small γ1 such that γ1 (1 + 5η𝑇) 𝑑 ≤ 16     min η 𝑇, 31 .
                             1
Case 2 - Assume η >          √  :     To conclude the proof we are left to show a constant lower bound
                            4 3
                         1
for the case of η >      √  .   For that matter we define the deterministic convex 2-Lipschitz function
                        4 3
 𝑓 (19) : ℝ → ℝ:
                                                        (
                                                            |𝑤 − 14 η |   η ≤ 1;
                                         𝑓 (19) (𝑤) =                                                         (19)
                                                            2|𝑤 − 23 |    η > 1.

For the case η ≤ 1 the gradients are given by ∇ 𝑓 (19) (𝑤) = sign(𝑤 − 16 η). The first GD iterate is
then 𝑤 1 = η. Observe that 𝑤 1 − 14 η > 0. Therefore, the second GD iterate is 𝑤 2 = 𝑤 1 − η = 0
and we can deduce that 𝑤 𝑡 = η for odd 𝑡 and 𝑤 𝑡 = 0 for even 𝑡. This implies that the average
iterate holds 𝑤 𝑆 ≥ 12 η and we conclude that 𝑓 (19) (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ 21 η − 14 η ≥ 14 η. For the case η > 1, note
that ∇ 𝑓 (19) (0) = −2 and therefore the first GD iterate after projection is then 𝑤 1 = 1. For the next
iterate, observe that ∇ 𝑓 (19) (1) = 2, which implies that 𝑤 2 = −1. Examine the third iterate, since
∇ 𝑓 (19) (−1) = −2 we obtain that 𝑤 3 = 1. This entails that 𝑤 𝑡 = 1 for odd 𝑡 and 𝑤 𝑡 = −1 for even 𝑡.
For even 𝑇 we get that the average iterate is 𝑤 𝑆 = 0 and therefore 𝑓 (19) (𝑤 𝑆 ) = 34 . On the other hand,
when 𝑇 is odd we get that the average iterate is 𝑤 𝑆 = 𝑇1 and therefore 𝑓 (19) (𝑤 𝑆 ) = 2| 𝑇1 − 23 | ≥ 13 .
Putting together both results (for η > 1 and η ≤ 1) we obtain that for η > √1
                                                                                         4 3

                                𝑓 (19) (𝑤 𝑆 ) − min 𝑓 (19) (𝑤) ≥ 41 min{η, 34 } ≥ 32
                                                                                  1
                                                                                     .
                                                𝑤 ∈W
Note that this result is independent on the dimension as we can simply embed the function 𝑓 (19) in
the first coordinate of any large space. Namely, 𝑓 (𝑤) = 𝑓 (19) (𝑤(1)) for 𝑤 ∈ ℝ 𝑑 .

                                                              17
                                           Amir Koren Livni




A.2. Proof of Theorem 3.2
As before, the proof follows from the following two claim which divides the lower bound into two
terms. The first term is dealt in Theorem A.4 and provides the main novelty of this section, and the
rest of the section is devoted for its proof. Lemma A.5 accompanies the first result with the standard
lower bounds that stems from optimization and sample complexity lower bound:

Theorem A.4. Fix 𝑛, λ < 3, 𝑇 ≥ 3 and assume 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 ·2𝑛+5 . Suppose we run GD over the regularized
objective as in Eq. (7) with learning rate η 𝑡 = 2/( λ (𝑡 + 1)) and setting 𝑤 𝑆 = 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑇 (𝑇2𝑡+1) 𝑤 𝑡 . Then,
                                                                                   P
there exists an 𝑓 (𝑤, 𝑧) 3-Lipschitz and convex over 𝑤 ∈ W and a distribution 𝐷 supported on 𝑧
such that:                                                                    
                                   λGD           ★      3            1       1
                         𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 )] − 𝐹 (𝑤 ) ≥ min               √       ,     .
                        𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛                           4        8λ 𝑇 + 1 16
                                                                                                       n    o
    The proof is now an immediate corollary of the following standard lower bound of Ω λ + min λ1𝑛 , √1𝑛 ,
we refer the reader to Appendix B.2 for complete proofs:

Lemma A.5. For λ > 0 and fixed 𝑛, there exists a function 𝑓 (𝑤, 𝑧) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ and a distribution 𝐷,
such that if we run GD over 𝐹λ,𝑆 as in Eq. (7), with η 𝑡 = 2/( λ (𝑡 + 1)) and set 𝑤 𝑆 = 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑇 (𝑇𝑡 +1) 𝑤 𝑡
                                                                                       P
then                                                                                 
                       λGD                         1                 4 1
               𝔼 [𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 )] − min          ★
                                       𝐹 (𝑤 ) ≥       min min          , √ + 64λ, 128
              𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛             𝑤 ★ ∈W           128                λ𝑛 𝑛

Proof of Theorem A.4. We set 𝐷 to be a distribution over 𝑧 = ( α, ε, γ), similarly to Eq. (30), and
again we define
                                                                                        (
                                                                                             1
                                                                                          − 2𝑛 α (𝑖) = 0;
                   sX
   𝑓 (20) (𝑤; 𝑧) =           α (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤(𝑖)) + γ1 𝑣 α · 𝑤 + γ3 · 𝑟 ε (𝑤), with 𝑣 α (𝑖) =
                                   2

                    𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]
                                                                                          +1   α (𝑖) = 1,
                                                                                                            (20)
                                                                                            γ
where α ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑 such that α (𝑖) = 0 w.p 1/2, ε1 < ε2 < . . . < ε𝑑 < 6𝑛(𝑇1+1) , and γ3 =
   n √         o
min λ2 𝑇 − 2, 1 . Finally we choose:
                                           (                                             𝑇 +1             )
       10−3    γ3                                10−3               γ3            γ2    λ           γ3
  γ2 ≤ √ · √ √                  γ1 ≤ min √               · √ √      ,P       ,                                  .
         𝑇 4 2λ 𝑇 + 1                           𝑑 (3 + λ) 4 2λ 𝑇 + 1 𝑇𝑡=1 η 𝑡 3                   (𝑇 + 1)
                                                                                              (21)
    Observe that with these choice of parameters, 𝑓 (20) is 3-Lipschitz. Because we only deal with
regularized objectives, throughout this section we suppress dependence in the algorithm and write
𝑤 instead of 𝑤 λGD . Next, as in Eq. (7), we consider the regularized objective
                                                              𝑚
                                            λ             1 X
                               𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤) =       k𝑤k 2 +       𝑓 (20) (𝑤; 𝑧 𝑖 ),
                                            2             𝑚
                                                             𝑖=1

The update rule is then given by:

             𝑤 𝑡+1 = ΠW [𝑤 𝑡 − η 𝑡+1 ∇𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 )] = ΠW [(1 − λη 𝑡+1 )𝑤 𝑡 − η 𝑡+1 ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 )].

                                                     18
                                      SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




Next, let us set I = { 𝑗 : ∀𝑧 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆, α𝑖 ( 𝑗) = 0} and
                                                    logwe will denote the element of I as 𝑖1 ≤ 𝑖2 ≤ . . . 𝑖 𝐾 .
                                                        𝑑 log 𝑑
By our assumption on 𝑑 we have that 𝑛 ≤ min 16 , 2𝑇 then, as in Claim A.3, we have that 𝐾 ≥ 𝑇
with probability 3/4. We will show that if this event happens then:
                                                                           
                                                ★                 1       1
                                 𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 ) − 𝐹 (𝑤 ) ≥ min        √       ,     .
                                                             8λ 𝑇 + 1 16
The result in expectation then follows.
   We first utilize Lemma C.1 as before. Specifically, we want to show the following claim:
Claim A.6. For every 𝑡 ≥ 2:
                                              ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ + γ3 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 .                                        (22)
    The proof of Claim A.6 is left to the end of this section and is provided in Appendix A.2 and we
continue with the proof of Theorem A.4. It will be convenient to replace the sequence 𝑤 𝑡 with the
following approximating sequence: define a new sequence,𝑤 10 , 𝑤 20 , . . . , 𝑤𝑇0 , by setting 𝑤 10 = 0 and
for every 𝑡 ≥ 2
                                 0
                                      = ΠW (1 − η 𝑡+1 λ)𝑤 𝑡0 − η 𝑡+1 γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 ,
                                                                             
                               𝑤 𝑡+1                                                                   (23)
and we set 𝑤 𝑆0 = 𝑇𝑡=1 𝑇 (𝑇2𝑡+1) · 𝑤 𝑡0 . We next claim that
                 P

                                                                     √
                                                               γ1        𝑑
                                               k𝑤 𝑆 − 𝑤 𝑆0 k ≤               .                                      (24)
                                                                     λ
                                                                                     √
                                                                                 γ
We can prove the above by induction. We show that k𝑤 𝑡 − 𝑤 𝑡0 k ≤ 1λ , and then the result holds also
                                                                                         𝑑

for the averaged 𝑤 𝑆 . For 𝑡 = 1 this is immediate from Lemma C.1 and the following calculation:
                                                                         √
                                       0                               γ1 𝑑
                             k𝑤 1 − 𝑤 1 k = k𝑤 1 k = k η 1 ∇𝐹𝑆 (0) k ≤      .
                                                                                     λ
Next we assume the statement holds for 𝑡 and prove for 𝑡 + 1:
   0
       − 𝑤 𝑡+1 k = ΠW (1 − η 𝑡+1 · λ)𝑤 𝑡0 − η 𝑡+1 γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 − ΠW (1 − η 𝑡+1 · λ)𝑤 𝑡 − η 𝑡+1 γ1 𝑣¯ − η 𝑡+1 γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡
                                                                                                                 
k𝑤 𝑡+1
                 ≤ k (1 − η 𝑡+1 · λ)𝑤 𝑡0 − η 𝑡+1 γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 − (1 − η 𝑡+1 · λ)𝑤 𝑡 + η 𝑡+1 γ1 𝑣¯ + η 𝑡+1 γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 k
                 = k (1 − η 𝑡+1 · λ) (𝑤 𝑡0 − 𝑤 𝑡 ) k + k η 𝑡+1 γ1 𝑣¯ k
                                                     √
                      𝑡      0               2 γ1 𝑑
                 ≤       k𝑤 − 𝑤 𝑡 k +
                   𝑡+2 𝑡 √                 𝑡 + 2√ λ
                      𝑡     γ1 𝑑         2 γ1 𝑑
                 ≤        ·        +
                   𝑡 +√2       λ      𝑡+2 λ
                   γ1 𝑑
                 =        .
                      λ
This establishes Eq. (24). Next, we formalize the final claim that we will need:
Claim A.7. For 𝑡0 ≥ 𝑇/2, we have that
                                                                          𝑡0
                                        2       © λ𝑇/2(𝑇/2 + 1) 0        X
                       𝑤 𝑡00 =                                 𝑤𝑇 /2 −          γ3 𝑡𝑒 𝑖𝑡 ® .
                                                                                         ª
                                 λ𝑡 0 (𝑡 0 + 1)
                                                ­
                                                       2
                                                «                      𝑡=𝑇 /2+1          ¬

                                                            19
                                                  Amir Koren Livni




and in particular for any 𝑇/2 < 𝑡0 ≤ 3𝑇/4
                                    𝑇                               𝑇
                                    X       2𝑡        2𝑡0          X       2             γ3
               𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖 𝑡0 ) = −γ3                            ≤ −γ3                ≤−                                        (25)
                                    𝑡=𝑡
                                        𝑇 (𝑇 + 1) λ𝑡 (𝑡 + 1)       𝑡=𝑡
                                                                       λ𝑇 (𝑇 + 1)    2λ (𝑇 + 1)
                                      0                                   0

   The proof of Claim A.7 is again deferred to the end at Appendix A.2, and we proceed with the
proof.
   We will refer to 𝑓 (20) (𝑤; 𝑧) as 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) for the rest of the proof. First, we derive a generic lower
bound for the generalization error. Since 𝔼𝑧∼𝐷 [ 𝑓 (𝑤★; 𝑧)] ≤ max𝑧 𝑓 (0; 𝑧) = 0, we have that

        𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ; 𝑧)] − 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤★; 𝑧)]
      𝑧∼𝐷                    𝑧∼𝐷
       = 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ; 𝑧)] − 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆0 ; 𝑧)]
         𝑧∼𝐷                𝑧∼𝐷
                   0
        + 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ; 𝑧)] − 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤★; 𝑧)]
         𝑧∼𝐷                 𝑧∼𝐷
                                                           √
                                                γ1 𝑑
       ≥ 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆0 ; 𝑧)] − 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤★; 𝑧)] − 3                               (3-Lipschitzness of f) & Eq. (24)
        𝑧∼𝐷                 𝑧∼𝐷                   λ
                                      √
                               γ1 𝑑
       ≥ 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆0 ; 𝑧)] − 3                                                                   𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤★, 𝑧)] ≤ 0
         𝑧∼𝐷                     λ
              v
              u
              u
              𝑇                                         √                                                          √
             tX                                     
                                                  3
                                                                                         |𝑣 α · 𝑤 𝑆0 | ≤ k𝑣 α k ≤
                                              
       ≥ 𝔼          α (𝑖 𝑗 )ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 ))  −
                        2      2    0              + 1 𝑑 γ1                                                            𝑑
         α∼𝐷                                    λ
              𝑗=1                            
           v
           u
           u
           t 𝑇                                  √
                                             
         1 X 2 0                     3
       ≥        ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 )) −       + 1 𝑑 γ1                                             convexity of norm
         2                           λ
                𝑗=1



Next, note that for every 𝑖 and 𝑡 we have that 𝑤 𝑡0 (𝑖) ≤ 0. In particular we have that |ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)) −
𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖))| ≤ γ2 , hence:
  v
  u
  u                            v
                               u
                               u                        v
                                                        u
                                                        u
  tX    𝑇                      tX 𝑇                     t 𝑇
1           2    0           1          02            1 X 0
           ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 )) ≥          𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 ) −             (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 ) − ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 )) 2       k𝑣k ≥ k𝑢k − k𝑢 − 𝑣k
2                            2                        2
       𝑗=1                       𝑗=1                       𝑗=1
                               v
                               u
                               u
                               t 𝑇
                             1 X 02                   √
                           ≥          𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖 𝑗 ) − 𝑇 · γ2                                      |ℎγ (𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖)) − 𝑤 𝑆0 (𝑖))| ≤ γ2
                             2
                                 𝑗=1
                               v
                               u
                               t 3𝑇  /4
                               u
                             1     X                      √
                           ≥               𝑤 𝑆02 (𝑖 𝑗 ) − 𝑇 · γ2
                             2
                                 𝑗=𝑇 /2+1
                             v
                             u
                             t 3𝑇 /4 
                             u                          2
                                X           γ3               √
                           ≥                               − 𝑇 · γ2                                                   𝐸𝑞. (25)
                                       4λ (𝑇 + 1)
                                𝑗=𝑇 /2
                                     γ3        √
                         ≥      p             − 𝑇 · γ2
                             4λ 2(𝑇 + 1)

                                                            20
                                   SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




Taken together, and with our choice of γ1 , γ2 in Eq. (21) we obtain the desired result.
Proof of Claim A.6. We, again, prove the statement by induction and we show that for 𝑤 𝑡 we have
that
                          X                   X            X
                                (𝑡)                                (𝑡)
                     𝑤𝑡 =     ρ 𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 + µ (𝑡)       𝑒𝑖 +          ξ𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 ,                  (26)
                                  𝑖∉I                     𝑖>𝑖𝑡−1 ,𝑖 ∈I                 𝑖 ≤𝑖𝑡−1 ,𝑖 ∈I

where
                                  (𝑡)
    • −γ2 ≤ −γ1       𝑖=1 η 𝑡 ≤ ρ 𝑖 ≤ 0
                    P𝑡−1

                      γ
    • ε𝑑 < µ (𝑡) ≤ 2λ1𝑛

    • ξ𝑖(𝑡) ≤ 0
We now assume that the above holds for 𝑤 𝑡 and prove the statement for 𝑤 𝑡+1 . First, by Lemma C.1
we have that for every 𝑡 0 ≤ 𝑡:
                                 ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 0 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ + γ3 · 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 0 .
Let us denote
                                              X                                    
                               𝑤 𝑡+1/2 =            (1 − λη 𝑡 ) ρ 𝑖(𝑡) − η 𝑡 γ1 𝑣¯ 𝑖 𝑒 𝑖
                                               𝑖∉I |            {z                  }
                                                                        ρ0𝑖
                                                  X                             η𝑡 
                                         +                (1 − λη 𝑡 ) µ (𝑡) + γ1      𝑒𝑖
                                                                                 2𝑛
                                              𝑖>𝑖𝑡 ,𝑖 ∈I |           {z            }
                                                                              µ0
                                                                 η𝑡         
                                         + (1 − λη 𝑡 ) µ (𝑡) + γ1    − γ3 η 𝑡 𝑒 𝑖𝑡
                                                                  2𝑛
                                          |                {z                }
                                                                  ξ0𝑖
                                                                    𝑡
                                                  X                             η𝑡 
                                         +                (1 − λη 𝑡 ) ξ𝑖(𝑡) + γ1      𝑒𝑖 .
                                                                                 2𝑛
                                              𝑖<𝑖𝑡 ,𝑖 ∈I |          {z             }
                                                                              ξ0𝑖

With this notation note that
                                                                       𝑤 𝑡+1/2
                                𝑤 𝑡+1 = ΠW [𝑤 𝑡+1/2 ] =                               .
                                                                   min{k𝑤 𝑡+1/2 k, 1}
    We next show that all      three conditions are met.
                           ρ0𝑖
    For ρ 𝑖(𝑡+1) = min{ k 𝑤𝑡+1/2 k,1} , note that since 0 < 𝑣¯ 𝑖 < 1 as well as 0 < λη 𝑡 < 1,

                                                                    𝑡−1
                                                                    X                                    𝑡
                                                                                                         X
                    0 ≥ (1 − λη 𝑡 ) ρ 𝑖(𝑡) − η 𝑡 γ1 𝑣¯ ≥ −γ1                        η 𝑖 − η 𝑡 γ1 ≥ −γ1         η𝑡 .
                                                                        𝑖=1                              𝑖=1

                                        ρ0𝑖
In particular −γ1    𝑖=1 η 𝑖 ≤ min{ k 𝑤𝑡+1/2 k,1} ≤ 0.
                    P𝑡


                                                             21
                                                     Amir Koren Livni



                                              µ0
    Next, we examine µ (𝑡) = min{ k 𝑤𝑡+1/2 k,1} . First, note that because 𝑓 is 3-Lipschitz:

                                                                      1              3
                                  k𝑤 𝑡+1/2 k = k (1 − λη 𝑡 )𝑤 𝑡 + λη 𝑡 ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ) k ≤ .
                                                                                λ                  λ
Hence,
                              λ                              η𝑡          λ          γ1              γ1
               µ (𝑡+1) ≥          · (1 − λη 𝑡 ) µ (𝑡) + γ1         )≥                       ≥                ≥ ε𝑑
                              3                              2𝑛          3 2𝑛λ (𝑇 + 1)           6𝑛(𝑇 + 1)
                      η
That µ (𝑡+1) ≤ γ1 2λ𝑡𝑛 , again follows by induction and the fact that λη 𝑡 ≤ 1. Finally, we consider
ξ (𝑡+1) . We again use the fact that k𝑤 𝑡+1/2 k ≤ λ3 , and we claim by induction that for 𝑡 ≥ 𝑗:

                                                   𝑡− 𝑗 𝑡
                                                       λ γ               λ            2γ3
                                                   X                     𝑡− 𝑗
                                          (𝑡)                 1
                                         ξ𝑖 𝑗 ≤                    −                         .
                                                         3𝑡 6𝑛           3          3(𝑇 + 1)
                                                   𝑖=0

                                         γ
For 𝑗 = 𝑡 we have that η (𝑡) ≤ 2λ1𝑛 hence:

                      (𝑡)     λ                              η𝑡               
                     ξ𝑖𝑡 ≤       (1 − λη 𝑡 ) η (𝑡) + γ1    − γ3 η 𝑡
                              3                        2𝑛
                              λ    γ1          2γ3
                                                       
                            ≤ ·        −                                                               λη 𝑡 ≤ 1
                              3 2λ𝑛 λ (𝑇 + 1)
                              γ1      2γ3
                            ≤    −
                              6𝑛 3(𝑇 + 1)
Next, for 𝑡 > 𝑗

                      (𝑡+1)        λh                             η𝑡 i
                   ξ𝑖 𝑗       ≤    (1 − λη 𝑡 ) ξ𝑖(𝑡) + γ1
                                3                 𝑗       2𝑛
                                λ h (𝑡)   γ1 i
                              ≤    ξ +                                                                 λη ≤ 1
                                3 𝑖𝑗     2λ𝑛
                                  λ (𝑡) γ1
                              =    ξ𝑖 𝑗 +
                                  3          6𝑛
                                  𝑡+1−
                                   X𝑗    λ𝑡 γ1           λ           2γ3
                                                      𝑡+1− 𝑗
                              ≤                −
                                         3𝑡 6𝑛           3         3(𝑇 + 1)
                                   𝑖=0

Finally, λ < 1 and our choice of
                                                               𝑇 +1
                                                              λ              4 γ3
                                                  γ1 ≤ 6𝑛
                                                              3              9 (𝑇 + 1)

ensures ξ𝑖(𝑡) ≤ 0.
Proof of Claim A.7. To prove Claim A.7 we first show that for 𝑡0 > 𝑇/2, we have that 𝑤 𝑡00 =
(1 − λη 𝑡 )𝑤 𝑡00 − η 𝑡 𝑒 𝑖𝑡0 . In other words, there are no projections after the 𝑇/2’th iteration. To show
that we use the fact that 𝑤 𝑡0 and 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 are orthogonal for every 𝑡. This follows from the fact that
𝑤 𝑡0 = span(𝑒 𝑖1 , . . . , 𝑒 𝑖𝑡−1 ). As such,

     k(1 − λη 𝑡+1 )𝑤 𝑡0 − η 𝑡+1 · γ3 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 k 2 = (1 − λη 𝑡+1 ) 2 k𝑤 𝑡0 k 2 + ( γ3 η 𝑡+1 ) 2

                                                                   22
                                     SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




                                                                         4γ23
                                                               2
                                                   2
                                             ≤ 1−                    +
                                                  𝑡+2          ( λ (𝑡 + 2)) 2
                                                    4          4             4γ23
                                             =1−        +             +
                                                  𝑡 + 2 (𝑡 + 2) 2 ( λ (𝑡 + 2)) 2
                                                    4          8              8γ2
                                             ≤ 1−        +             + 2 3                           𝑡 + 2 ≥ 𝑇/2
                                                  𝑡 + 2 𝑇 (𝑡 + 2) λ 𝑇 (𝑡 + 2)
                                                                                                            λ√
                                                                         
                                                        𝑇/2            4
                                             ≤ 1+ 8               −                                γ3 ≤         𝑇 −2
                                                     𝑇 · (𝑡 + 1) 𝑡 + 1                                      2
                                             ≤ 1.

    Using the fact that there are no projections taken, we prove by induction that at step 𝑡 for 𝑡 ≥ 𝑇/2,

                                                                     𝑡
                                     2     © λ𝑇/2(𝑇/2 + 1) 0        X
                       𝑤 𝑡0 =                             𝑤𝑇 /2 −          γ3 𝑘𝑒 𝑖𝑘 ® .
                                                                                    ª
                                λ𝑡 (𝑡 + 1)
                                           ­
                                                  2
                                           «                      𝑘=𝑇 /2+1          ¬

Indeed, set 𝑡0 > 𝑇/2, and denote 𝑐 = λ𝑇 /2(𝑇2 /2+1) :


                𝑤 𝑡00 = (1 − λη 𝑡0 )𝑤 𝑡00 −1 − γ3 η 𝑡0 𝑒 𝑖𝑡0
                                                                        𝑡0 −1
                                 2          2      © 0                  X
                     = (1 −           )            ­𝑐𝑤𝑇 /2 − γ3                  𝑡𝑒 𝑖𝑡 ® − γ3 η 𝑡0 𝑒 𝑖𝑡0
                                                                                       ª
                              𝑡0 + 1 λ𝑡0 (𝑡0 − 1)
                                                   «                 𝑡=𝑇 /2+1          ¬
                                                                    𝑡0 −1
                         𝑡0 − 1          1      © 0                 X                          2
                     =−           ·             ­𝑐𝑤𝑇 /2 − γ3                 𝑡𝑒 𝑖𝑡 ® − γ3
                                                                                   ª
                                                                                                       𝑒𝑖
                         𝑡0 + 1 λ (𝑡0 − 1)𝑡0                                               λ𝑡 0 + 1 𝑡0
                                                «                𝑡=𝑇   /2+1        ¬
                                                       𝑡0
                              2        © 0            X
                     =                 ­𝑐𝑤𝑇 /2 − γ3
                                                                   ª
                                                             𝑡𝑒 𝑖𝑡 ® .
                       λ𝑡 0 (𝑡 0 + 1)
                                       «            𝑡=𝑇 /2+1       ¬

A.3. Proof of Theorem 5.1
We next state a lower bound for overtraining in the general (non strongly-convex) case. As discussed,
                                                                                            √
the work of Bassily et al. (2020) showed that the stability of GD is governed by the η 𝑇 term.
The following result complements their work and gives a matching lower bound on the expected
population risk via a construction a Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2009) with a unique empirical risk
minimizer that overfits:

Theorem A.8. For every η, 𝑇 and 𝑛, for 𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 · 2𝑛+5 , there exists a function 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ
convex and 3-Lipschitz in 𝑤 ∈ W for every 𝑧, and a distribution 𝐷 over Z such that if 𝑆 ∼ 𝐷 𝑛 , then
                                                     n   n 1 22𝑛+2 o o
                     𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹 (𝑤 GD
                               𝑆 )] − 𝑤
                                      min 𝐹 (𝑤) ≥ min max −              1
                                                                  , 0 , 48 .
                    𝑆∼𝐷                 ∈W                 8 4 η𝑇
   The above suggests that for large 𝑇 training steps, GD might overfit. In particular, when
𝑇 = Ω (22𝑛 /η), GD is susceptible to over-training.

                                                               23
                                            Amir Koren Livni




Proof of Theorem A.8         Define a family of convex functions 𝑓 (27) (𝑤; α) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ parameterized
by α ∈ {0, 1} 𝑑
                                          sX
                                                                             1 X
                        𝑓 (27) (𝑤; α) =              α (𝑖)𝑤 2 (𝑖) +              (1 − 𝑤(𝑖)),                       (27)
                                                                             𝑑2
                                          𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                               𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

Observe that the objective is convex and 2-Lipschitz. Fix 𝑛 ≥ 1 and consider the sequence
( α1 , . . . , α𝑛 ). Then, we denote the empirical average over a sample 𝑆 of size 𝑛 as follows
                                                           𝑛
                                                      1X
                                      𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) =           𝑓 (27) (𝑤; α𝑖 ).                                          (28)
                                                      𝑛
                                                           𝑖=1

Similarly to our first construction we consider 𝐷 to be the uniform distribution over the functions
{ 𝑓 (𝑤; α)}α ∈ {0,1} 𝑑 and we denote

                                     𝐹(27) (𝑤 𝑆 ) = 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (27) (𝑤 𝑆 ; α)].
                                                       α∼𝐷

Claim A.9.√ Running GD over the function 𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) defined in Eq. (28) and denoting its output by 𝑤 𝑆 ,
then for η 𝑇 ≤ 12 and 𝑑 = 2𝑛+1 the following holds
                                                                                    n1          22𝑛+2 o
                        𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹(27) (𝑤 𝑆 )] − min 𝐹(27) (𝑤) ≥ max                            −        ,0 .
                      𝑆∼𝐷                    𝑤 ∈W                                     8         4η𝑇
                                       √                                             √
   Note that Claim A.9 holds for η 𝑇 ≤ 12 . Using Theorem A.1 we know that for η 𝑇 > 12 , if
𝑑 ≥ 𝑇 · 2𝑛+5 there exist a function 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧) and a distribution 𝐷 such that
                                                                1
                                                                      √
                  𝔼 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ; 𝑧)] − min 𝔼 [ 𝑓 (𝑤; 𝑧)] ≥ 16     min η 𝑇, 31 ≥ 48
                                                                                 1
                                                                                   .
                𝑆∼𝐷 𝑛 𝑧∼𝐷                 𝑤 ∈W 𝑧∼𝐷
                           √            √
Combining both claims for η 𝑇 > 12 and η 𝑇 ≤ 12 , we conclude the desired result. We now proceed
with proving Claim A.9.

Proof of Claim A.9. As α is distributed uniformly over {0, 1} 𝑑 , we have that α (𝑖) are i.i.d. uniform
Bernoulli. Consider a sample ( α1 , . . . , α𝑛 ), then the probability that a given index 𝑖 satisfies
                                 1
∀ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] : α 𝑗 (𝑖) = 0 is 𝑝 = 2𝑛+1 . Therefore, the probability of non-existence of such coordinate
                           𝑑
is then given by (1 − 𝑝) . As a result, the probability that there exists such a coordinate is
           1 2𝑛+1
1 − (1 − 2𝑛+1 )    ≥ 1 − 𝑒 −1 ≥ 1/2. Recall that
                        𝑛                                  sX
                    1X                    1 X                                                    1 X
           𝐹𝑆 (𝑤) =    𝑓 (27) (𝑤; α 𝑗 ) =                                   α 𝑗 (𝑖)𝑤 2 (𝑖) +         (1 − 𝑤(𝑖)).
                    𝑛                     𝑛                                                      𝑑2
                       𝑗=1                       𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]         𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                           𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

Suppose that the GD solution is in the interior of the domain, namely k𝑤 𝑆 k < 1. In addition,
suppose that there exists an index 𝑖★ ∈ [𝑑] such that ∀ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] : α 𝑗 (𝑖★) = 0. We can now propose a
better alternative solution denoted by 𝑤ˆ 𝑆 and defined as,
                                           (
                                             𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖) + 1 − k𝑤 𝑆 k 𝑖 = 𝑖★;
                                𝑤ˆ 𝑆 (𝑖) =
                                             𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖)              𝑖 ≠ 𝑖★ .

                                                           24
                                  SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




Observe that
                                                                1
                                  𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑆 ) − 𝐹𝑆 ( 𝑤ˆ 𝑆 ) ≥        (1 − k𝑤 𝑆 k).
                                                                𝑑2
Using the well known optimization√upper bound of GD on convex 2-Lipschitz functions (Bubeck,
2015, Theorem 3.2) we obtain for η 𝑇 ≤ 12 :

                                                                 1          1
                                 𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑆 ) − 𝐹𝑆 ( 𝑤ˆ 𝑆 ) ≤          + 2η ≤    ,
                                                                2η𝑇        η𝑇

where we used the fact that our domain is bounded in the Euclidean unit ball. This implies that

                                                                 𝑑2
                                                  k𝑤 𝑆 k ≥ 1 −      .                                        (29)
                                                                 η𝑇

Consequently, we can conclude that with probability higher than 1/2 we get

        𝐹(27) (𝑤 𝑆 ) − min 𝐹(27) (𝑤) ≥ 𝐹(27) (𝑤 𝑆 ) − 41
                       𝑤 ∈W
                                            hs X                    i
                                     ≥ 𝔼               α (𝑖)𝑤 2𝑆 (𝑖) − 14             (1 − 𝑤(𝑖) ≥ 0 for 𝑤 ∈ W)
                                          α∼𝐷
                                                    𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

                                      ≥ 21 k𝑤 𝑆 k − 14                  (Jensen’s inequality with 𝔼 [α (𝑖)] = 12 )
                                        1      𝑑2
                                      ≥       −                                                        (Eq. (29))
                                          4       2η𝑇

where the first inequality stems from the observation that 𝑓 (27) (0; α) = 1/𝑑 = 2−(𝑛+1) ≤ 41 . For the
third inequality, a simple observation of α (𝑖) = α2 (𝑖) ensures that the first term is convex. Note that
when k𝑤 𝑆 k = 1 we get an even tighter lower bound of 1/4. After taking expectation over 𝑆 ∼ 𝐷 𝑛
we conclude that
                                                                         n1       22𝑛+2 o
                         𝔼 𝑛 [𝐹(27) (𝑤 𝑆 )] − min 𝐹(27) (𝑤) ≥ max             −        ,0 .                    
                       𝑆∼𝐷                        𝑤 ∈W                    8       4η𝑇

Appendix B. Additional proofs for Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2
B.1. Proof of Lemma A.2
Without loss of generality assume 18η2𝑇 2 ≤ 𝑑 ≤ 36η2𝑇 2 (as we can always embed the below
example in any larger space). Set parameters 0 < ε1 < · · · < ε𝑑 < √1 , and define the deterministic
                                                                              2 𝑑
convex function 𝑓 (30) : ℝ 𝑑 → ℝ as follows:

                                                            1
                                          𝑓 (30) (𝑤) = 𝑤 − √ + ε ∞ ,                                         (30)
                                                             𝑑
where ε = ( ε1 , . . . , ε𝑑 ). We begin the proof with the following claim that upper bounds the smallest
coordinate:
                                                                  η𝑇
Claim B.1. There exists an 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑] such that 𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖) ≤ 𝑑 .

                                                           25
                                                   Amir Koren Livni




Proof. The update rule of GD states that

                                            𝑤 𝑡 = ΠW [𝑤 𝑡−1 − η∇ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑡−1 )].

Note that
                                                           1
                                        ∇ 𝑓 (𝑤) = − sign( √ − 𝑤(𝑖) − ε𝑖 )𝑒 𝑖 ,                                   (31)
                                                            𝑑

for an 𝑖 ∈ arg max 𝑗 ∈ [𝑑 ] | √1 − 𝑤( 𝑗) − ε 𝑗 |. We will upper bound the `1 -norm of 𝑤 𝑡+1 . Observe that
                                𝑑
projection can only reduce the `1 -norm. Therefore,

                           k𝑤 𝑡 k 1 ≤ k𝑤 𝑡−1 − η∇ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑡 ) k 1
                                    ≤ k𝑤 𝑡−1 k 1 + η k∇ 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑡 ) k 1                            (triangle inequality)
                                    ≤ k𝑤 𝑡−1 k 1 + η                                                       (Eq. (31))
                                    ≤ η𝑡.                              (applying the claim recursively on k𝑤 𝑡−1 k 1 )

This implies that the average iterate holds

                                                       𝑇                 𝑇
                                                1X            1X
                                     k𝑤 𝑆 k 1 ≤    k𝑤 𝑡 k 1 ≤    η𝑡 ≤ η𝑇 .                                       (32)
                                                𝑇             𝑇
                                                       𝑡=1               𝑡=1

If we assume by contradiction that for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑] it holds that 𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖) > η𝑇/𝑑, then we will get that
k𝑤 𝑆 k 1 > η𝑇 which contradicts the claim in Eq. (32).                                              
                                                                         η𝑇
    Using Claim B.1 the average iterate satisfies 𝑤 𝑆 (𝑖) ≤ 𝑑 for some 𝑖 and we can conclude

                                                  1  η𝑇        1   η𝑇
                                      𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥ √ −    − ε𝑖 ≥ √ −    ,
                                                   𝑑  𝑑       2 𝑑   𝑑

              1
since ε𝑖 ≤    √  . We obtain that for 18η2𝑇 2 ≥ 1
             2 𝑑

                                                         1    1    1
                                          𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥       −    =     ,                                          (33)
                                                       12η𝑇 18η𝑇 36η𝑇

where we used the fact that 18η2𝑇 2 ≤ 36η2𝑇 2 . While for 18η2𝑇 2 ≤ 1 we get that for 𝑑 = 1

                                                              1       1
                                                 𝑓 (𝑤 𝑆 ) ≥     − η𝑇 ≥ .
                                                              2       4
                                     1
                         𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ] ( √𝑑 − ε𝑖 )𝑒 𝑖 ) = 0, hence:
                     P
Note also that 𝑓 (
                                                                                   
                                                                               1 1
                                     𝐹 (𝑤 𝑆 ) − min 𝐹 (𝑤) ≥ min                  ,    .
                                                 𝑤 ∈W                        36η𝑇 4

Because we consider a deterministic function, the result also holds in expectation.

                                                              26
                                    SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




B.2. Proof of Lemma A.5
Consider the function
                                                                 λ̄
                                                  ℎ(𝑤) = − 𝑤(1),
                                                          2
where λ̄ = min{1, λ}
   We set the distribution 𝐷 to be deterministic, namely: 𝑓 (𝑤, 𝑧) = ℎ(𝑤) = −λ̄𝑤(1) w.p. 1.
   Note that for our update step we have that

                                                    λ̄
                                         𝑤1 = −        ∇ℎ(𝑤) = −α · 𝑒 1 ,
                                                   2λ

where α ≤ 12 Since ∇𝐹λ,𝑆 (𝑤 1 ) = 0,we have that for every 𝑡 ≥ 1, 𝑤 𝑡 = 𝑤 1 , in particular, 𝑤 𝑆 = −𝑒 1 .
On the other hand:

                        α · λ̄                     αλ̄ λ̄ λ̄           λ 1
                                                                           
                     ℎ(        𝑒 1 ) − ℎ(𝑒 1 ) ≥ −    + = ≥ min ,              .
                          2                         2  2 4             4 4

Appendix C. Proof of Lemma 4.1
Because we only analyze non-regularized objectives in this proof we will suppress the dependence
on the algorithm and we will use 𝑤 𝑡 for 𝑤 GD
                                           𝑡 . Before we proceed with the proof, we present a generic
Lemma that this proof relies upon. The proof of Lemma C.1 can be found at Appendix C.1.

Lemma C.1. Fix ε ∈ ℝ 𝑑 and γ ∈ ℝ2 . Let (𝑧 1 , . . . 𝑧 𝑛 ) be a sequence such that 𝑧 𝑗 = ( α 𝑗 , ε, γ), and
consider
                                         1 X
                               𝐹 (𝑤) =                𝑓 (16) (𝑤; 𝑧 𝑗 ).
                                         𝑛
                                                        𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]

Denote ∇𝑖 𝐹 (𝑤) to be the 𝑖-th element of the gradient ∇𝐹 (𝑤). If I = {𝑖 : ∀ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛], α 𝑗 (𝑖) = 0}, then
for a choice 0 < ε1 < . . . < ε𝑑 we have the following:

   1. ∇𝐹 (0) = γ1 𝑣¯ .
                                             γ
   2. For every 𝑖 ∈ I then ∇𝑖 𝐹 (0) = − 2𝑛1 .

   3. If 𝑖 ∉ I then 0 < ∇𝑖 𝐹 (0) ≤ γ1 .

   4. Suppose for some 𝑘 ∈ I:
                                           X                  X                   X
                                      𝑤=          ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +               µ𝑒 𝑖 +              ξ𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 ,
                                            𝑖∉I             𝑖 ≥𝑘,𝑖 ∈I            𝑖<𝑘,𝑖 ∈I

      where −γ2 < ρ 𝑖 < 0, ξ𝑖 ≤ 0 and, µ > ε𝑑 . Then:

                                                  ∇𝐹 (𝑤) = γ1 𝑣¯ + γ3 𝑒 𝑘 ,

      where 𝑣¯ = 𝑛1
                      P
                          𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] 𝑣 α 𝑗 and 𝑒 𝑘 is the 𝑘-th standard basis vector in ℝ
                                                                                                       𝑑.



                                                            27
                                              Amir Koren Livni




   5. Suppose:                                        X                   X
                                              𝑤=                ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +           ξ𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 ,
                                                         𝑖∉I              𝑖 ∈I

      where −γ2 < ρ 𝑖 < 0 and ξ𝑖 ≤ 0. Then:

                                                      ∇𝐹 (𝑤) = γ1 𝑣¯ .

   First, we address the case of 𝑡 ≤ min{𝑇, 𝐾 }. We will prove by induction on 𝑡 that

                                                                        𝑡−1
                                                                        X
                                         𝑤 𝑡 = −η𝑡 · γ1 𝑣¯ − η                   𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .                             (34)
                                                                          𝑠=1

For 𝑡 = 1 we know that the first GD step takes to 𝑤 1 = −η∇𝐹𝑆 (0). Using Lemma C.1 we get that
𝑤 1 = −ηγ1 𝑣¯ which concludes the base of the induction. For the induction step we assume that 𝑤 𝑡 is
given by Eq. (34). Recall that 0 < 𝑣¯ 𝑖 ≤ 1 for 𝑖 ∉ I and 𝑣¯ 𝑖 = − 2𝑛
                                                                    1
                                                                      for 𝑖 ∈ I. Now observe that 𝑤 𝑡
takes the following form
                            X               Xγ                         X
                                   (𝑡)               1
                     𝑤𝑡 =         ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +                 η𝑡𝑒 𝑖 +                   (−η)𝑒 𝑖
                                               2𝑛
                            𝑖∉I             𝑖 ∈I                    𝑖 ≤𝑖𝑡−1 ,𝑖 ∈I
                            X                 X γ                           X                      γ1
                                   (𝑡)                      1
                        =         ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +                       η𝑡𝑒 𝑖 +                   (−η +         η𝑡)𝑒 𝑖 ,
                                                          2𝑛                                       2𝑛
                            𝑖∉I             𝑖 ≥𝑖𝑡 ,𝑖 ∈I                   𝑖<𝑖𝑡 ,𝑖 ∈I


where −γ1 η𝑡 ≤ ρ 𝑖(𝑡) < 0. One can ensure that all the necessary conditions of the fourth claim in
                                                                                            γ
Lemma C.1 hold, under the assumptions of Lemma 4.1. Namely, that −γ2 < ρ 𝑖(𝑡) < 0, −η + 2𝑛1 η𝑡 ≤
                                                                                                  
       γ
0 and 2𝑛1 η𝑡 > ε𝑑 . Therefore, we can apply Lemma C.1 and obtain that ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ + 𝑒 𝑖𝑡 . The
next iterate is then

                                   𝑤 𝑡+1 = 𝑤 𝑡 − ηγ1 𝑣¯ − η𝑒 𝑖𝑡
                                                                                𝑡
                                                                                X
                                          = −η (𝑡 + 1) · γ1 𝑣¯ − η                        𝑒 𝑖𝑠 ,
                                                                                 𝑠=1

which concludes the first part of the proof. We now address the case of 𝐾 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇 when 𝑇 > 𝐾.
Similarly to the first part, we will prove by induction on 𝑡 that

                                                                        𝐾
                                                                        X
                                         𝑤 𝑡 = −η𝑡 · γ1 𝑣¯ − η                   𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .                             (35)
                                                                          𝑠=1

Starting at 𝑡 = 𝐾 + 1 we know that 𝑤 𝐾 +1 = 𝑤 𝐾 − η∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝐾 ). From the first part of the claim we
can deduce that 𝑤 𝐾 holds Eq. (34) and ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝐾 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ + 𝑒 𝑖𝐾 . Therefore we conclude that

                                                                                                    𝐾
                                                                                                    X
                    𝑤 𝐾 +1 = 𝑤 𝐾 − ηγ1 𝑣¯ − η𝑒 𝑖𝐾 = −η (𝐾 + 1) · γ1 𝑣¯ − η                                 𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .
                                                                                                    𝑠=1


                                                            28
                                     SGD Generalizes Better Than GD




For the induction step we assume that 𝑤 𝑡 holds Eq. (35). Taking advantage of the properties of 𝑣¯ we
have that 𝑤 𝑡 takes the following form
                                    X           Xγ               X
                                         (𝑡)           1
                              𝑤𝑡 =      ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +          η𝑡𝑒 𝑖 +      (−η)𝑒 𝑖
                                                      2𝑛
                                    𝑖∉I         𝑖 ∈I             𝑖 ∈I
                                    X
                                         (𝑡)
                                                X           γ1
                                 =      ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +      (−η + η𝑡)𝑒 𝑖 ,
                                                            2𝑛
                                       𝑖∉I                𝑖 ∈I

where −γ1 η𝑡 ≤ ρ 𝑖(𝑡) < 0. Again, one can ensure that all the necessary conditions of the fifth claim
in Lemma C.1 hold, under the assumptions of Lemma 4.1. Namely, that −γ2 < ρ 𝑖(𝑡) < 0 and
      γ
 −η + 2𝑛1 η𝑡 ≤ 0. Applying Lemma C.1 we obtain that ∇𝐹𝑆 (𝑤 𝑡 ) = γ1 𝑣¯ . We then conclude that
                                     𝑤 𝑡+1 = 𝑤 𝑡 − ηγ1 𝑣¯
                                                                        𝐾
                                                                        X
                                             = −η (𝑡 + 1) · γ1 𝑣¯ − η         𝑒 𝑖𝑠 .
                                                                        𝑠=1

      Because we ignored projections throughout the proof we need to ensure that each 𝑤 𝑡 for 𝑡 =
0, . . . , 𝑇 lies in the Euclidean unit ball. Observe that this is indeed the case, as we get
                        k𝑤 𝑡 k 2 ≤ η2 min{𝑡, 𝐾 } + 𝑑 γ21 η2𝑇 2 ≤ η2 (𝐾 + 𝑑 γ21𝑇 2 ) ≤ 1,

since γ1 ≤    √1    and 𝐾 ≤ 43η2 .
             2 𝑑 η𝑇


C.1. Proof of Lemma C.1
Consider the gradient of 𝑓 (16) (𝑤; 𝑧 𝑗 ) at 𝑤 = 0,
                                       s X                      
                ∇ 𝑓 (16) (0; 𝑧 𝑗 ) = ∇         α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖))            + γ1 𝑣 α 𝑗 + γ3 ∇𝑟 ε (0).
                                          𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                    𝑤=0

Observe that ∇𝑟 ε (𝑤) = 0 for any 𝑤 that satisfies ∀𝑖 ∈ [𝑑] : 𝑤(𝑖) < ε1 . In particular, this holds when
𝑤 = 0. Now, note that for any 𝑤(𝑖) > −γ2 we have ℎγ (𝑤(𝑖)) = 0. Since γ2 > 0, this implies that
                                          s X                       
                          ∀ 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] : ∇             α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤(𝑖))
                                                            2            = 0,
                                                     𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                    𝑤=0

and we obtain ∇ 𝑓 (16) (0; 𝑧 𝑗 ) = γ1 𝑣 α 𝑗 . This concludes the first claim proof, as we get
                                                      γ1 X
                                           ∇𝐹 (0) =           𝑣 α 𝑗 = γ1 𝑣¯ .
                                                      𝑛
                                                            𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]

For 𝑖 ∈ I, note that 𝑣 α 𝑗 (𝑖) = − 2𝑛   1                          1
                                           and therefore 𝑣¯ 𝑖 = − 2𝑛 . In addition, for 𝑖 ∉ I there is at
least one sample 𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] such that α 𝑗 (𝑖) = 1. This entails that for any 𝑖 ∉ I it holds 0 < 𝑣¯ 𝑖 =
 1 P
𝑛    𝑗 ∈ [𝑛] 𝑣 α 𝑗 (𝑖) ≤ 1. Taking both cases conclude the second and third claim proofs. For the fourth
claim we assume that for some 𝑘 ∈ I
                                       X            X            X
                                   𝑤=       ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +      µ𝑒 𝑖 +        ξ𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 .
                                       𝑖∉I            𝑖 ≥𝑘,𝑖 ∈I       𝑖<𝑘,𝑖 ∈I


                                                                29
                                                         Amir Koren Livni




Consider then the gradient at 𝑤

                                                                                       γ1 X
                                       s X                                   
                      1 X
             ∇𝐹 (𝑤) =     ∇                              α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖))         +                 𝑣 α 𝑗 (𝑖) + γ3 ∇𝑟 ε (𝑤).
                      𝑛                                                                𝑛
                             𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]          𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                                     𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]

Let us examine each term separately. We start with the first term,
                        s X                                 sX                   
              1 X                                  1 X
                      ∇        α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖)) =         ∇       α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎ2γ (𝑤(𝑖)) ,
              𝑛                                    𝑛
                   𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]      𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]                                    𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]           𝑖∉I

where we used the fact that for any 𝑖 ∈ I we have α 𝑗 (𝑖) = 0. First, note that this term is independent
in 𝑤(𝑖) for 𝑖 ∈ I. In addition, for any 𝑖 ∉ I we have 𝑤(𝑖) = ρ 𝑖 > −γ2 . This implies that
                                           s X                   
                                 1 X
                                         ∇        α 𝑗 (𝑖)ℎγ (𝑤(𝑖)) = 0.
                                                          2                                         (36)
                                 𝑛
                                           𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]          𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ]

The second term is trivially given by the definition of 𝑣¯ ,
                                         γ1 X
                                                  𝑣 α 𝑗 = γ1 𝑣¯ .
                                          𝑛
                                                            𝑗 ∈ [𝑛]


Recall that 𝑟 ε (𝑤) = max 0, max𝑖 ∈ [𝑑 ] {𝑤(𝑖) − ε𝑖 } and observe the following
                         

                                                              ρ        𝑖 ∉ I;
                                                              𝑖
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                𝑤(𝑖) = µ                𝑖 ∈ I, 𝑖 ≥ 𝑘;
                                                      
                                                       ξ𝑖              𝑖 ∈ I, 𝑖 < 𝑘.
                                                      
                                                      
Since ρ 𝑖 < 0 and ξ𝑖 ≤ 0 the maximum of 𝑤 𝑖 − ε𝑖 can only be achieved for 𝑖 ∈ I, 𝑖 ≥ 𝑘. Specifically,
as ε𝑖 are strictly increasing and µ > ε𝑖 for all 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑], we get that the maximum is given in 𝑖 = 𝑘.
This concludes the fourth claim proof as ∇𝑟 ε (𝑤) = 𝑒 𝑘 . For the last claim we assume
                                           X            X
                                      𝑤=        ρ𝑖 𝑒𝑖 +    ξ𝑖 𝑒 𝑖 .
                                                           𝑖∉I              𝑖 ∈I

Following the same arguments as in the previous claim we get that Eq. (36) holds here as well.
Therefore,

                                                ∇𝐹 (𝑤) = γ1 𝑣¯ + γ3 ∇𝑟 ε (𝑤).

Observe that 𝑤(𝑖) ≤ 0 for any 𝑖 ∈ [𝑑], since ρ 𝑖 < 0 and ξ𝑖 ≤ 0. This implies that ∇𝑟 ε (𝑤) = 0, which
concludes the proof.




                                                                       30
