Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization
Mrinal Kumar1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Bombay, India
mrinalkumar08@gmail.com
Ben Lee Volk
Center for the Mathematics of Information, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA
benleevolk@gmail.com

        Abstract
We study the problem of constructing explicit families of matrices which cannot be expressed as a
product of a few sparse matrices. In addition to being a natural mathematical question on its own,
this problem appears in various incarnations in computer science; the most significant being in the
context of lower bounds for algebraic circuits which compute linear transformations, matrix rigidity
and data structure lower bounds.
    We first show, for every constant d, a deterministic construction in time exp(n1−Ω(1/d) ) of a
family {Mn } of n × n matrices which cannot be expressed as a product Mn = A1 · · · Ad where
the total sparsity of A1 , . . . , Ad is less than n1+1/(2d) . In other words, any depth-d linear circuit
computing the linear transformation Mn · x has size at least n1+Ω(1/d) . This improves upon the
prior best lower bounds for this problem, which are barely super-linear, and were obtained by a long
line of research based on the study of super-concentrators (albeit at the cost of a blow up in the
time required to construct these matrices).
    We then outline an approach for proving improved lower bounds through a certain derandomiza-
tion problem, and use this approach to prove asymptotically optimal quadratic lower bounds for
natural special cases, which generalize many of the common matrix decompositions.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Algebraic complexity theory; Theory
of computation → Circuit complexity

Keywords and phrases Algebraic Complexity, Linear Circuits, Matrix Factorization, Lower Bounds

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2020.5

Related Version A full version of the paper is avaiable at https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.01182.

Acknowledgements A part of this work was done while the first author was at the semester on
Lower Bounds in Computational Complexity at Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing,
Berkeley, USA, and at the Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada. We
thank Swastik Kopparty for an insightful discussion on explicit construction of Sidon sets over finite
fields. We also thank Rohit Gurjar, Nutan Limaye, Srikanth Srinivasan and Joel Tropp for helpful
discussions.


    1    Introduction
This work concerns the following (informally stated) very natural problem:
I Open Problem 1. Exhibit an explicit matrix A ∈ Fn×n , such that A cannot be written as
A = BC, where B ∈ Fn×m and C ∈ Fm×n are sparse matrices.
    Before bothering ourselves with the precise meaning of the words “explicit” and “sparse”
in the above problem, we discuss the various contexts in which this problem presents itself.


1
    A part of this work was done during the semester on Lower Bounds in Computational Complexity at
    Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, Berkeley, USA, and at the Department of Computer
    Science, University of Toronto, Canada.
            © Mrinal Kumar and Ben Lee Volk;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
35th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2020).
Editor: Shubhangi Saraf; Article No. 5; pp. 5:1–5:20
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
5:2   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


      1.1      Linear circuits and matrix factorization
      Algebraic complexity theory studies the complexity of computing polynomials using arithmetic
      operations: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. An algebraic circuit over
      a field F is an acyclic directed graph whose vertices of in-degree 0, also called inputs, are
      labeled by indetermeinates {x1 , . . . , xn } or field elements from F, and every internal node is
      labeled with an arithmetic operation. The circuit computes rational functions in the natural
      way, and the polynomials (or rational functions) computed by the circuit are those computed
      by its vertices of out-degree 0, called the outputs. This framework is general enough to
      encompass virtually all the known algorithms for algebraic computational problems. The
      size of the circuit is defined to be the number of edges in it. For a more detailed background
      on algebraic circuits, see [50].
          Perhaps the simplest non-trivial class of polynomials is the class of linear (or affine)
      functions. Accordingly, such polynomials can be computed by a very simple class of circuits
      called linear circuits: these are algebraic circuits which are only allowed to use addition and
      multiplication by a scalar. It is often convenient to consider graphs with labels on the edges
      as well: every internal node is an addition gate, and for c ∈ F, an edged labeled c from a
      vertex v to a vertex u denotes that the output of v is multiplied by c when feeding into u.
      Thus, every node computes a linear combination of its inputs.
          It is not hard to show that any arithmetic circuit for computing a set of linear functions can
      be converted into a linear circuit with only a constant blow-up in size (see [10], Theorem 13.1;
      eliminating division gates requires that the field F in question is large enough. In this paper
      we will always make this assumption when needed).
          Clearly, every set of n linear functions on n variables (represented by a matrix A ∈ Fn×n )
      can be computed by a linear circuit of size O(n2 ). Using counting arguments (over finite
      fields) or dimension arguments (over infinite fields), it can be shown that for a random or
      generic matrix this upper bound is fairly tight. Thus, a central open problem in algebraic
      complexity theory is to prove any super-linear lower bound for an explicit family of matrices
      {An } where An ∈ Fn×n . The standard notion of explicitness in complexity theory is that
      there is a deterministic algorithm that outputs the matrix An in poly(n) time, although
      more or less stringent definitions can be considered as well.
          Despite decades of research and partial results, such lower bounds are not known.2 In order
      to gain insight into the general model of computation, research has focused on limited models
      of linear circuits, such as monotone circuits, circuits with bounded coefficients, or bounded
      depth circuits. We defer a more thorough discussion on previous work to Subsection 1.5, and
      proceed to describe bounded depth circuits, which are the focus of this work.
          The depth of a circuit is the length (in edges) of a longest path from an input to an
      output. Constant depth circuits appear to be a particularly weak model of computation.
      However, even this model is surprisingly powerful (see also Subsection 1.2).
          The “easiest” non-trivial model is the model of depth-2 linear circuits. A depth 2 linear
      circuit computing a linear transformation A ∈ Fn×n consists of a bottom layer of n input
      gates, a middle layer of m gates, and a top layer of n output gates. We assume, without
      loss of generality, that the circuit is layered, in the sense that every edge goes either from
      the bottom to the middle layer, or from the middle to the top layer. Indeed, every edge
      going directly from the bottom to the top layer can be replaced by a path of length 2; this
      transformation increases the size of the circuit by at most a factor of 2.


      2
          We remark that super-linear lower bounds for general arithmetic circuits are known, but for polynomials
          of high degree [51, 7].
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                            5:3


    By letting C ∈ Fm×n be the adjacency matrix of the (labeled) subgraph between the
bottom and the middle layer, and B ∈ Fn×m be the adjacency matrix as the subgraph
between the middle and the top layer, it is clear that A = BC. Thus, a decomposition of A
into the product of two sparse matrices is equivalent to saying that A has a small depth-2
linear circuit. This argument can be generalized, in exactly the same way, to depth-d circuits
and decompositions of the form A = A1 · · · Ad , for constant d.
    Weak super-linear lower bounds are known for constant depth linear circuits. They are
based on the following observation, due to Valiant [53]: for subsets S, T ⊆ [n] of size k, let
AS,T denote the submatrix of A indexed by rows in S and columns in T . If AS,T has rank
k, the minimal vertex cut in the subcircuit restricted to input from S and outputs from T
is of size at least k: indeed, a smaller cut corresponds to a factorization AS,T = P Q for
P ∈ Fk×r and Q ∈ Fr×k for r < k, contradicting the rank assumption. Using Menger’s
theorem, it is now possible to deduce that if A is a matrix such that for every S, T as above
the matrix AS,T is non-singular, then the circuit computing A contains, for every subcircuit
which corresponds to such S, T , at least k vertex disjoint paths from S to T . Such graphs
were named superconcentrators by Valiant, and their minimal size was extensively studied
[53, 41, 42, 14, 43, 6, 45].
    Superconcentrators of logarithmic depth and linear size do exist, so while this approach
cannot show lower bounds for circuits of logarithmic depth, it is possible to show that for
constant d, any depth-d superconcentrator has size at least n·λd (n), where λd (n) is a function
that unfortunately grows very slowly with n. For example, λ2 (n) = Θ(log2 n/ log log n),
λ3 (n) = Θ(log log n), λ4 (n) = λ5 (n) = log∗ (n), and so on. Such lower bounds apply
for any matrix whose minors of all orders are non-zero, e.g., a Cauchy matrix given by
Ai,j = 1/(xi − yj ) for any distinct x1 , . . . , xn , y1 , . . . , yn . Over finite fields it is possible to
modify the proof and obtain similar lower bounds for matrices defining good error correcting
codes [22].
    These lower bounds on the size of superconcentrators are tight: for every d ∈ N, there
exists a super-concentrator of depth d and size O(n · λd (n)). It is thus impossible to improve
the lower bounds only using this technique.

1.2      Matrix rigidity
A demonstration of the surprising power of depth-2 circuits can be seen using the notion
of matrix rigidity, a pseudorandom property of matrices which we now recall. A matrix
A ∈ Fn×n is (r, s) rigid if A cannot be written as a sum A = R + S where R is a matrix of
rank r, and S is a matrix with at most s non-zero entries. Valiant [54] famously proved that
if A is computed by a linear circuit with bounded fan-in of depth O(log n) and size O(n),
then A is not (εn, n1+δ ) rigid for every ε, δ > 0.3 It follows that an explicit construction of
(εn, n1+δ ) matrix, for some ε, δ > 0, will imply a super-linear lower bound for linear circuits
of depth O(log n). Pudlák [43] observed that similar rigidity parameters will imply even
stronger lower bounds for constant depth circuits. A random matrix (over infinite fields) is
(r, (n − r)2 )-rigid, but the best explicit constructions have rigidity (r, n2 /r · log(n/r)) [21, 47],
which is insufficient for proving lower bounds.
     Observe that a decomposition A = R + S where rank(R) = εn and S is n1+δ -sparse
corresponds to a depth-2 circuit with a very special structure and with at most 2εn2 + n1+δ
edges (this circuit is not layered, but as we explained above, this does not make a significant


3
    In fact, one can obtain slightly better parameters. See, for example, [54] or [16].




                                                                                                                CCC 2020
5:4   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


      difference). In particular, one way of interpreting Valiant’s result is as a non-trivial depth
      reduction from depth O(log n) to depth 2, so that proving any depth-2 Ω(n2 ) lower bound
      for an explicit matrix, will imply a lower bound for depth O(log n).4 This can be seen as the
      linear circuit analog of similar strong depth reduction theorems for general algebraic circuits
      [3, 29, 52, 24].
          However, we would like to argue that proving lower bounds for depth-2 circuits is in fact
      necessary for proving rigidity lower bounds, by observing that upper bounds on the depth-2
      complexity of A give upper bounds on its rigidity parameters. Indeed, suppose A = BC can
      be computed by a depth-2 circuit of size n1+ε . Let m be as before the number of columns of
      B (which equals the number of rows of C), and note that we may assume m ≤ n1+ε , as zero
      columns of B or zero rows of C can be omitted. For i ∈ [m], let Bi denote the i-th column of
                                                  Pm
      B, and Ci the i-th row of C, so that A = i=1 Bi Ci . Fix a constant δ > 0, and say i ∈ [m]
      is dense if either Bi or Ci has more than nε /δ non-zero entries; otherwise, i is sparse. Since
      B can have at most δn columns with sparsity of more than nε /δ, and similarly for the rows
      of C, the number of dense i-s is at most 2δn. It follows that
                 X              X
          A=           Bi C i +      Bi Ci .
                 i dense         i sparse

      The first sum is a matrix of rank at most 2δn, and the second is a matrix whose sparsity
      is at most m · n2ε /δ 2 = n1+3ε /δ 2 . Thus, proving rigidity lower bounds of the type required
      to carry out Valiant’s approach necessarily means proving lower bounds of the form “n1+ε ”
      on the depth-2 complexity of A (we remark that the argument above is very similar to the
      aforementioned result of Pudlák [43]; Pudlák’s argument is stated in a slightly different
      language and in greater generality). Since proving rigidity lower bounds is a long-standing
      open problem, we view the problem of proving an Ω(n1+ε ) lower bound for depth-2 circuits
      as an important milestone towards this.

      1.3      Data structure lower bounds
      The problem of matrix factorization into sparse matrices also appears in the context of
      proving lower bounds for data structures. A dynamic data structure with n inputs and q
      queries is a pair of algorithms whose purpose is to update and retrieve certain data under
      a sequence of operations, while minimizing the memory access. In the group model, it is
      given by a pair of algorithms. The update algorithm is represented by a matrix U ∈ Fs×n .
      Given x ∈ Fn , thought of as assignment of weights to the n inputs, U x computes a linear
      combination of those weights and stores them in memory. The query algorithm is given
      by a matrix Q ∈ Fq×s . Given a query, it computes a linear function of the s memory cells,
      and returns the answer. Hence, an “update” operation followed by a “retrieve” operation
      computes the linear transformation given by A = QU .
          The worst case update time of the database is the maximal number of non-zero elements
      in a column of U , and the worst case query time is the maximal number of non-zero elements
      in a row of Q. The value s denotes the space required by the data structure. It now directly
      follows that a matrix A ∈ Fq×n which cannot be factored as A = QU for a row-sparse Q and
      column-sparse U gives a data structure problem with a lower bound on its worst case query


      4
          We note that this statement makes sense only over large fields, as over fixed finite fields, it is always
          possible to prove an upper bound of O(n2 / log n) on the depth-2 complexity of any matrix [27]. This
          does not contradict the fact that rigid matrices exist over finite fields – a decomposition to R + S is a
          very special type of depth-2 circuit.
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                             5:5


or update time. It is also possible to define an analogous average case notion. Lower bounds
for this model were proved by [19, 20, 40, 39, 30, 31, 32], but none of these results beats the
lower bounds for depth-2 circuits obtained using superconcentrators.
    A related model is that of a static data structures, which is again given by a factorization
A = QP , where now we are interested in trade-offs between the space s of the data structure
and its worst case query time, while not being charged for the total sparsity of P . A recent
work of Dvir, Golovnev and Weinstein [16] showed that proving lower bounds for this model
is related to the problem of matrix rigidity from Subsection 1.2.
    Despite the overall similarity, there are several key technical differences between the
linear circuit complexity and the data structure problems. The first and obvious issue is that
worst-case lower bounds on the update or query time do not necessarily imply that Q or
U are dense matrices: the total sparsity of Q and U is related to the average-case update
and query time. The second, more severe issue, is that in many applications the number
of queries q is polynomially larger than n, while the lower bounds on running time are still
measured as functions of the number of inputs n. This makes sense in the data structure
settings, but from a circuit complexity point of view, a set of say n3 linear functions trivially
requires a circuit of size n3 , and thus a lower bound of say n polylog(n) is meaningless in
that setting.
    This issue also comes up when studying the so-called succinct space setting, where we
require s = n(1 + o(1)). The lower bounds we are aware of for this setting are worst case
lower bounds, and require the number of outputs q to be at least Cn for some C > 1 [23, 16],
so that in the corresponding circuit the number of vertices in the middle layer is required
to be much smaller than the number of outputs, which may be considered quite unnatural.
In particular, we are unaware of any improved lower bounds on the sparsity of matrix
factorization for A ∈ Fn×n when s = n(1 + o(1)) or even s = n which come from the data
structure lower bounds literature.

1.4      Machine learning
We briefly remark that the problem of factorizing a matrix into a product of two or more
sparse matrices is also ubiquitous in machine learning and related areas. Naturally, research
in those areas did not focus on lower bounds but rather on algorithms for finding such
a representation, assuming it exists, sometimes heuristically, and it is usually enough to
approximate the target matrix A. In particular, algorithms have been proposed for the very
related problems of non-negative matrix factorization [33]5 or sparse dictionary learning [36],
and there are also connections to the analysis of deep neural networks [38].

1.5      Previous work
As mentioned in Subsection 1.1, there are no non-trivial known lower bounds for general
linear circuits, and for bounded depth circuits, the best lower bounds follow from the lower
bounds on bounded depth super-concentrators, which are barely super-linear.
    Shoup and Smolensky [49] give a lower bound of Ω(dn1+1/d ) for depth-d circuits computing
a certain linear transformation given by a matrix A ∈ Rn×n . Unfortunately, the matrices
for which their lower bound holds are not explicit from the complexity theoretic point of


5
    It is interesting to observe that for the problem of factorizing matrices into non-negative matrices it is
    quite easy to prove almost-optimal lower bounds even for unbounded depth linear circuits, as mentioned
    in Subsection 1.5




                                                                                                                 CCC 2020
5:6   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


      view, despite having a very succinct mathematical description (for example, one can take
              √
      Ai,j = pi,j for n2 distinct prime numbers pi,j ). For the same matrix, they in fact prove
      super-linear lower bounds for circuits of depth up to polylog(n).
          Quite informally, the intuition behind their lower bounds is that all small bounded depth
      linear circuits can be described as lying in the image of a low-degree polynomial map in
      a small number of variables, and thus, if the elements of A are sufficiently “algebraically
      rich”, for a certain specific measure, A cannot be computed by such a circuit. This same
      philosophy lies behind Raz’s elusive function approach for proving lower bounds for algebraic
      circuits [46]. In particular, among other results, Raz uses an argument which can be seen as
      a modification of the technique of Shoup and Smolensky (as worked out in [50]) to prove
      lower bounds for bounded depth algebraic circuits computing bounded degree polynomials.
          One class of linear circuits which has attracted significant attention is the class of circuits
      with bounded coefficients. Here, the circuit is only allowed to multiply by scalars with
      absolute value of at most some constant. For definiteness, we may assume this constant is 1
      (this does not affect the complexity by more than a constant factor). The earliest result for
      this model is Morgenstern’s ingenious proof [37] of an Ω(n log n) lower bound on bounded
      coefficient circuits computing the discrete Fourier transform matrix (this lower bound is
      matched by the upper bound given by the Cooley-Tukey FFT algorithm, which is a bounded
      coefficient linear circuit). For depth-d circuits, Pudlák [44] has proved lower bounds of the
      form Ω(dn1+1/d ) for the same matrix.
          Another natural subclass which was considered in earlier works is the class of monotone
      linear circuits. These are circuits which are defined over R, and can only use non-negative
      scalars. Chazelle [12] observed that it is possible to prove lower bounds in this model, even
      against unbounded-depth circuits, for any boolean matrix with no large monochromatic
      rectangle. Instantiated with the recent explicit constructions of bipartite Ramsey graphs
      [11, 8, 13, 34], this gives an almost optimal n2−o(1) lower bound against such circuits. The
      main observation in the proof is that if A does not have monochromatic t × t rectangle, then
      since the model is monotone and no cancellations are allowed, every internal node which
      computes a linear function supported on at least t variables cannot be connected to more
      than t output gates.
          For a more detailed survey on these results and some other related results, see the survey
      by Lokam [35].

      1.6    Our results
      In this paper, we prove several results regarding bounded depth linear circuits which we now
      discuss.

      Lower bounds for depth-d linear circuits
      We start by considering general depth-d circuits. We give the first deterministic construction
      in time 2o(n) of matrices which require depth-d circuits of size n1+Ω(1/d) .

      I Theorem 2. Let F be a field. There exists a family of matrices {An }n∈N , which can be
      constructed in time exp(n1−Ω(1/d) ), such that every depth-d linear circuit computing An , even
      over the algebraic closure of F, has size at least n1+Ω(1/d) .
          If F = Q, the entries of A are integers of bit complexity exp(n1−Ω(1/d) ). If F = Fq is a
      finite field, the entries of A are elements of an extension E of F of degree exp(n1−Ω(1/d) ).
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                 5:7


    This theorem is proved in Section 2. We remark again that the previous best lower bounds
against general depth-d linear circuits (for matrices that can be constructed in polynomial
time) are barely super-linear and much weaker than n1+ε . In the recent work of Dvir,
Golovnev and Weinstein [16] it was pointed out that currently there are not even known
constructions of rigid matrices (with parameters that would imply lower bounds) in classes
such as ENP . By arguing directly about circuit size, and not about rigidity, Theorem 2
gives constructions of matrices in a much smaller complexity class, which enjoy the same
bounded-depth complexity lower bounds as would follow from optimal constructions of rigid
matrices using the results of Pudlák [43].
    In a related and independent work, Alman and Chen [4] constructed in PNP (i.e., in
polynomial time and using an NP oracle), for infinitely many n’s, an n × n matrix with
                                                                            1/4−ε
rigidity parameters which suffice for proving a lower bound of Ω(n · 2log(n)      ) on its depth-2
complexity. Compared to their work, our construction lies in an incomparable complexity
class (we do not use an NP oracle at the expense of a longer running time), extends for all
depths d ≥ 2, works for all large enough n, and provides stronger lower bounds. Furthermore,
Alman and Chen use complexity theoretic techniques which are very different from our
algebraic techniques. We refer to [4] for some further discussion on the differences and
similarities.
    While the statement in Theorem 2 holds for any d ≥ 2, for d = 2 there is a much simpler
construction of a hard family of matrices in quasi-polynomial time.

I Theorem 3. Let F be any field and c be any positive constant. Then, there is a family
{An }n∈N of n × n matrices which can be constructed in time exp(O(log2c+1 n)) such that
any depth-2 linear circuit computing An even over the algebraic closure of F has size at least
Ω(n logc n).

    For every constant c ≥ 2, this theorem already improves upon the current best lower
bound of Ω(n log2 n/ log log n) known for this problem (see [45]). This construction is based
on an exponential time construction of a small hard matrix, and then amplifying its hardness
using a direct sum construction (note, however, that over infinite fields even the fact that a
hard matrix can be constructed in exponential time, while not very hard to prove, is not
completely obvious). For completeness, we describe this simple construction in Subsection 2.7.

Lower bounds for restricted depth-2 linear circuits
Given the importance of the model of depth-2 linear circuits, as explained above, and its
resistance to strong lower bounds, we then move on to consider several natural subclasses
of depth-2 circuits. These classes in particular correspond to almost all common matrix
decompositions. We are able to prove asymptotically optimal Ω(n2 ) lower bounds for these
restricted models. As mentioned above, such lower bounds for general depth-2 circuits will
imply super-linear lower bounds for logarithmic depth linear circuits, thus resolving a major
open problem.

Symmetric circuits
A symmetric depth-2 circuit (over R) is a circuit of the form B T B for some B ∈ Rm×n
(considered as a graph, the subgraph between the middle and the top layer is the “mirror
image” of the subgraph between the bottom and middle layer). Over C, one should take the
conjugate transpose B ∗ instead of B T .




                                                                                                     CCC 2020
5:8   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


         Symmetric circuits are a natural computational model for computing positive semi-definite
      (PSD) matrix. Clearly, every symmetric circuit computes a PSD matrix, and every PSD
      matrix has a (non-unique) symmetric circuit. In particular, a Cholesky decomposition of
      PSD matrices corresponds to a computation by a symmetric circuit (of a very special form).
         We prove asymptotically optimal lower bounds for this model.

      I Theorem 4. There exists an explicit family of real n × n PSD matrices {An }n∈N such
      that every symmetric circuit computing An (over R or C) has size Ω(n2 ).

          We do not know whether every depth-2 linear circuit for a PSD matrix can be converted
      to a symmetric circuit with a small blow-up in size. One way to phrase this question is given
      below.

      I Question 5. Is there a constant c < 2, such that every PSD matrix A ∈ Rn×n which can
      be computed by a linear circuit of size s, can be computed by a symmetric circuit of size
      O(sc )?

          A positive answer for Question 5 will imply, using Theorem 4, an Ω(n1+ε ) lower bound
      for depth-2 linear circuits.


      Invertible circuits

      Invertible circuits are circuits of the form BC, where either B or C are invertible (but not
      necessarily both). We stress that invertible circuits can (and do) compute non-invertible
      matrices. In particular, if B ∈ Fn×m and C ∈ Fm×n , here we require m = n.
          Invertible circuits generalize many of the common matrix decompositions, such as QR
      decomposition, eigendecomposition, singular value decomposition6 and LUP decomposition
      (in the case where the matrix L is required to be unit lower triangular).7
          We prove optimal lower bounds for invertible circuits.

      I Theorem 6. Let F be a large enough field. There exists an explicit family of n × n matrices
      {An }n∈N over F such that every invertible circuit computing An has size Ω(n2 ).

         If A is an invertible matrix, then clearly every depth-2 circuit with m = n must be an
      invertible circuit. However, our technique for proving Theorem 6 crucially requires the hard
      matrix A to be non-invertible.


      1.7    Proof Overview
      Our proofs rely on a few different ideas coming from algebraic complexity theory, coding
      theory, arithmetic combinatorics and the theory of derandomization. We now discuss some
      of the key aspects.


      6
        A diagonal matrix can be multiplied with the matrix to its left or to its right, without increasing the
        sparsity, to obtain an invertible depth-2 circuit.
      7
        The sparsity of U P equals the sparsity of U , as P simply permutes the columns of U , so every LU P
        decomposition corresponds to the invertible depth-2 circuit given by L(U P ).
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                 5:9


Shoup-Smolensky dimension
For the proof of Theorem 2, we rely on the notion of Shoup-Smolensky dimension as a
measure of complexity of matrices. Shoup-Smolensky dimensions are a family of measures,
parametrized by t ∈ N, of “algebraic richness” of the entries of a matrix (see Definition 8 for
details), which is supposed to capture the intuition that matrices with small circuits should
depend on a few “parameters” and thus should not posses much richness.
    Shoup and Smolensky [49] showed that for an appropriate choice of parameters, this
measure is non-trivially small for linear transformations with small linear circuits of depth at
most poly(log n). Informally, as the order t gets larger, this measure becomes useful against
stronger models of computation; however, it also becomes harder to construct matrices which
have a large complexity with respect to this measure (and hence cannot be computed by a
small linear circuit). Shoup and Smolensky do this by constructing hard matrices which do
not have small bit complexity (and hence this construction is not complexity theoretically
explicit) but do have short and succinct mathematical description.
    For our proof, we first observe that for bounded depth circuits it suffices to use much
smaller order t than what Shoup and Smolensky used. This observation was also made by
Raz [46] in a similar context, but using the language of elusive functions.
    We then use this observation to “derandomize”, in a certain sense, an exponential time
construction of a hard matrix, by giving deterministic constructions of matrices with large
Shoup-Smolensky dimension.
    A key ingredient of our proof is a connection between the notion of Sidon Sets in
arithmetic combinatorics and Shoup-Smolensky dimension (see Subsection 2.4 for details).
Our construction is in two steps. In the first step we construct matrices with entries in F[y]
which have a large Shoup-Smolensky dimension over F, and degree of every entry is not
too large. In the next step, we go from these univariate matrices to a matrix with entries
in an appropriate low degree extension of F while still maintaining the Shoup-Smolensky
dimension over F. Our construction of hard matrices over the field of complex numbers is
based on similar ideas but differs in some minor details.


Lower bounds via Polynomial Identity Testing
Our proofs for Theorem 4 and Theorem 6 are based on a derandomization argument.
Connections between derandomization and lower bounds are prevalent in algebraic and
Boolean complexity, but in our current setting they have not been widely studied before.
     We say that a set H of n × n matrices is a hitting set for a class C of matrices if for every
                                                         P
non-zero A ∈ C there is H ∈ H such that hA, Hi := i,j Ai,j Hi,j 6= 0.
     Every class C has a hitting set of size n2 , namely the indicator matrices of each of the
entries. A hitting set is non-trivial if its size is at most n2 − 1. Observe that a non-trivial
hitting set for C gives an efficient algorithm for finding a matrix M 6∈ C, by finding a non-zero
A such that hA, Hi = 0 for every H ∈ H. Such an A exists and can be found in polynomial
time because the set H imposes at most n2 − 1 homogeneous linear constraints on the
n2 entries of A. This argument is a special case of a more general theorem showing how
efficient algorithms for black box polynomial identity testing give lower bounds for algebraic
circuits [1, 26].
     In practice, it is often convenient (although by no means necessary) to consider hitting
sets that contain only rank 1 matrices xyT , since A, xyT = xT Ay, and thus we find
ourselves in the more familiar territory of polynomial identity testing, trying to construct a
hitting set for the class of polynomials of the form xT Ay for A ∈ C. This approach was also



                                                                                                     CCC 2020
5:10   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       taken by Forbes and Shpilka [18], who considered this exact problem where C is the class of
       low-rank matrices, and remarked that hitting sets for the class of low-rank matrices plus
       sparse matrices will give an explicit construction of a rigid matrix.
          We carry out this idea for two different classes in the proofs of Theorem 4 and Theorem 6.
       However, the following problem remains open.
       I Open Problem 7. For some 0 < ε ≤ 1, construct an explicit hitting set of size at most
       n2 − 1 for the class of n × n matrices A which can be written as A = BC where B, C have
       at most n1+ε non-zero entries.
           A solution to Open Problem 7 will imply lower bounds of the form n1+ε for an explicit
       matrix. If ε = 1, this will imply lower bounds for logarithmic depth linear circuits.
           A useful ingredient in our constructions is the use of maximum distance separable (MDS)
       codes (for example, Reed-Solomon codes), as their dual subspace is a small dimensional
       subspace which does not contain sparse non-zero vectors. Over the reals, it is also easy to
       give such construction based on the well known Descartes’ rule of signs which says that a
       sparse univariate real polynomial cannot have too many real roots. We refer the reader
       to Subsection 3.1 for details.

        2     Lower bounds for constant depth linear circuits
       In this section, we prove Theorem 2. We start by describing the notion of Shoup-Smolensky
       dimension, but first we set up some notation.

       2.1    Notation
       We work with matrices whose entries lie in an appropriate extension of a base finite field Fp .
       We follow the natural convention that the elements of this extension will be represented as
       univariate polynomials of appropriate degree over the base field, and the arithmetic is done
       modulo an explicitly given irreducible polynomial.
          We use boldface letters (x, y) to denote vectors. The length of the vectors is understood
       from the context.
          For a matrix M , kM k0 denotes the number of non-zero entries in M .

       2.2    Shoup-Smolensky Dimension
       A useful concept will be the notion of Shoup-Smolensky dimension of sequences of elements
       of an extension E of a field F.
       I Definition 8 (Shoup-Smolensky dimension). Let F be a field, and E be an extension field of
       F. Let S = (a1 , . . . , am ) a sequence of elements of E. For t ∈ N, denote by Πt (S) the set of
       t-wise products of distinct entries of S that is,
                                                             
                   Y  t                                      
          Πt (S) =          aij : 1 ≤ i1 < i2 < · · · < it ≤ m .
                                                             
                      j=1

       The Shoup-Smolensky dimension of S of order t, denoted by Γt,F (S) is defined to be the
       dimension, over F, of the vector space spanned by Πt (S).
          We also denote by Σt (S) the number of distinct elements of E that can be obtained by
       summing distinct elements of Πt (S).
          When M ∈ En×n is a matrix we also regard it as a sequence of m = n2 elements of E
       (under some order on the entries) and refer to the Shoup-Smolensky dimension of M .
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                                5:11


2.3       Upper bounding the Shoup-Smolensky dimension for Sparse
          Products
The following lemma shows that any matrix computable by a depth-d linear circuit of size at
most s has a somewhat small Shoup-Smolensky dimension.
I Lemma 9. Let F be a field, E an extension of F and A ∈ En×n be a matrix such that
     Qd                            Pd
A = i=1 Pi for Pi ∈ Eni ×mi , where i=1 kPi k0 ≤ s. Then, for every t ≤ n2 /4 such that
s ≥ dt it holds that
                         t
   Γt,F (A) ≤ ed (2s/dt)d .
Proof. Since
             d
                  !                                               d−1
                                                                                        !
           Y                            X                         Y
   Ai,j =      P`                =                  (P1 )i,k1 ·         (P` )k`−1 ,k`       · (Pd )kd−1 ,j ,
             `=1           i,j       k1 ,...,kd−1                 `=2

every element in Πt (A) is a sum of monomials of degree dt in the entries of P1 , P2 , . . . , Pd ,
that is,
          d
               !           
         Y           s + dt
   Γt,F      Pi ≤             ,
         i=1
                       dt
with the right hand
                   side being the number of monomials of degree dt in s variables. Using
                n           k
the inequality k ≤ (en/k) ,
                                           t
   Γt,F (A) ≤ (e(1 + s/dt))dt ≤ ed (2s/dt)d .                                           J
    Over Q, we do not wish to use field extensions (which would give rise to elements with
infinite bit complexity). Thus, we use a similar argument that replaces the measure Γt,F
with Σt (recall Definition 8) for a small tolerable penalty.
                                                                                  Qd
I Lemma 10. Let d be a positive integer. Let A ∈ Qn×n be a matrix such that A = i=1 Pi
                             d
for Pi ∈ Qni ×mi , where i=1 kPi k0 ≤ s. Assume that for each i, ni ≤ n2 and mi ≤ n2 .
                          P

Then, for every t ≤ n2 /4 such that s ≥ dt it holds that
                   3   d             d t
   Σt (A) ≤ 22n ·(e (2s/dt) ) .

Proof. We follow the same steps as in the proof of Lemma 9, replacing the measure Γt,F (A)
by Σt (A). As before,
             d
                  !                         d−1
                                                             !
            Y             X                 Y
   Ai,j =      P`     =         (P1 )i,k1 ·     (P` )k`−1 ,k` · (Pd )kd−1 ,j .
             `=1           i,j       k1 ,...,kd−1                 `=2

Every element in Πt (A) can be written as
   X
        cα · α                                                                                                 (1)
   α∈M

where M is the set of monomials of degree dt in the entries of P1 , P2 , . . . , Pd , and each cα is a
                                                       3
non-negative integer of absolute value at most sdt ≤ 2n (since s ≤ n2 d and d is O(1)). It now
                                                                                             3       3
follows that each element in Σt (A) has the same form as in (1), with cα ≤ |Πt (A)| · 2n ≤ 22n
. We conclude that
                 3   s+dt
    Σ (A) ≤ (22n )( dt ) ,
      t

which implies the statement of the lemma using the same bounds on binomial coefficients as
in Lemma 9.                                                                             J

   We now move on to describe constructions of matrices which have large Shoup-Smolensky
dimension, and then deduce lower bounds for them.

                                                                                                                     CCC 2020
5:12   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       2.4    Sidon sets and hard univariate matrices
       In this section, we describe a construction of a matrix G ∈ F[y]n×n which has a large value
       of Γt,F . Let us denote Gi,j = y ei,j for some non-negative integer ei,j . For G to have a large
       Shoup-Smolensky dimension of order t, the set S = {e1,1 , e1,2 , . . . , en,n } ⊆ N should have the
       property that S (t) := {a1 + a2 + . . . + at : ai ∈ S distinct} has size comparable to |S|   t . A
       set S such that every subset of size t of S has a distinct sum is called a t-wise Sidon set.
       These are very well studied objects in arithmetic combinatorics, and explicit constructions
       are known for them in poly(n) time (e.g., Lemma 60 in [9]). However, another important
       parameter in the construction is the degree of y, and such a set will inevitably contain
       integers of size roughly nΩ(t) . Thus, the construction of G would take time which is not
       polynomially bounded in n. Below we give an elementary construction of such a set in time
       nO(t) (cf. [2]).

       I Lemma 11. Let t be a positive integer. There is a set S ⊆ N of size m such that:
       1. S (t) := {a1 + a2 + . . . + at : ai ∈ S distinct} has size m t .
       2. The maximal element in S is at most mO(t) .
       3. S can be constructed in time mO(t) .

       Proof. Let S 0 = 1, 2, 22 , . . . , 2m−1 . Clearly, every subset of S 0 has a distinct sum. For
                         

       a prime p we denote Sp = S 0 mod p = {a mod                   0
                                                         p : a ∈ S }, and we claim that there exists
                       O(t)                    (t)    m
       a prime p ≤ m        such that |(Sp ) | = t . Since this condition can be checked in time
       mO(t) , this would immediately imply the statement of the lemma, by checking this condition
       for every p ≤ mO(t) and letting S = Sp for a p which satisfies this condition.
           For every subset T ⊆ S 0 of size t, let σT denote the sum of its elements, and observe that
       σT ≤ 2m . Clearly, σT mod p = σT 0 mod p if and only if p | σT − σT 0 , so it is enough to show
       that there exists p ≤ mO(t) which does not divide
                     Y
           N :=           (σT − σT 0 ),
                  T 6=T 0 ⊆S 0
                 |T |=|T 0 |=t

       and therefore does not divide any of the terms on the right hand size. It further holds that
                     mO(t)     O(t)
       0 6= N ≤ (2m )      = 2m , so the existence of p now follows from the fact that N can have
       at most log N = mO(t) distinct prime divisors, and from the prime number theorem.         J

         Given the above construction of t-wise Sidon sets, we now describe the construction of
       matrices with univariate polynomial entries which has large Shoup-Smolensky dimension.

       I Construction 12. Let S = {ei,j : i, j ∈ [n]} be a t-wise Sidon set of positive integers of size
       n2 as in Lemma 11. Then, the matrix Gt,n ∈ F[y]n×n is defined as follows as (Gt )i,j = y ei,j .

          The useful properties of Construction 12 are given by the following lemma.

       I Lemma 13. Let t ≤ n be a parameter, S ⊆ N be a t-wise Sidon set of size n2 and let Gt,n
       be the matrix defined in Construction 12. Then, the following are true.
        1. Every entry of Gt,n is a monomial of degree at most nO(t) .
                              2
                                  2 t
        2. Γt,F ((Gt,n )) ≥ nt ≥ nt .

       Proof. The first item follows from the definition of Gt,n and the properties of the set S
       in Lemma 11. The second item also follows from the properties of S and the definition of
       Shoup-Smolensky dimension, since every t-wise product of elements of Gt,n gives a distinct
       monomial in y, and thus they are all linearly independent over the base field F.        J
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                          5:13


2.5      Hard matrices over finite fields
From the univariate matrix in Construction 12, we now construct, for every p and parameter
t, a matrix M over an extension of Fp which has large Shoup-Smolensky dimension over Fp
with the same parameters as Gt,n .

I Lemma 14. Let p be a prime, and t be any positive integer. There is a matrix Mt,n ∈ En×n
over an extension E of Fp of degree exp (O(t log n)), which can be deterministically constructed
in time nO(t) , and satisfies
                                  t
                             n2
                         
     Γt,Fp (Mt,n ) ≥
                              t

Proof. Let Gt,n be as in Construction 12, and let ∆ be the maximum degree of any entry
of Gt,n . Set D = 10 · t · ∆ = exp (O(t log n)). We use Shoup’s algorithm (see Theorem 3.2
in [48]) to construct an irreducible polynomial g(z) of degree D + 1 over Fp in deterministic
poly(D, |Fp |) time. Let α be a root of g(z) in an extension E of Fp , where E ≡ Fp [z]/hg(z)i.8
Then, it follows that 1, α, α2 , . . . , αD are linearly independent over F.
    The matrix Mt,n is obtained from Gt by just replacing every occurrence of the variable
                                                                                 2 t
y by α. We now need to argue that Mt,n continues to satisfy Γt,Fp (Mt,n ) ≥ nt . By the
choice of α, it immediately follows that Γt,Fp (Mt,n ) = Γt,Fp (Gt,n ), since every monomial in
the set Πt (Mt,n ) is mapped to a distinct power of α in {0, 1, . . . , D}, which are all linearly
independent over Fp .
   The upper bound on the running time needed to construct Mt,n now follows from the
upper bound on the degree of the extension E, and from Lemma 11.                                J

The following theorem now directly follows.

I Theorem 15. Let p be any prime and d ≥ 2 be a positive integer. Then, there exists a
                                                                      1−1/2d
family of matrices {An }n∈N which can be constructed in time nO(n            )
                                                                               such that every
                                                             1+1/2d
depth-d linear circuit Fp computing An has size at least Ω(n        ). Moreover, the entries
of An lie in an extension of Fp of degree at most exp(O(n1−1/2d log n)).

Proof. We invoke Lemma 14 with parameter t set to n1−1/2d to get matrices {An } in time
nO(t) with the following lower bound on their Shoup-Smolensky dimension.
                               t
                          n2
                     
     Γt,Fp (Mn ) ≥                    .
                           t

If there is a depth d linear circuit of size s computing the linear transformation An · x, the
following inequality must hold (from Lemma 9),
                                      t
                                 n2
                             
                    t
      ed (2s/dt)d        ≥                 .                                                            (2)
                                  t

If s ≤ n1+1/2d /2, we have,
                    t
      ed (2s/dt)d        ≤ (O(e/d))dt · nt .


8
    We identify the elements of E with coefficient vectors of polynomials of degree at most D in Fp [z], and
    in this representation α is identified with the polynomial z.




                                                                                                               CCC 2020
5:14   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       We also have,
                     t
                n2
                                 t
                          ≥ n1+1/2d .
                 t

       For any constant d, these estimates contradict Equation 2, thereby implying a lower bound
       of Ω(n1+1/2d ) on s.                                                                    J


       2.6       Hard matrices over C
       An analog for Lemma 14 can be proved over C by constructing a matrix whose Σt -measure
       (rather than Γt,F as before) is large. The full statement and its proof appear in the full
       version of the paper. The analog of Theorem 15 for C is given below, with the proof again
       deferred to the full version.

       I Theorem 16. There exists a family of matrices {An }n∈N over Q which can be constructed
                      1−1/2d
       in time nO(n          )
                               such that every depth-d linear circuit C computing An has size at least
            1+1/2d
       Ω(n         ). Moreover, the entries of An are positive integers of bit complexity at most
       exp(O(n1−1/2d log n)).


       2.7       Lower bounds for depth-2 linear circuits
       The lower bounds of Theorem 16 and Theorem 15 apply to any constant depth. However, here
       we briefly remark that in the special case of d = 2 there is in fact a much simpler construction.
       As discussed in the introduction,
                                      for2 depth-2
                                                      linear circuits, the best lower bounds currently
                                         log n
       known is a lower bound of Ω n log   log n   based  on the study of super-concentrator graphs in
       the work of Radhakrishnan and Ta-Shma [45].
          In the full version of the paper, we give two simple constructions of matrices in quasi-
       polynomial time which improve upon this bound.


        3        Lower bounds via Hitting Sets

       In this section, we prove lower bounds for several classes of depth 2 circuits using hitting
       sets for matrices. We first recall the definition.

       I Definition 17 (Hitting set for matrices, [18]). Let C ⊆ Fn×n be a set of matrices. A set
       H ⊆ Fn × Fn is said to be a hitting set for C, if for every non-zero M ∈ C, there is a pair
       (a, b) ∈ H such that
                                X
            ha, M · bi =                   Mi,j ai bj 6= 0.
                             i∈[n],j∈[m]



       3.1       Matrices with no sparse vectors in their kernel
       In this section, we recall some simple, deterministic and efficient constructions of matrices
       which do not have any sparse non-zero vector in their kernel. Such a construction forms the
       basic building block for building hard instances of matrices for various cases of the matrix
       factorization problem that we discuss in the rest of this paper. We start by describing such a
       construction over the field of real numbers.
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                    5:15


3.1.1     Construction over R
The following is a weak form of a classical lemma of Descartes.

I Lemma 18 (Descartes’ rule of signs). Let d1 < d2 < · · · < dk be non-negative integers, and
let a1 , a2 , . . . , ak be arbitrary real numbers. Then, the number of distinct positive roots of the
                  Pk
polynomial i=1 ai xdi is at most k − 1.

Lemma 18 immediately gives the following construction of a small set of vectors, such that
not all of them can lie in the kernel of any matrix with at least one sparse row.
                                                          
I Lemma 19. For i ∈ [n], let vi := 1, i, i2 , . . . , in−1 ∈ Rn . Then, for every 1 ≤ s ≤ n and
for every m × n matrix B over real numbers that has a non-zero row with at most s non-zero
entries, there is an i ∈ [s] such that B · vi 6= 0.

Proof. Let (a0 , a1 , . . . , an−1 ) ∈ Rn be any non-zero vector with at most s non zero entries.
                                 Pn−1
So, the polynomial P (x) = i=0 ai xi has sparsity at most s. From Lemma 18, it follows that
P has at most s − 1 positive real roots. Therefore, there exists an i ∈ [s] such that i is not a
root of P (x), i.e., P (i) 6= 0. The lemma now follows immediately by taking (a0 , a1 , . . . , an−1 )
to be any non-zero s-sparse row of B.                                                              J

We remark that Lemma 19 also holds for matrices over C which have a sparse non-zero row
for the choice of the vectors vi as above. This follows from the application of Lemma 18
separately for the real and complex parts of a sparse complex polynomial, both of which are
individually sparse, with real coefficients and at least one of them is not identically zero. This
observation extends our results over R in Subsection 3.2 to the field of complex numbers.

3.1.2     Construction over finite fields
We now recall some basic properties of Reed-Solomon codes, and observe they can be used
as well in lieu of the construction in Lemma 19.
    The proofs for these properties can be found in any standard reference on coding theory,
e.g., Chapter 5 in [25].

I Definition 20 (Reed Solomon codes). Let Fq = {α0 , α1 , . . . , αq−1 } be the finite field with q
elements and let k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , q − 1}. The Reed-Solomon code of block length q and dimension
k are defined as follows.

    RSq [q, k] = {(P (α0 ), P (α1 ), . . . , P (αq−1 )) : P (z) ∈ Fq [z], deg(P ) ≤ k − 1}.

I Lemma 21. Let Fq be the finite field with q elements and let k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , q − 1}. The
linear space RSq [q, k] as in Definition 20 satisfies the following properties.
    Every non-zero vector in RSq [q, k] has at least q − k + 1 non-zero coordinates.
    The dual of RSq [q, k] is the space of Reed Solomon codes of block length q and dimension
    q − k.

I Lemma 22. Let Fq = {α0 , α1 , . . . , αq−1 } be the finite field with q elements. For any
                                                                               2              k−1
k ≤ q − 1, let Gk be the q × k matrix over Fq whose i-th row is (1, αi−1 , αi−1    , . . . , αi−1 ).
                                q                       T
Then, every non-zero vector in Fq in the kernel of (Gk ) has at least k+1 non-zero coordinates.

Proof. Observe that Gk is the precisely the generator matrix of Reed Solomon codes of block
length q and dimension k over Fq . In particular, the linear space RSq [q, k] as in Lemma 21
is spanned by the columns of Gk . Thus any vector w in the kernel of (Gk )T is in fact a



                                                                                                         CCC 2020
5:16   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       codeword of the dual of these codes, which as we know from Item 2 of Lemma 21, is itself a
       Reed Solomon code of block length q and dimension q − k. From the first item of Lemma 21,
       it now follows that w has at least k + 1 non-zero coordinates.                          J

       The following lemma is an analog of Lemma 19.

       I Lemma 23. Let Fq = {α0 , α1 , . . . , αq−1 } be the finite field with q elements, s ∈ [q] be a
       parameter and let vi be the i-th column of the matrix Gk as in Lemma 22 for k = s.
           Then, for every m × n matrix B over Fq that has a non-zero row with at most s non zero
       entries, there is an i ∈ [s] such that B · vi 6= 0.

       Proof. The proof follows from the observation that any non-zero vector orthogonal to all
       the vectors v1 , v2 , . . . , vs must be in the kernel of the matrix GTs and hence by Lemma 22
       must have at least s + 1 non-zero entries.                                                  J

       3.2    Lower bounds for symmetric circuits
       We now prove our lower bounds for symmetric circuits. Recall that a symmetric circuit is a
       linear depth-2 circuit of the form B T B.

       I Theorem 24. There is an explicit family of positive semidefinite matrices {Mn } such that
       every symmetric circuit computing Mn has size at least n2 /4.

           For the proof of this theorem, we give an efficient deterministic construction of a hitting
       set H for the set of matrices which factor as B T · B for B of sparsity less than n2 /4, and as
       outlined in Subsection 1.7, we construct a hard matrix M = M̃ T · M̃ which is not hit by
       such a hitting set and has a high rank.
           We start by describing the construction of M .

       I Lemma 25. Let {vi : i ∈ [n]} be the set of vectors defined in Lemma 19. There exists an
       explicit PSD matrix M of rank n/2 such that viT M vi = 0 for i ∈ [n/2].

       Proof. We wish to find a matrix M̃ of high rank such that M̃ vi = 0 for i = 1, . . . , n/2. This
       can be done by completing {vi : i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n/2}} to a basis (in an arbitrary way) and
       requiring that the other n/2 basis elements are mapped to linearly independent vectors under
       M̃ . Conveniently, the set {vi : i ∈ [n]} is itself a basis for Rn : the matrix V whose rows are
       the vi ’s is a Vandermonde matrix.
           We now describe this in some more detail. For i ∈ [n], let ei by the i-th elementary basis
       vector. For a set of n2 variables Y = (yi,j )n×n consider the system of (non-homogeneous)
       linear equations on the variables Y given by the n constraints.

          Y · vi = 0    for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n/2}
          Y · vi = ei   for i ∈ {n/2 + 1, . . . , n} .

            Since the vectors {vi : i ∈ [n]} are linearly independent, this system has a solution, which
       can be found in polynomial time using basic linear algebra. More explicitly the j-th row
       of Y , yj , is given by the solution to the linear system V · (yj )T = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ n/2 and
       V · (yj )T = ej for n/2 + 1 ≤ j ≤ n where V is the Vandermonde matrix whose rows are the
       vi ’s. Let M̃ be the matrix whose rows are the solution to the system above. Also, note that
       the rank of M̃ is at least n/2, as linearly independent vectors en/2+1 , en/2+2 , . . . , en are in
       the image of the linear transformation given by M̃ .
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                               5:17


   Now let M = (M̃ T ) · M̃ , so that indeed M is a positive semi-definite matrix, and
rank M = n/2 as well. It immediately follows that

     viT M vi = (viT M̃ T )(M̃ vi ) = 0.                                                       J

     We are now ready to prove Theorem 24.

Proof of Theorem 24. Let M be the matrix from Lemma 25. Let B ∈ Rm×n be real matrix
such that kBk0 < n2 /4, and suppose towards contradiction that M = B T B.
   It follows that the rank of B must be at least n/2. Thus, B must have at least n/2
non-zero rows. Now, since the total sparsity of B is at most n2 /4 − 1, there must be a
non-zero row of B with sparsity at most (n2 /4 − 1)/(n/2) ≤ n/2. From Lemma 19, it follows
that there is an i ∈ [n/2] such that B · vi is non-zero. Thus, for this index i, we have that
                             2
     viT (B T B)vi = kBvi k2 6= 0,

contradicting Lemma 25.                                                                        J

    We remark that the proof of Theorem 24 goes through almost verbatim for symmetric
circuits over C (recall that over C these are circuits of form B ∗ B, where B ∗ is the conjugate
transpose of B).

3.3     Lower bounds for invertible circuits
Recall that an invertible circuit is a circuit of them form BC where either B or C is invertible.
In this section, we prove Theorem 6, which shows a quadratic lower bound for such circuits.
For convenience, we restate the theorem.

I Theorem 26. There exists an explicit family of n × n matrices {An }, over any field F
such that F ≥ poly(n), such that every invertible circuit computing An has size n2 /4.

     The proof of this theorem appears in the full version of the paper.

 4      Open Problems
An important problem that continues to remain open is to prove a lower bound of the form
Ω(n1+ε ) for some constant ε > 0 for the depth-2 complexity of an explicit matrix. Such a
lower bound would follow from an explicit hitting set of size at most n2 − 1 for the class of
polynomials of the form xT BCy such that kBk0 + kCk0 ≤ n1+ε .
    Another natural question here is to understand if this PIT based approach can be used for
explicit constructions of rigid matrices, which improve the state of art. One concrete question
in this direction would be to construct explicit hitting sets for the set of matrices which are
not (r, s) rigid for rs > ω(n2 log(n/r)). Using the techniques in this paper, it is possible
to construct hitting sets of size O(rs) for matrices which are not (r, s) rigid. But, this is
non-trivial only when rs ≤ cn2 for some constant c < 1, which is a regime of parameters
for which explicit construction of rigid matrices is already known. A sequence of recent
results [5, 15, 17] showed that many natural candidates for rigid matrices that posses certain
symmetries are in fact not as rigid as suspected. This approach might circumvent these
obstacles by giving an explicit construction which is not ruled out by these results.
    A lower bound of s on the size of depth d linear circuits computing the linear transformation
Ax implies a lower bound of Ω(s) for depth Ω(d) algebraic circuits computing the degree-2
polynomial yT Ax [7, 28] (so, we can convert lower bounds for circuits with n outputs to



                                                                                                    CCC 2020
5:18   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       lower bounds for circuits with 1 output). A notable open problem in algebraic complexity,
       which is very related to this work, is to prove any super-linear lower bound for algebraic
       circuits of depth O(log n) computing a polynomial with constant total degree. We refer
       to [46] for a discussion on the importance of this problem.


            References
        1   Manindra Agrawal. Proving Lower Bounds Via Pseudo-random Generators. In Proceedings
            of the 25th International Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical
            Computer Science (FSTTCS 2005), pages 92–105, 2005. doi:10.1007/11590156_6.
        2   Manindra Agrawal, Rohit Gurjar, Arpita Korwar, and Nitin Saxena. Hitting-sets for ROABP
            and sum of set-multilinear circuits. SIAM J. Comput., 44(3):669–697, 2015. doi:10.1137/
            140975103.
        3   Manindra Agrawal and V. Vinay. Arithmetic circuits: A chasm at depth four. In Proceedings
            of the 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2008),
            pages 67–75, 2008. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.32.
        4   Josh Alman and Lijie Chen. Efficient construction of rigid matrices using an np oracle. In
            Proceedings of the 60th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS
            2019), 2019. URL: http://joshalman.com/AlmanChenFOCS19.pdf.
        5   Josh Alman and R. Ryan Williams. Probabilistic rank and matrix rigidity. In Proceedings
            of the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2017), pages 641–652.
            ACM, 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055484.
        6   Noga Alon and Pavel Pudlák. Superconcentrators of depths 2 and 3; odd levels help (rarely).
            J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 48(1):194–202, 1994. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80027-3.
        7   Walter Baur and Volker Strassen. The complexity of partial derivatives. Theoretical Computer
            Science, 22:317–330, 1983. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(83)90110-X.
        8   Avraham Ben-Aroya, Dean Doron, and Amnon Ta-Shma. An efficient reduction from two-
            source to non-malleable extractors: achieving near-logarithmic min-entropy. In Proceedings of
            the 49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2017), pages 1185–1194.
            ACM, 2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055423.
        9   Nader H. Bshouty. Testers and their applications. In Innovations in Theoretical Computer
            Science, ITCS’14, 2014, pages 327–352, 2014. doi:10.1145/2554797.2554828.
       10   Peter Bürgisser, Michael Clausen, and Mohammad A. Shokrollahi. Algebraic Complexity
            Theory, volume 315 of Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Springer-Verlag,
            1997. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-03338-8.
       11   Eshan Chattopadhyay and David Zuckerman. Explicit two-source extractors and resilient
            functions. In Proceedings of the 48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
            (STOC 2016), pages 670–683. ACM, 2016. doi:10.1145/2897518.2897528.
       12   Bernard Chazelle. The discrepancy method - randomness and complexity. Cambridge University
            Press, 2001. URL: https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~chazelle/pubs/book.pdf.
       13   Gil Cohen. Towards optimal two-source extractors and ramsey graphs. In Proceedings of the
            49th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2017), pages 1157–1170. ACM,
            2017. doi:10.1145/3055399.3055429.
       14   Danny Dolev, Cynthia Dwork, Nicholas Pippenger, and Avi Wigderson. Superconcentrators,
            generalizers and generalized connectors with limited depth (preliminary version). In Proceedings
            of the 15th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 1983), pages 42–51.
            ACM, 1983. doi:10.1145/800061.808731.
       15   Zeev Dvir and Benjamin Edelman. Matrix rigidity and the croot-lev-pach lemma. CoRR,
            abs/1708.01646, 2017. arXiv:1708.01646.
       16   Zeev Dvir, Alexander Golovnev, and Omri Weinstein. Static data structure lower bounds
            imply rigidity. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 25:188, 2018.
            URL: https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/188.
M. Kumar and B. L. Volk                                                                                5:19


17   Zeev Dvir and Allen Liu. Fourier and circulant matrices are not rigid. CoRR, abs/1902.07334,
     2019. arXiv:1902.07334.
18   Michael A. Forbes and Amir Shpilka. On identity testing of tensors, low-rank recovery and
     compressed sensing. In Howard J. Karloff and Toniann Pitassi, editors, Proceedings of the
     44th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2012), pages 163–172. ACM,
     2012. doi:10.1145/2213977.2213995.
19   Michael L. Fredman. The complexity of maintaining an array and computing its partial sums.
     J. ACM, 29(1):250–260, 1982. doi:10.1145/322290.322305.
20   Michael L. Fredman and Michael E. Saks. The cell probe complexity of dynamic data structures.
     In David S. Johnson, editor, Proceedings of the 21st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing (STOC 1989), pages 345–354. ACM, 1989. doi:10.1145/73007.73040.
21   Joel Friedman. A note on matrix rigidity. Combinatorica, 13(2):235–239, June 1993. doi:
     10.1007/BF01303207.
22   Anna Gál, Kristoffer Arnsfelt Hansen, Michal Koucký, Pavel Pudlák, and Emanuele Viola. Tight
     bounds on computing error-correcting codes by bounded-depth circuits with arbitrary gates.
     IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 59(10):6611–6627, 2013. doi:10.1109/TIT.2013.2270275.
23   Anna Gál and Peter Bro Miltersen. The cell probe complexity of succinct data structures.
     Theor. Comput. Sci., 379(3):405–417, 2007. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2007.02.047.
24   Ankit Gupta, Pritish Kamath, Neeraj Kayal, and Ramprasad Saptharishi. Arithmetic circuits:
     A chasm at depth 3. SIAM J. Comput., 45(3):1064–1079, 2016. doi:10.1137/140957123.
25   Venkatesan Guruswami, Atri Rudra, and Madhu Sudan. Essential coding theory, 2018. URL:
     https://cse.buffalo.edu/faculty/atri/courses/coding-theory/book/.
26   Joos Heintz and Claus-Peter Schnorr. Testing Polynomials which Are Easy to Compute
     (Extended Abstract). In Proceedings of the 12th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
     Computing (STOC 1980), pages 262–272, 1980. doi:10.1145/800141.804674.
27   Stasys Jukna and Igor Sergeev. Complexity of linear boolean operators. Foundations and
     Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 9(1):1–123, 2013. doi:10.1561/0400000063.
28   Erich Kaltofen and Michael F. Singer. Size efficient parallel algebraic circuits for partial
     derivatives. In IV International Conference on Computer Algebra in Physical Research, pages
     133–145, 1991. URL: https://users.cs.duke.edu/~elk27/bibliography/91/KaSi91.pdf.
29   Pascal Koiran. Arithmetic circuits: The chasm at depth four gets wider. Theoretical Computer
     Science, 448:56–65, 2012. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2012.03.041.
30   Kasper Green Larsen. The cell probe complexity of dynamic range counting. In Howard J.
     Karloff and Toniann Pitassi, editors, Proceedings of the 44th Annual ACM Symposium on
     Theory of Computing (STOC 2012), pages 85–94. ACM, 2012. doi:10.1145/2213977.2213987.
31   Kasper Green Larsen. On range searching in the group model and combinatorial discrepancy.
     SIAM J. Comput., 43(2):673–686, 2014. doi:10.1137/120865240.
32   Kasper Green Larsen, Omri Weinstein, and Huacheng Yu. Crossing the logarithmic barrier
     for dynamic boolean data structure lower bounds. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual ACM
     Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2018), pages 978–989. ACM, 2018. doi:10.1145/
     3188745.3188790.
33   Daniel D. Lee and H. Sebastian Seung. Algorithms for non-negative matrix factorization.
     In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13, Papers from Neural Information
     Processing Systems (NIPS) 2000, pages 556–562. MIT Press, 2000. URL: http://papers.
     nips.cc/paper/1861-algorithms-for-non-negative-matrix-factorization.
34   Xin Li. Non-malleable extractors and non-malleable codes: Partially optimal constructions.
     CoRR, abs/1804.04005, 2018. arXiv:1804.04005.
35   Satyanarayana V. Lokam. Complexity lower bounds using linear algebra. Foundations and
     Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 4(1-2):1–155, 2009. doi:10.1561/0400000011.
36   Julien Mairal, Francis R. Bach, Jean Ponce, and Guillermo Sapiro. Online dictionary learning
     for sparse coding. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine
     Learning, ICML 2009, volume 382 of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, pages
     689–696. ACM, 2009. doi:10.1145/1553374.1553463.



                                                                                                     CCC 2020
5:20   Lower Bounds for Matrix Factorization


       37   Jacques Morgenstern. Note on a lower bound on the linear complexity of the fast fourier
            transform. J. ACM, 20(2):305–306, 1973. doi:10.1145/321752.321761.
       38   Behnam Neyshabur and Rina Panigrahy. Sparse matrix factorization. CoRR, abs/1311.3315,
            2013. arXiv:1311.3315.
       39   Mihai Pǎtraşcu. Lower bounds for 2-dimensional range counting. In Proceedings of the 39th
            Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2007), pages 40–46. ACM, 2007.
            doi:10.1145/1250790.1250797.
       40   Mihai Pǎtraşcu and Erik D. Demaine. Logarithmic lower bounds in the cell-probe model.
            SIAM J. Comput., 35(4):932–963, 2006. doi:10.1137/S0097539705447256.
       41   Nicholas Pippenger. Superconcentrators. SIAM J. Comput., 6(2):298–304, 1977. doi:
            10.1137/0206022.
       42   Nicholas Pippenger. Superconcentrators of depth 2. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 24(1):82–90, 1982.
            doi:10.1016/0022-0000(82)90056-3.
       43   Pavel Pudlák. Communication in bounded depth circuits. Combinatorica, 14(2):203–216, 1994.
            doi:10.1007/BF01215351.
       44   Pavel Pudlák. A note on the use of determinant for proving lower bounds on the size of linear
            circuits. Inf. Process. Lett., 74(5-6):197–201, 2000. doi:10.1016/S0020-0190(00)00058-2.
       45   Jaikumar Radhakrishnan and Amnon Ta-Shma. Bounds for dispersers, extractors, and
            depth-two superconcentrators. SIAM J. Discrete Math., 13(1):2–24, 2000. doi:10.1137/
            S0895480197329508.
       46   Ran Raz. Elusive functions and lower bounds for arithmetic circuits. Theory of Computing,
            6(1):135–177, 2010. doi:10.4086/toc.2010.v006a007.
       47   Mohammad Amin Shokrollahi, Daniel A. Spielman, and Volker Stemann. A remark on matrix
            rigidity. Inf. Process. Lett., 64(6):283–285, 1997. doi:10.1016/S0020-0190(97)00190-7.
       48   Victor Shoup. New algorithms for finding irreducible polynomials over finite fields. Math-
            ematics of Computation, 54:435–447, 1990. URL: https://www.ams.org/journals/mcom/
            1990-54-189/S0025-5718-1990-0993933-0/S0025-5718-1990-0993933-0.pdf.
       49   Victor Shoup and Roman Smolensky. Lower bounds for polynomial evaluation and in-
            terpolation problems. Computational Complexity, 6(4):301–311, December 1996. doi:
            10.1007/BF01270384.
       50   Amir Shpilka and Amir Yehudayoff. Arithmetic circuits: A survey of recent results and open
            questions. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science, 5:207–388, March 2010.
            doi:10.1561/0400000039.
       51   Volker Strassen. Die berechnungskomplexität von elementarsymmetrischen funktionen und
            von interpolationskoeffizienten. Numerische Mathematik, 20(3):238–251, June 1973. doi:
            10.1007/BF01436566.
       52   Sébastien Tavenas. Improved bounds for reduction to depth 4 and depth 3. Inf. Comput.,
            240:2–11, 2015. Preliminary version in the 38th Internationl Symposium on the Mathematical
            Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS 2013). doi:10.1016/j.ic.2014.09.004.
       53   Leslie G. Valiant. On non-linear lower bounds in computational complexity. In Proceedings of
            the 7th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 1975), pages 45–53. ACM,
            1975. doi:10.1145/800116.803752.
       54   Leslie G. Valiant. Graph-theoretic arguments in low-level complexity. In Proceedings of the
            2nd Internationl Symposium on the Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS
            1977), volume 53 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 162–176. Springer, 1977.
            doi:10.1007/3-540-08353-7_135.
