Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory
Evan Cavallo
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
ecavallo@cs.cmu.edu
Robert Harper
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
rwh@cs.cmu.edu

       Abstract
We define a computational type theory combining the contentful equality structure of cartesian
cubical type theory with internal parametricity primitives. The combined theory supports both
univalence and its relational equivalent, which we call relativity. We demonstrate the use of the
theory by analyzing polymorphic functions between higher inductive types, and we give an account
of the identity extension lemma for internal parametricity.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Type theory

Keywords and phrases parametricity, cubical type theory, higher inductive types

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2020.13

Related Version https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00489

Funding We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
through MURI grant FA9550-15-1-0053. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
AFOSR.

Acknowledgements We thank Carlo Angiuli, Steve Awodey, Daniel Gratzer, Kuen-Bang Hou
(Favonia), Dan Licata, Anders Mörtberg, Emily Riehl, Christian Sattler, and Jonathan Sterling for
their comments and insights.


 1      Introduction
Cubical type theory [17, 3, 2] is a recent extension of type theory with contentful equality (or
paths). The central concept of cubical type theory, inherited from homotopy type theory [30],
is that terms can be equal in multiple ways, each of which is a method of translating results
between them. The motivating example of contentful equality is structured isomorphism. In
informal mathematical practice, it is common to treat isomorphic objects as if they were
“the same,” because any interesting property of one will also hold of the other. Cubical type
theory makes this informal practice formal: equality of types is isomorphism, which is to say
that we have Voevodsky’s univalence axiom [32]. For this to be possible, it is essential that
equality be contentful, because two objects can be isomorphic in many ways. The key feature
of cubical type theory, in comparison with homotopy type theory, is that it is a programming
language, not just a logical formalism; in particular, uses of contentful equality compute.
    A user of cubical type theory can also define types with custom equality structure using
higher inductive types (HITs) [18, 14]. A simultaneous generalization of inductive types and
quotient types, a HIT is freely generated by a collection of constructors, each of which may
introduce not only elements but also paths between elements. For example, the following
specification defines a type Z/2Z of integers modulo 2 from a type Z of integers.

     data Z/2Z : U where
     | in(n : Z) : Z/2Z
     | mod(n : Z, x : I) : Z/2Z [x = 0 ,→ in(n) | x = 1 ,→ in(n + 2)]
           © Evan Cavallo and Robert Harper;
           licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
28th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL 2020).
Editors: Maribel Fernández and Anca Muscholl; Article No. 13; pp. 13:1–13:17
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
13:2   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


       This type has two constructors, in and mod. The first introduces an element of Z/2Z for each
       element of Z, while the second identifies in(n) and in(n + 2) for every n : Z. To construct a
       function out of Z/2Z, we simply explain where to send in and mod, in direct analogy with the
       induction principle of an ordinary inductive type. In addition to quotients, HITs permit the
       definition of higher-dimensional objects, enabling the use of type theory as a domain-specific
       language for formalizing homotopy-theoretic mathematics [30].
           While contentful equality creates new possibilities, it also introduces new obligations. The
       type of equalities between any pair of objects has its own equality structure, which means
       that every type actually contains an infinite tower of structure: paths, paths between paths,
       and so on. A user of HITs is often forced to wrestle with this higher-dimensional structure. A
       particularly vicious example is provided by the smash product [30, §6.8], a key construction
       in homotopy theory. The smash product is a binary operator − ∧ − : U∗ → U∗ → U∗ on the
       universe U∗ := (X : U) × X of pointed types. Defined as a HIT (see Section 4.3), it is the
       natural notion of tensor product for U∗ , being left adjoint to the pointed function space. We
       thus expect properties such as commutativity and associativity: for any X, Y, Z : U∗ , we hope
       that X ∧ Y ≃ Y ∧ X and (X ∧ Y ) ∧ Z ≃ X ∧ (Y ∧ Z). However, these laws are not so simple
       to prove. The associator, in particular, involves two stacked applications of ∧; this means the
       programmer must wrangle with two-dimensional structure to define functions back and forth,
       then three-dimensional structure to prove they are inverses. Worse yet, these are only the
       first level of an infinite hierarchy of laws satisfied by ∧. For example, Mac Lane’s pentagon
       relates the two different ways of re-associating the product of four types; to prove it requires
       building four-dimensional terms. Despite concerted effort [31, 12], a complete formal proof
       that the smash product is a symmetric monoidal product has yet to be produced.
           For all the suffering, these properties seem “obvious” in a way familiar to computer
       scientists: they look like consequences of parametricity [25]. Parametricity is Reynolds’
       crystallization of a property enjoyed by many type theories: programs behave uniformly
       in their type variables. Reynolds captures this uniformity in the existence of a relational
       interpretation of type theory that expresses the invariance of type constructions under a broad
       class of relations. With parametricity, it is often possible to derive what Wadler dubs “free
       theorems” [33], naturality properties enjoyed by any term of a given type. In our case, we can
       hope that there are only so many functions α : (X, Y, Z:U∗ ) → (X ∧ Y ) ∧ Z → X ∧ (Y ∧ Z).
       Perhaps any definable function of this type satisfies Mac Lane’s pentagon?

       Contributions
       We present a cubical type theory with internal parametricity, a further extension to type
       theory introduced by Bernardy and Moulin [8, 9, 6, 21, 23, 22]. Just as cubical type
       theory makes the fact that all constructions act on isomorphisms available to the user,
       internally parametric type theory exposes that all constructions act on relations, providing
       an operational account of Reynolds’s denotational presentation of parametricity. In fact, the
       two are based on the same design principle: the use of dimension variables.
           Our contribution can be viewed in two ways. On the one hand, we bring parametricity
       to bear on problems in cubical type theory, giving in particular a characterization of maps
       between smash products. On the other, we provide an internally parametric theory that
       enjoys the extensionality principles of cubical type theory. A lack of function extensionality,
       for one, is acutely visible when working with Church encodings. By relying on univalence, we
       are able to eliminate the technical device of I-sets used by Bernardy, Coquand, and Moulin
       in their presheaf model [6]. We also explore the use of internal parametricity beyond the
       initial forays of Bernardy et al., internally developing the sub-universe of bridge-discrete
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                           13:3


types (which is closed under all type formers except the universe) as a substitute for the
traditional identity extension lemma. This is a departure from previous approaches [4, 23]
where the goal is typically to externally restrict the universe to bridge-discrete types from
the start. We also show by example that the relational interpretations of inductive types can
be characterized. Finally, we use this paper as an opportunity to compare and contrast the
mechanisms underlying cubical and parametric type theory.
    We begin in Section 2 by introducing cubical type theory. In Section 3, we mix in the
parametricity primitives. With the theory complete, we make use of it in Section 4, proving
results about the smash product and probing the status of the identity extension lemma.
In Section 5, we go into more detail on the meaning of the judgments and canonicity. In
Section 6, we briefly sketch a presheaf model. We close in Section 7 with a discussion of
related work. Complete proofs of our results, and in particular a detailed development of the
computational interpretation, can be found in our companion technical report [15].


 2     Cubical type theory
Cubical type theory, in its various incarnations, is a means of organizing the data of a
type equipped with path structure. Homotopy theory suggests various ways of doing this;
empirically, cubical structure is most convenient for the design of type theories, because
n-dimensional elements of a type can be represented by terms in a context of n dimension
variables. In this section, we recall cartesian cubical type theory [3, 2]; however, one can
substitute another cubical type theory (e.g., [17, 24]) in the remainder of this paper without
difficulty.

2.1    Path dimensions
Like ordinary type theory, cubical type theory is based on four judgment forms, expressing
typehood, type equality, elementhood, and element equality.

      Γ  A type         Γ  A = B type           ΓM ∈A              ΓM =N ∈A

For us, these judgments are behavioral specifications on terms of an untyped programming
language. Roughly, a program A is a type when, for any instantiation of its hypotheses,
it computes to a name in some prescribed set of value types, while M is in A when its
instantiations compute to values in the type named by A. Types and elements are equal
when they compute to the same values, where value equality is again prescribed in advance.
We use the notation  for the behavioral counterpart of the formal `. To more quickly give
the reader a feel for the system, however, we will defer precise definitions of the judgments
to Section 5, and instead first present a collection of rules they satisfy.
    Cubical type theory is distinguished by the addition of path dimensions, for which we
write r, s. These are specified by judgments Γ  r pdim and Γ  r = s pdim and populated
by variables and two distinguished constants.

             Γ, x : I, Γ0  x pdim           Γ  0 pdim             Γ  1 pdim

In the context we write dimension variable assumptions in the form x : I, but this is merely
suggestive notation: “I” is not the name of a type. We also allow dimension equality
assumptions. (Note that dimension equality is decidable.)




                                                                                                 CSL 2020
13:4   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory



                      Γ, x : I  A type       Γ  M0 ∈ Ah0/xi            Γ  M1 ∈ Ah1/xi
                                            Γ  Pathx.A (M0 , M1 ) type

             Γ, x : I  P ∈ A       Γ  P h0/xi = M0 ∈ Ah0/xi            Γ  P h1/xi = M1 ∈ Ah1/xi
                                                I
                                         Γ  λ x.P ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 )

          Γ  Q ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 )          Γ  r pdim                      Γ, x : I  P ∈ A
                                                                          I
                       Γ  Q@r ∈ Ahr/xi                          Γ  (λ x.P )@r = P hr/xi ∈ Ahr/xi

          Γ  Q ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 )         ε ∈ {0, 1}             Γ  Q ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 )
                  Γ  Q@ε = Mε ∈ Ahε/xi                        Γ  Q = λI x.Q@x ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 )


          Figure 1 Rules for Path-types.




                  Γ ctx        Γ  A type           Γ ctx        Γ ctx        Γ  r pdim         Γ  s pdim
       · ctx              Γ, a : A ctx          Γ, x : I ctx                     Γ, r = s ctx

       A path dimension variable can be pictured as varying in the real unit interval [0, 1]: as x
       varies in a term x : I  M ∈ A, the term M draws out a “line” in A. The line’s “endpoints”
       are obtained by substituting 0 and 1 for x: writing −hr/xi for path dimension substitution,
       we have M h0/xi ∈ Ah0/xi and M h1/xi ∈ Ah1/xi. Path dimension variables support all of
       the structural rules (weakening, contraction, and exchange) enjoyed by ordinary variables.
       In contrast to ordinary variables, however, there is more to M than its closed instantiations
       M h0/xi and M h1/xi: there can be many distinct terms with the same endpoints.
           Path dimensions provide a judgmental notion of contentful equality: a path between
       M0 ∈ A and M1 ∈ A is a term x : I  P ∈ A such that P h0/xi = M0 and P h1/xi = M1 .
       The judgmental notion is then internalized via Path-types, shown in Figure 1. Aside from the
       indices M0 and M1 , they behave as “functions out of I”: they are introduced by abstraction,
       eliminated by application, and satisfy β- and η-rules. In general, Path-types are heterogeneous,
       meaning that they are dependent functions: they take the form Pathx.A (M0 , M1 ) where
       x : I  A type, and applying Q ∈ Pathx.A (M0 , M1 ) at r yields Q@r ∈ Ahr/xi. When A does
       not depend on x, we simply write PathA (M0 , M1 ).
           Using just these few principles of cubical type theory, we can already observe that path
       types validate function extensionality. Given F0 , F1 ∈ (a:A) → B, a pointwise path between
       them is a term H ∈ (a:A) → PathB (F0 a, F1 a). Given such an H, we obtain a path between
       F0 and F1 by simply flipping the order of abstraction: λI x.λa.Ha@x ∈ Path(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ).


       2.2     Coercion and composition
       The path apparatus equips each type with some kind of infinite-dimensional relation. It is
       reflexive: given any M ∈ A, we have λI .M ∈ PathA (M, M ). However, there is as yet no
       reason for it to be symmetric or transitive, nor for all constructions to respect it. These
       properties are ensured by adding two operations: coercion and composition.
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                                           13:5


    The coercion operation turns paths between types into isomorphisms,1 implementing one
direction of the correspondence required by the univalence axiom. Given a line x.A and an
element M ∈ Ahr/xi at some index r, coercion produces an element at any other index s.

                      Γ, x : I  A type          Γ  r, s pdim        Γ  M ∈ Ahr/xi
                                        Γ  coerx.As (M ) ∈ Ahs/xi
We moreover impose the equation coerx.Ar (M ) = M ∈ Ahr/xi. From this, one can show that
λa.coerx.As (a) ∈ Ahr/xi → Ahs/xi is in fact an isomorphism. Using coercion, we can see that
all constructions respect paths, in the following sense: if we have some property B ∈ A → U,
a proof N ∈ BM0 that B holds of some M0 ∈ A0 , and a path Q ∈ PathA (M0 , M1 ), we get
a proof coe0x.B(Q@x)
                1
                     (N ) ∈ BM1 that B holds of M1 . This fact can be used to invert and
compose paths, establishing that path equality is symmetric and transitive.
    While coercion gives us all we need of equality, it is not a strong enough “induction
hypothesis.” Operationally, the evaluation of a coercion term is guided by the outermost
constructor of type line. To explain the reduction of coercion for Path-types, a second
operation, (homogeneous) composition, is required to obtain a term with the correct endpoints.
As the purpose of this operation is essentially technical, however, we defer to [3, 2] for details.

2.3      Paths in the universe: V-types and univalence
Coercion converts paths of types into isomorphisms, but we still need a way to convert
isomorphisms into paths. This is accomplished by a new type former: Glue-types in [17, 2],
V-types in [3], and G-types in [11]. We use V-types, a sufficient special case of Glue-types.
    The V constructor does not, strictly speaking, convert an isomorphism into a path.
Rather, it takes an isomorphism and a path as input, and produces a second path that is the
concatenation of the two inputs. Precisely, it takes a dimension r pdim, some r = 0  A type
defined at its 0 endpoint, some B type, and an isomorphism r = 0  E ∈ A ≃ B. These
inputs form a V-shape, hence the name.
                                             A
                                                       Vr (A, B, E)
                                           E
                                           B0                B1
                                                     B
                                           r→
The output is a type Vr (A, B, E) satisfying the equations r = 0  Vr (A, B, E) = A type
and r = 1  Vr (A, B, E) = B type.
    To transform an isomorphism E ∈ A ≃ B of types A, B ∈ U into a path, we simply take
λI x.Vx (A, B, E) ∈ PathU (A, B). This is the special case of the V-type where B is constant
in the direction of the output (here x).

2.4      Higher inductive types
As described in the introduction, cubical type theory also supports higher inductive types,
types generated by constructors that may take dimension arguments and be attached at
their boundaries to other elements. We refer to [18, 14] for formal treatments of HITs in
cubical type theory; for this paper, we will only need an intuitive understanding.


1
    For us, an isomorphism is a function with a left and right inverse up to path equality. That is, we define
    A ≃ B to be the following type.
        (f : A → B) × (l : B → A) × (r : B → A) × ((a:A) → PathA (l(f a), a)) × ((b:B) → PathB (f (rb), b))
    These are often called equivalences in the literature, and have several equivalent definitions [30, §4].


                                                                                                                 CSL 2020
13:6   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


           3    Internalizing parametricity
       We now add internal parametricity primitives, closely following Bernardy, Coquand, and
       Moulin [6]. (Our notation, however, differs substantially from theirs; see [15, Figure 7] for a
       translation dictionary.) Reynolds’ parametricity captures the vague concept of “uniformity in
       type variables” by the precise concept of acting on relations. To say that all constructions act
       on relations is essentially to say that type theory has a relational semantics. With internal
       parametricity, we make that semantics visible inside the theory.
          With cubical type theory, the goal was to ensure that all constructions act on isomorphisms;
       the solution was to equip each type with equality structure via dimension variables, then to
       identify lines between types with isomorphisms. For internal parametricity, we ensure that
       constructions act on relations with the same technique, but now identifying lines between
       types with type-valued relations. Where we use the word path in cubical type theory, we will
       use bridge in parametric type theory, following Nuyts et al. [23].

       3.1      Bridge dimensions
       Second verse, same as the first: we introduce bridge dimensions r, s, . . . by judgments
       Γ  r bdim and Γ  r = s bdim with two constants Γ  0, 1 bdim. We use bold type to
       distinguish bridge from path dimensions. We likewise add bridge dimension and equality
       assumptions – but this time, only equations where one side is a constant.

                                   Γ ctx                       Γ ctx       Γ  r bdim          ε ∈ {0, 1}
                              Γ, x : 2 ctx                                   Γ, r = ε ctx

           The distinguishing feature of bridge dimensions is that they are substructural, specifically
       affine: they do not support contraction. For Γ ctx and (x : 2) ∈ Γ, write Γ\x for the result
       of deleting x and all term variables that occur beyond it from the context.2
                                                                                               
                    \x        \x                          \x          \x             \x            Γ             if x = y
       (Γ, y : I)        := (Γ , y : I)      (Γ, a : A)        := Γ         (Γ, y : 2)    :=
                                                                                                   (Γ\x , y : 2) if x 6= y

       Set Γ\ε = Γ. We then have the following structural rules for bridge dimension variables.

                                                                                  ΓΓ0  J
                                                    BHyp                                            BWeak
                           Γ, x : 2, Γ0  x bdim                              Γ, x : 2, Γ0  J

                           Γ  r bdim         Γ\r , x : 2  Γ0 ctx            Γ\r , x : 2, Γ0  J
                                                                                                      BCut
                                               Γ(Γ0 hr/xi)  J hr/xi

       The first two rules are unsurprising, but the third contains an essential restriction. To
       substitute r for x in a judgment Γ, x : 2, Γ0  J , we must know that neither Γ0 or J refers
       to r (if it is a variable). In other words, r must be fresh for Γ0 and J .
           The Bezem-Coquand-Huber (BCH) cubical sets model [10, 11] also uses affine dimension
       variables, but recent work on cubical type theories has focused on structural variables.
       The primary motivation for the shift is to support HITs, whose development remains an
       open problem in the affine setting; ease of implementation is another factor. For internal


       2
           Here we follow the approach developed by Cheney for nominal dependent type theory [16].
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                                  13:7



 Γ  r bdim       Γ\r , x : 2  A type     Γ\r , x : 2, a : A  B type     Γ  M ∈ Ahr/xi
    \r                                              \r
   Γ , a0 : Ah0/xi  N0 ∈ Bh0/xi[a0 /a]           Γ , a1 : Ah1/xi  N1 ∈ Bh1/xi[a1 /a]
   Γ\r , a0 : Ah0/xi, a1 : Ah1/xi, a : Bridgex.A (a0 , a1 )  N ∈ Bridgex.B[a@x/a] (N0 , N1 )
                  Γ  extentr (M ; a0 .N0 , a1 .N1 , a0 .a1 .a.N ) ∈ Bhr/xi[M/a]

                         extentε (M ; · · · ) = Nε [M/aε ] ∈ Bhε/xi[M/a]

                                       Γ\r , x : 2  M ∈ A
 Γ  extentr (M hr/xi; · · · ) = N [M h0/xi/a0 ][M h1/xi/a1 ][λ2 x.M/a]@r ∈ Bhr/xi[M/a]

   Figure 2 The extent operator. We omit straightforwardly inferrable premises for readability.


parametricity, however, affine dimensions are essential to ensure the correct characterization
of bridges in function types (Section 3.2) and in the universe (Section 3.3).
    As with paths, we introduce types Bridgex.A (M0 , M1 ) of bridges over x.A from M0 to
M1 . We write λ2 x.P for the values of these types. In accordance with the judgmental
structure, a bridge can only be applied to a fresh variable: if Γ\r  Q ∈ Bridgex.A (M0 , M1 ),
then Γ  Q@r ∈ Ahr/xi. Otherwise, they are exactly like path types; see [15, §8.3] for
rules. We now have one direction of our desired correspondence between bridges of types and
binary relations: for any x.A, we have the relation Bridgex.A (−, −) on Ah0/xi and Ah1/xi.

3.2    Bridges at function type: extent
In the standard relational interpretation of type theory [7, 4], two functions are related when
they take related arguments to related results. As such, we expect Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 )
to be isomorphic to the following.

    (a0 :Ah0/xi)(a1 :Ah1/xi)(q:Bridgex.A (a0 , a1 )) → Bridgex.B[q@x/a] (F0 a0 , F1 a1 )         (1)

Although it is simple to define a map from Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ) to the type (1), the con-
verse is more delicate. In fact, the first role of substructurality is in enabling this principle. As
we have seen, structural dimensions give rise to a different principle: Pathx.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ) ≃
(a:A) → Pathx.B (F0 a, F1 a) when A does not depend on x. The proof, sketched in Sec-
tion 2.1, uses the interchangeability of terms λa.λI x.P and λI x.λa.P . However, λa.λ2 x.P
and λ2 x.λa.P are not interchangeable: in the former, x ranges over dimensions that are
fresh for a, whereas no such restriction is in play in the latter. Conversely, structural
dimensions would not allow us to prove that the map from Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ) to (1)
is an isomorphism, as having both principles at once would lead to a contradiction (in the
presence of Gel-types, defined below). The two principles are both derivable for paths, but
only thanks to the presence of coercion – an operation with no equivalent for bridges.
    To see how we can get from (1) to Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ) with affine dimensions, let H in
(1) be given. Abstracting x and a, our goal is to exhibit a term in B that is equal to F0 a when
x = 0 and F1 a when x = 1. Recall that a, being abstracted when x is in scope, ranges over
terms that may mention x. We would like, then, to think of a as a bridge in direction x, and to
supply that bridge to H. In syntax, we would like to write “H(ah0/xi)(ah1/xi)(λ2 x.a)@x”.
This does not quite make sense: a is a variable, so ah0/xi = a.
    We instead introduce an operator, extentr (M ; a0 .N0 , a1 .N1 , a0 .a1 .a.N ), that performs
the substitutions and capture once a (now M ) is instantiated. This operator satisfies the
rules shown in Figure 2; we call it extent because it reveals the extent of the term M as a


                                                                                                        CSL 2020
13:8   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory



               Γ  r bdim        Γ\r  A type          Γ\r  B type          Γ\r , a : A, b : B  R type
                                            Γ  Gelr (A, B, a.b.R) type

                       Γ\r  M ∈ A            Γ\r  N ∈ B           Γ\r  P ∈ R[M, N/a, b]
                                       Γ  gelr (M, N, P ) ∈ Gelr (A, B, R)

                                           Γ, x : 2  Q ∈ Gelx (A, B, E)
                                  Γ  ungel(x.Q) ∈ R[Qh0/xi, Qh1/xi/a, b]

             Gel0 (A, B, a.b.R) = A           Gel1 (A, B, a.b.R) = B             gel0 (M, N, P ) = M : A

                gel1 (M, N, P ) = N : B               ungel(x.gelx (M, N, P )) = P : R[M, N/a, b]

                          Qhr/xi = gelr (Qh0/xi, Qh1/xi, x.Q) : Gelr (A, B, a.b.R)

          Figure 3 Rules for Gel-types.


       line in direction r. There are three cases: either r is 0 or 1, in which case M is simply a
       point, or r is a variable x, in which case M is a bridge in direction x. The operator takes
       an argument for each case, here N0 , N1 , and N . The last of these takes as input endpoints
       a0 , a1 and a bridge a between them and produces a bridge between N0 and N1 ; when extentx
       executes, it supplies M h0/xi, M h1/xi, and λ2 x.M to N and outputs its value at x.
            Substructurality is essential to extent because of its use of variable capture: the mapping
         2
       λ : (x, M )      λ2 x.M is not stable under all dimension substitutions. If M = M 0 (x, y),
       for example, then applying λ2 after substituting hy/xi results in λ2 y.M 0 (y, y), while
       applying λ2 before substituting hy/xi results in the inequivalent λ2 x.M 0 (x, y). However,
       variable capture does commute with substitution of fresh variables. Returning to the original
       motivation, extent is exactly what is needed to get from (1) to Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 ).

           H     λ2 x.λa.extentx (a; a0 .F0 a0 , a1 .F1 a1 , a0 .a1 .a.Ha0 a1 a) : Bridgex.(a:A)→B (F0 , F1 )

       It is straightforward to show that this map is in fact an isomorphism [15, Theorem 6.9].

       3.3     Bridges in the universe: Gel-types and relativity
       The final ingredient is the equivalent of univalence: a characterization of bridges in the
       universe as binary type-valued relations. We call this property relativity.

       I Definition 1. A universe U is relativistic when for every pair of types A, B : U, the map
       λC.Bridgex.C@x (−, −) ∈ BridgeU (A, B) → (A × B → U) is an isomorphism.

           As in cubical type theory, we implement the inverse map with a new type constructor:
       Gel, so named because it resembles the G-types of the BCH model but applies to relations
       rather than isomorphisms. Rules for Gel-types – omitting those for coercion and composition
       – are displayed in Figure 3. In stark contrast to V- or Glue-types, coercion and composition
       in Gel-types are simple; this is because the direction of a coercion or composition is always a
       path dimension and therefore orthogonal to the direction of the Gel-type.
           Given a dimension r and a relation Γ\r , a : A, b : B  R type for which r is fresh, we
       obtain a type Gelr (A, B, a.b.R) satisfy Gel0 (A, B, a.b.R) = A and Gel1 (A, B, a.b.R) = B.
       Its values take the form gelr (M, N, P ) where M ∈ A, N ∈ B, and P is a proof the
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                               13:9


two are related by R; we have gel0 (M, N, P ) = M ∈ A and gel1 (M, N, P ) = N ∈ B.
Given a bridge Γ, x : 2  Q ∈ Gelx (A, B, a.b.R) over a Gel-type, we can project the proof
ungel(x.Q) : R[Qh0/xi, Qh1/xi/a, b] that its endpoints – elements of A and B respectively
– are related by R. When we have A, B ∈ U and R ∈ A × B → U, we write Gelr (A, B, R) as
shorthand for Gelr (A, B, a.b.Rha, bi).
    Whereas V-types concatenate an isomorphism and a path to produce a path, Gel-types
directly convert relations to bridges. That this is possible is a consequence of substructurality.
The constructor Gelx performs a dimension shift: it takes A, B, and R in some context Γ,
and it produces a type in context Γ, x : 2. To express a typing rule for Gel, we must be able
to specify that x is fresh for A, B, R. By contrast, Vx takes a type in context Γ, x with an
isomorphism at one end and produces a type in context Γ, x; there is no dimension shift.
    Moreover, a V-like type would be insufficient for internal parametricity. In cubical type
theory, we can turn E : A ≃ B into a path by attaching it to the constant path λI .B, which
corresponds to the identity equivalence at B. For bridges, however, this might not give the
desired result: the constant bridge λ2 .B corresponds to the relation BridgeB (−, −), which
may be distinct from the identity relation PathB (−, −). In particular, they fail to coincide
when B is a universe: we have BridgeU (A, B) ≃ (A × B → U) 6≃ (A ≃ B) ≃ PathU (A, B).

I Theorem 2. Any universe U closed under Gel types is relativistic.

Sketch. Given a : A and b : B, the gel and ungel operators constitute an isomorphism between
Rha, bi and Bridgex.Gelx (A,B,R) (a, b) by virtue of their β- and η-rules. By univalence, this
gives a path in U between the two. By function extensionality, then, we have a path from R to
Bridgex.Gelx (A,B,R) (−, −). Thus λR.Gelx (A, B, R) is a left inverse to λC.Bridgex.C@x (−, −),
getting us halfway to a proof that U is relativistic.
    For the right inverse, we need a path from λ2 x.Gelx (A, B, Bridgex.C@x (−, −)) to C
for C : BridgeU (A, B). We use the fact that bridges between paths correspond to paths
between bridges, a correspondence implemented by swapping binders [15, Theorem 6.2]. It
thus suffices to exhibit a bridge over x.PathU (Gelx (A, B, Bridgex.C@x (−, −)), C@x) between
λI .A and λI .B. Next, we apply univalence, reducing the goal to constructing a bridge over
x.Gelx (A, B, Bridgex.C@x (−, −)) ≃ C@x between the identity equivalences on A and B.
    Finally, we can show, using the characterization of bridges at function type, that bridges
at an isomorphism type correspond to isomorphisms between bridges in the source and target
types [15, Corollary 6.10]. That is, it is enough to show that for every a : A and b : B, we
have an isomorphism between Bridgex.Gelx (A,B,Bridgex.C@x (−,−)) (a, b) and Bridgex.C@x (a, b).
This is a special case of the inverse condition already proven.                              J

 4     The practice of internal parametricity
We have completed a formulation of internally parametric cubical type theory. Now, we will
use it. As a warm-up, we prove that bool is isomorphic to its Church encoding. Then we
move on to novel results: a characterization of bridges in bool, the definition and applications
of bridge-discrete types, and finally, a characterization of maps between smash products.

4.1    The basics: booleans
A classic application of parametricity is the characterization of Church encodings, definitions
of inductive types by their universal properties. Our universes are predicative, so Church
encodings likely cannot be used to obtain data types ex nihilo. If we know that a data type
exists, however, we can show that it is isomorphic to its Church encoding.



                                                                                                     CSL 2020
13:10   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


        I Theorem 3. The type B := (X:U) → X → X → X is isomorphic to bool.

        Proof. It is easy to exhibit functions in either direction.

            λb.(λX.λt.λf.if X (b; t, f )) ∈ bool → B               λg.g(bool)(true)(false) ∈ B → bool

        One inverse condition is immediate. For the other, we must construct a path from
        λX.λt.λf.if X (g(bool)(true)(false); t, f ) to g for all g : B. Applying function extensional-
        ity, we assume X : U and t, f : X and aim to connect if X (g(bool)(true)(false); t, f ) to
        gXtf .
            Intuitively, we want to say that g is natural in its type argument; specifically, with respect
        to the map if X (−; t, f ) : bool → X. Accordingly, we define the relation given by the graph
        of this map: R : bool × X → U given by Rhb, ai := PathX (if X (b; t, f ), a). To obtain the
        relational interpretation of g at R, we introduce a dimension x and apply g at its Gel-type.

            g(Gelx (bool, X, R)) ∈ Gelx (bool, X, R) → Gelx (bool, X, R) → Gelx (bool, X, R)

        Next, we apply this to the related pairs (true, t) and (false, f ), in the form of gelx terms.

            g(Gelx (bool, X, R))(gelx (true, t, λI .t))(gelx (false, f, λI .f )) ∈ Gelx (bool, X, R)

        Call this term W . If we substitute 0 for x in W , each Gel or gel term steps to its first
        argument; thus W h0/xi = g(bool)(true)(false). Likewise, W h1/xi = gXtf . The term
        ungel(x.W ) is then a proof that these are related by R, which is precisely what we need. J

            We can also characterize the bridges in bool. Intuitively, these are all trivial: bool’s only
        elements are the zero-dimensional true and false. To show this, we use parametricity, an
        interesting parallel with the use of univalence for characterizing paths in HITs.

        I Theorem 4. For any b0 , b1 : bool, we have Bridgebool (b0 , b1 ) ≃ Pathbool (b0 , b1 ).

        Sketch. We will only construct the forward map; for a full proof, see [15, Theorem 11.5]. Let
        q : Bridgebool (b0 , b1 ). Given x, we have Px := Gelx (bool, bool, Pathbool (−, −)) corresponding
        to the identity relation on bool, as well as a map Fx : bool → Px defined as follows.

            Fx := λb.if Px (b; gelx (true, true, λI .true), gelx (false, false, λI .false))

        Note that F0 = F1 = λb.if bool (b; true, false). By applying F pointwise to q, we thus obtain
        λ2 x.Fx (q@x) ∈ Bridgex.Px (if bool (b0 ; true, false), if bool (b1 ; true, false)). It is easy to show that
        for any b : bool, there is a path from if bool (b; true, false) to b; using coercion, we obtain some
        T ∈ Bridgex.Px (b0 , b1 ). Applying ungel gives an element of Pathbool (b0 , b1 ).                        J

           The definition of the forward map uses parametricity; showing that it is an isomorphism
        uses iterated parametricity, which is to say two-bridge-dimensional types. Just as a one-
        dimensional bridge corresponds to a relation indexed by its boundary (the two endpoint
        types), relativity and the characterization of bridges at function type suffice to show that
        two-dimensional bridges satisfy the same characterization, the boundary now being given by
        four types and four relations in a square shape.

        4.2     Bridge-discrete types
        The booleans are one example of a bridge-discrete type, a type with trivial bridge structure.
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                              13:11


I Definition 5. A type A is bridge-discrete when for all pairs a0 , a1 : A, the canonical map
λp.coe0x.Bridge
          1
                           (λ2 .a0 ) ∈ PathA (a0 , a1 ) → BridgeA (a0 , a1 ) is an isomorphism. We
               A (a0 ,p@x)
write isBDisc(A) for the type of proofs that A is bridge-discrete.

    To show that A is bridge-discrete, it suffices to exhibit any family of isomorphisms between
PathA and BridgeA [15, Corollary 10.7]. The type isBDisc(A) is a homotopy proposition [30,
§3.3]: all proofs of isBDisc(A) are equal up to a path.
    Bridge-discrete types are worth identifying because they provide an analogue to the
identity extension lemma, a standard lemma in parametricity stating that the relational
interpretation of a closed type is its identity relation. This does not hold in our theory, in
the sense that a homogeneous bridge type BridgeA (M0 , M1 ) is not necessarily isomorphic to
PathA (M0 , M1 ) (take A = U). However, we can instead work by inserting bridge-discreteness
hypotheses where the lemma would be required. For example, in imitation of Abel et al. [1],
we can prove that path equality in a bridge-discrete type is isomorphic to Leibniz equality.

I Proposition 6 ([15, §11.2]). Let A be bridge-discrete. For any a0 , a1 : A, PathA (a0 , a1 ) is
isomorphic to (P :A → U) → P a0 → P a1 .

   Fortunately, most type constructors preserve bridge-discreteness. We can check that
UBDisc := (X : U) × isBDisc(X) is closed under almost all the type formers, with the obvious
exception of universes.

I Proposition 7. The sub-universe UBDisc is closed under product, function, Path-, and
Bridge-types. It is univalent and relativistic (i.e., closed under V- and Gel-types).

Proof. For the first statement, see [15, Lemma 10.9]. Any sub-universe of a univalent
universe carved out by a proposition is univalent (see [30, Lemma 3.5.1]). For the proof of
relativity, see [15, Theorem 10.12].                                                     J

    Per Section 4.1, we also expect that UBDisc is closed under inductive types. Proposition 7
implies that we can also use parametricity in UBDisc : for example, one can repeat the proof
of Theorem 3 to show that bool is isomorphic to (X:U) → isBDisc(X) → X → X → X.
    Finally, we observe as a simple consequence of Theorem 4 that the excluded middle for
homotopy propositions [30, §3.4] is refuted by internal parametricity. (The excluded middle
for all types is already refuted by univalence [30, Corollary 3.27].)

I Definition 8. Write isProp(A) := (a0 , a1 :A) → PathA (a0 , a1 ). The excluded middle for
homotopy propositions is LEM := (X:U) → isProp(X) → (b : bool) × if U (b; X, ¬X).

I Lemma 9. If A is bridge-discrete, then any function f : U → A is constant.

Proof. For any pair of types X, Y : U, we have a bridge B := λ2 x.Gelx (X, Y, . .⊥) between
them, thus a bridge λ2 x.f (B@x) : BridgeA (f X, f Y ) between their images by f , thus a path
from f X to f Y by bridge-discreteness of A.                                                J

I Theorem 10. There is a term of type LEM → ⊥.

Proof. We refute the weak excluded middle WLEM := (X:U) → (b : bool) × if U (b; ¬X, ¬¬X),
the special case of LEM that decides negated types. (Any negated type is a homotopy
proposition.) Let f : WLEM. Then λX.fst(f X) ∈ U → bool. By Theorem 4 and Lemma 9,
this map is constant. But fst(f ⊥) and fst(f >) cannot be equal, so we have a contradiction. J



                                                                                                     CSL 2020
13:12   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


        4.3    The smash product
        We adopt the convention of writing A∗ : U∗ := (X : U) × X for a pointed type, A := fst(A∗ )
        for its underlying type, and a0 := snd(A∗ ) for its basepoint. Given A∗ , B∗ ∈ U∗ , we write
        A∗ →∗ B∗ := (f : A → B) × PathB (f a0 , b0 ) for the type of basepoint-preserving functions
        from A∗ to B∗ . Given A∗ , B∗ : U∗ , their smash product is the following HIT.

           data A∗ ∧ B∗ : U where
           | pair(a : A, b : B) : A∗ ∧ B∗
           | basel : A∗ ∧ B∗
           | baser : A∗ ∧ B∗
           | gluel(b : B, x : I) : A∗ ∧ B∗ [x = 0 ,→ basel | x = 1 ,→ pair(a0 , b)]
           | gluer(a : A, x : I) : A∗ ∧ B∗ [x = 0 ,→ baser | x = 1 ,→ pair(a, b0 )]

        In words, the smash product of A∗ and B∗ is the cartesian product of their underlying types
        modulo the relation equating all pairs of the form (a0 , b) or (a, b0 ). The smash product can
        itself be made a pointed type A∗ ∧∗ B∗ with basepoint pair(a0 , b0 ).
            Our goal is to characterize the polymorphic pointed endofunctions on n-ary smash
        products. Here, we will only consider the binary case, and we will only sketch the proof. For
        the binary case, we give detailed pen-and-paper proofs of the arguments that use parametricity
        directly in [15, Appendix C], and we have formalized the purely cubical arguments in the
        redtt cubical proof assistant [29, cool.smash].

        I Theorem 11. Any function f∗ : (X∗ , Y∗ :U∗ ) → X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ →∗ X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ is connected by a
        path to either the polymorphic identity or the polymorphic constant function.

            That we cannot squeeze a complete proof into this space may seem to undermine our
        case for parametricity’s usefulness. However, our argument is not that it is easy, but that it
        scales. After establishing the above, we will argue that no combinatorial explosion results
        from generalizing to n-ary smash products, in contrast to the more direct approaches.

        I Definition 12. Given f : A → B, write Grr (A, B, f ) := Gelr (A, B, a.b.PathB (f a, b)).
        Given f∗ : A∗ →∗ B∗ , define Gr∗r (A∗ , B∗ , f∗ ) := hGrr (A, B, f ), gelr (a0 , b0 , f0 )i ∈ U∗ .

           The smash product has an action: from f∗ : A∗ →∗ C∗ and g∗ : B∗ →∗ D, we obtain
        f∗ ∧ g∗ ∈ A∗ ∧ B∗ → C∗ ∧ D∗ . The following extracts results from products of Gr-types.

        I Lemma 13 (Graph Lemma for ∧). Let pointed types A∗ , B∗ , C∗ , D∗ : U∗ and pointed
        functions f∗ : A∗ →∗ C∗ , g∗ : B∗ →∗ D∗ be given. For any x, there is a map of type

           Gr∗x (A, C, f ) ∧ Gr∗x (B, D, g) → Grx (A∗ ∧ B∗ , C∗ ∧ D∗ , f∗ ∧ g∗ )

        equal to the identity function on A∗ ∧ B∗ when x = 0 and on C∗ ∧ D∗ when x = 1.

        Sketch. This is analogous to Theorem 4; we define the map by smash product induction.
        We use extent and ungel to extract relation witnesses in the pair, gluel, and gluer cases. J

        I Proposition 14. Any element of bool∗ ∧ bool∗ is either pair(true, true) or pair(false, false).

        I Lemma 15. Any f : (X∗ , Y∗ :U∗ ) → X → Y → X∗ ∧ Y∗ is connected by a path to either
        1. the pairing function λhX, x0 i.λhY, y0 i.λa.λb.pair(a, b), or
        2. the constant basepoint function λhX, x0 i.λhY, y0 i.λ .λ .pair(x0 , y0 ).
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                                       13:13


Proof. Let X∗ , Y∗ : U∗ , a : X, and b : Y be given. We have a function g∗X ∈ bool∗ →∗ X∗
taking true to x0 and false to a, likewise g∗Y ∈ bool∗ →∗ Y∗ taking true to y0 and false to b.
   Fix a fresh bridge dimension x. By taking the Gel-types for the graphs of the above
                                               ∗                           ∗
functions, we obtain pointed types GX                      X       Y                   Y
                                       ∗ := Grx (bool, X, g ) and G∗ := Grx (bool, Y, g ). We
                                 X        Y
apply f with the elements of G and G corresponding to a and b.

    f (GX    Y                    I                      I        X    Y
        ∗ )(G∗ )(gelx (false, a, λ .a))(gelx (false, b, λ .b)) ∈ G∗ ∧ G∗

At x = 0, this is equal to f (bool∗ )(bool∗ )(false)(false) ∈ bool∗ ∧ bool∗ ; at x = 1, it is equal to
f X∗ Y∗ ab ∈ X∗ ∧ Y∗ . By Lemma 13, we obtain a term in Grx (bool∗ ∧ bool∗ , X∗ ∧ Y∗ , g∗X ∧ g∗Y )
with the same endpoints. Applying ungel, we get a proof that these endpoints are in the
graph of g∗X ∧ g∗Y , i.e., that (g∗X ∧ g∗Y )(f (bool∗ )(bool∗ )(false)(false)) is path-equal to f X∗ Y∗ ab.
By Proposition 14, f (bool∗ )(bool∗ )(false)(false) has two possible values. If it is pair(true, true),
then f X∗ Y∗ ab must be pair(x0 , y0 ); if it is pair(false, false), then f X∗ Y∗ ab is pair(a, b).     J

Sketch of Theorem 11. To characterize f∗ : (X∗ , Y∗ :U∗ ) → X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ →∗ X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ , we must
characterize its behavior on each constructor, as well as the proof that it preserves the
basepoint of X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ . Given X∗ , Y∗ , write f X∗ Y∗ for the function underlying f∗ X∗ Y∗ .
    Write P := (X∗ , Y∗ :U∗ ) → X → Y → X∗ ∧ Y∗ . First, we isolate the behavior of f∗ on the
pair constructor: λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f X∗ Y∗ (pair(a, b)) ∈ P . By Lemma 15, this is one of two
functions. We aim to show that this is the only degree of freedom available to f∗ .
    The values of f on the basel and baser constructors are uniquely determined up to a path
by the fact that f∗ X∗ Y∗ is basepoint-preserving, as basel and baser are connected to the
basepoint of X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ by gluel(y0 , −) and gluer(x0 , −) respectively.
    For gluel, we consider the term H := λI x.λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f X∗ Y∗ (gluel(b, x)), which is
a path in P from λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f X∗ Y∗ (basel) to λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f X∗ Y∗ (pair(x0 , b)). By
Lemma 15, we know that P is isomorphic to bool, which means in particular that it is a
homotopy set: its path types are all homotopy propositions. So H, and therefore the behavior
of f∗ on gluel terms, is uniquely determined (up to a path). The same applies to gluer.
    Finally, write f0 : (X∗ , Y∗ :U∗ ) → PathX∗ ∧Y∗ (f X∗ Y∗ (pair(x0 , y0 )), pair(x0 , y0 )) for the
proof that f preserves the basepoint of X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ . As with gluel, we prove that f0 is uniquely
determined by recasting it as a path in P , namely the path λx.λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f0 X∗ Y∗ @x
that connects λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.f X∗ Y∗ (pair(x0 , y0 )) to λX∗ .λY∗ .λa.λb.pair(x0 , y0 ).           J

   To prove the n-ary generalization of this theorem, we can proceed by a inductive argument,
showing for each i ≤ n that there are exactly two maps of the following type.
                                                                                      V
    (X1∗ , . . . , Xn∗ :U∗ ) → X1 → · · · → Xn−i → (Xn−i+1∗ ∧∗ · · · ∧∗ Xn∗ ) →           ∗i Xi∗

For the base case i = 0, we use an easy generalization of Lemma 15; for the inductive step,
the argument in the proof of Theorem 11. What is key is that we never use an iterated
induction argument on the elements of stacked smash products, so we never find ourselves
dealing with a two-dimensional case like that of gluel(gluel(c, x), y) ∈ X∗ ∧ (Y∗ ∧ Z∗ ).
    To see how we can apply the theorem, consider the case of commutativity. If we have
K : (X∗ , Y∗ :U) → X∗ ∧∗ Y∗ →∗ Y∗ ∧∗ X∗ , then λX∗ .λY∗ .KX∗ ,Y∗ ◦ KY∗ ,X∗ is a polymorphic
endofunction on smash products. By Theorem 11, we can show it is the identity simply by
showing it is not constant, which we can do by instantiating X∗ , Y∗ with bool∗ , bool∗ and
testing it on pair(false, false). If it is indeed non-constant, we see that K is an isomorphism.
Similar techniques show that any non-constant associator is an isomorphism and satisfies
Mac Lane’s pentagon.



                                                                                                              CSL 2020
13:14   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


         5      Computational meaning of the judgments
        We now explain more precisely the meanings of the typing judgments. We follow the work of
        Angiuli et al. [3]. The central idea is that well-typed terms need not only evaluate to values,
        but evaluate in a way that is coherent with respect to substitution of dimensions.
            First, we have an operational semantics, specified by judgments M val and M 7−→ M 0 .
        We write M ⇓ V when M 7−→∗ V and V val. The “closed” types and terms – those to which
        the operational semantics applies – are those whose free variables are all dimensions, i.e,
        those well-formed in some ΦΨ ctx where Φ = x1 : 2, . . . , xn : 2 and Ψ = y1 : I, . . . , ym : I. A
        type system on this language is a five-place relation τ (Φ, Ψ, A0 , A00 , ϕ). It specifies, for each
        context ΦΨ, those values A0 and A00 that are equal value types in that context, and associates
        to each such pair a partial equivalence relation (PER) ϕ on values in context ΦΨ. To be a
        type system, τ is required to satisfy laws ensuring symmetry, transitivity, and so forth. To
        interpret the type formers described in Sections 2 and 3, we can define an appropriate τ by a
        fixed-point construction populating it with the various constructors.
            Two terms A and A0 in context ΦΨ are then equal types when they evaluate to equal
        type values in a way that commutes with dimension substitution.

        I Definition 16. Given τ , define a five-place relation PTy(τ )(Φ, Ψ, A, A0 , α) on context
        ΦΨ, terms A, A0 , and families (αψ )ψ:Φ0 Ψ0 →ΦΨ indexed by substitutions into ΦΨ, as follows.
        PTy(τ )(Φ, Ψ, A, A0 , α) holds when for all ψ1 : Φ1 Ψ1 → ΦΨ and ψ2 : Φ2 Ψ2 → Φ1 Ψ1 , we have

             Aψ1 ⇓ A1      A1 ψ2 ⇓ A2      Aψ1 ψ2 ⇓ A12      A0 ψ1 ⇓ A01    A01 ψ2 ⇓ A02       A0 ψ1 ψ2 ⇓ A012

        with τ (Φ2 , Ψ2 , V, V 0 , αψ1 ψ2 ) for all V ∈ {A2 , A12 } and V 0 ∈ {A02 , A012 }.

            We write JAK for the α such that PTy(τ )(Φ2 , Ψ2 , A, A, α) when it exists; the laws
        required of type systems ensure its uniqueness. We now say that ΦΨ  A = A0 type when
        PTy(τ )(Φ, Ψ, A, A0 , α) for some α (satisfying a certain coherence condition). As a special
        case, we say that ΦΨ  A type when ΦΨ  A = A type. Element equality is defined
        analogously: M and M 0 are equal in A when they coherently evaluate to equal values
        in JAK. Finally, the closed judgments are extended to open judgments by functionality:
        Γ  A = A0 type holds when ΦΨ  Aγ = A0 γ 0 type for all ΦΨ  γ = γ 0 ∈ Γ.
            By definition of ΦΨ  M ∈ bool, we obtain a canonicity theorem.

        I Theorem 17 (Canonicity). If ΦΨ  M ∈ bool, then either M 7−→∗ true or M 7−→∗ false.
        Additionally, either ΦΨ  M = true ∈ bool or ΦΨ  M = false ∈ bool.

         6      Presheaf model
        As we have said, the rules presented in Sections 2 and 3 can be used as a formalism for
        reasoning in parametric cubical type theory. Following prior work on cubical type theory
        [17, 2] and internal parametricity [6], this formalism also supports a presheaf semantics.
            The two base categories at play, defined using the notation of Buchholtz and Morehouse
        [13], are the BCH cube category B := C(we,·) and the cartesian cube category P := C(wec,·) .
        (Here w, e, and c stand for weakening, exchange, and contraction respectively.) We model
                                                                         op
        parametric cubical type theory in the category C := Set(B ×P ) of presheaves on the product
        of the two. We can immediately obtain an interpretation of the standard and cubical type
        formers (including the universe) by applying a result of Angiuli et al. [2, Theorem 1]. For
        the interval, we take (·, x : I) ∈ B × P ; for the generating cofibrations Cof ⊆ Ωdec , we take
        finite unions of equations of the form r = s and r = ε. It is straightforward to check that
        these choices satisfy the axioms required to apply their theorem.
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                               13:15


    On the parametric side, we follow the BCH model. Given a context Γ interpreted as some
JΓK : C, its extension Γ, x : 2 is interpreted as the separated product JΓK ⊗ y(x : 2, ·), whose
elements at (Φ, Ψ) ∈ B × P are pairs (γ, r) with r ∈ Φ ∪ {0, 1} and γ ∈ JΓK(Φ \ {r}, Ψ).
Bridge-types are interpreted à la BCH path types; the inclusion of equations r = ε in Cof
ensures that they support coercion and composition. Gel-types can be interpreted similarly
to BCH G-types (though coercion and composition are much simpler in our case).
    One advantage of univalence is that we can obtain a relativistic universe without replacing
sets with I-sets, Bernardy et al. do [6]. In their theory, the isomorphism implemented by
gel and ungel is replaced by an equality Bridgex.Gelx (A,B,R) (M, N ) = RhM, N i. To ensure
that the interpretations of these types have exactly the same elements, sets are everywhere
replaced with I-sets. In our notation, these would be Φ-sets: for Φ ∈ B , a Φ-element is a
family indexed by subcontexts Φ0 ⊆ Φ, and a Φ-set is a set of Φ-elements. Interpreting types
as families of I-sets makes it possible to give an interpretation of Gel- and Bridge-types that
validates the above equation. In our work, on the contrary, the equality is replaced by an
isomorphism, obviating the need for I-sets. By exploiting univalence, we can still obtain a
path and so establish the target isomorphism between BridgeU (A, B) and A × B → U.


 7     Related and future work

Our parametric cubical type theory is, for the most part, simply the union of Angiuli et al.’s
cartesian cubical type theory [3] and Bernardy et al.’s internally parametric type theory [6].
We work with binary rather than unary parametricity, but as Bernardy et al. remark, this
requires only cosmetic changes. There is little interaction between the two halves of the
theory; we need only to check that coercion and composition can be defined for the new
types. For bridge types, this requires a minor change to the definition of composition, the
addition of r = ε tube equations. As discussed in Section 6, our Gel-types satisfy fewer
equations than the corresponding types in [6]; accordingly, our proof of relativity is novel.
    A second approach to internal parametricity has been developed by Nuyts, Vezzosi, and
Devriese [23]. Like ours, their system is based on paths and bridges. Where ours are almost
entirely separate, however, theirs are connected by a modality, which mediates between
variable uses in continuous and parametric positions. Intuitively, their goal is to internalize
the independence of element-level calculation from terms at the type level, whereas ours
is merely to internalize the relational interpretation. The divergence of aims leads to very
different considerations; in particular, their bridge dimensions are structural. In later work
[22], Nuyts and Devriese generalize from paths and bridges to an infinite tower of relations.
    Parametric cubical type theory also strongly resembles Riehl and Shulman’s directed
type theory [27]. Where ours has semantics in presheaves on B × P , theirs is aimed at
presheaves on ∆ × ∆, two copies of the simplex category. In both cases, one half of the base
category is used for equality, while the other endows types with a relational structure. For
directed type theory, the goal is to identify those types for which the relational structure is
actually a category structure, meaning that concatenable bridges have path-unique composites.
Interestingly, their model does not appear to admit a relativistic universe [26, §2].
    Stepping outside the realm of internalization, there has been general interest in higher-
dimensional generalizations of parametricity, for example in the work of Atkey et al. [4],
Benton et al. [5], Ghani et al. [19], and Sojakova and Johann [28]. Atkey et al.’s use of reflexive
graphs to construct a parametric model with a discrete universe is to Bernardy-Moulin-style
internal parametricity as the Hofmann-Streicher groupoid model [20] is to cubical type theory.




                                                                                                      CSL 2020
13:16   Internal Parametricity for Cubical Type Theory


           One unsolved problem looms large: to what extent do results in parametric type theory
        translate into ordinary type theory? Naturally, not all theorems translate – (f :U → bool) →
        Pathbool (f >, f ⊥) is provable in parametric type theory but refuted in classical cubical sets –
        but one reasonable conjecture is that proofs Γ  M ∈ A translate when Γ and A use no
        function types. It appears fairly straightforward to obtain results of this kind in semantics,
        but syntactic results are much murkier; similar conservativity questions for homotopy and
        cubical type theory over ordinary type theory remain open.


             References
         1   Andreas Abel, Jesper Cockx, Dominique Devriese, Amin Timany, and Philip Wadler. Leibniz
             Equality is Isomorphic to Martin-Löf Identity, Parametrically. Submitted to the Journal
             of Functional Programming, February 2018. URL: https://jesper.sikanda.be/files/
             leibniz-equality.pdf.
         2   Carlo Angiuli, Guillaume Brunerie, Thierry Coquand, Kuen-Bang Hou (Favonia), Robert
             Harper, and Daniel R. Licata. Syntax and Models of Cartesian Cubical Type Theory.
             Unpublished draft, February 2019. URL: https://github.com/dlicata335/cart-cube.
         3   Carlo Angiuli, Kuen-Bang Hou (Favonia), and Robert Harper. Cartesian Cubical Compu-
             tational Type Theory: Constructive Reasoning with Paths and Equalities. In 27th EACSL
             Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, CSL 2018, September 4-7, 2018, Birmingham,
             UK, pages 6:1–6:17, 2018. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2018.6.
         4   Robert Atkey, Neil Ghani, and Patricia Johann. A relationally parametric model of dependent
             type theory. In The 41st Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of
             Programming Languages, POPL ’14, San Diego, CA, USA, January 20-21, 2014, pages
             503–516, 2014. doi:10.1145/2535838.2535852.
         5   Nick Benton, Martin Hofmann, and Vivek Nigam. Abstract effects and proof-relevant logical
             relations. In The 41st Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Pro-
             gramming Languages, POPL ’14, San Diego, CA, USA, January 20-21, 2014, pages 619–632,
             2014. doi:10.1145/2535838.2535869.
         6   Jean-Philippe Bernardy, Thierry Coquand, and Guilhem Moulin. A Presheaf Model of
             Parametric Type Theory. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., 319:67–82, 2015. doi:10.1016/
             j.entcs.2015.12.006.
         7   Jean-Philippe Bernardy, Patrik Jansson, and Ross Paterson. Parametricity and dependent
             types. In ICFP 2010, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, September 27-29, 2010, pages 345–356,
             2010.
         8   Jean-Philippe Bernardy and Guilhem Moulin. A Computational Interpretation of Parametricity.
             In LICS 2012, Dubrovnik, Croatia, June 25-28, 2012, pages 135–144, 2012. doi:10.1109/
             LICS.2012.25.
         9   Jean-Philippe Bernardy and Guilhem Moulin. Type-theory in color. In ICFP 2013, Boston,
             MA, USA - September 25 - 27, 2013, pages 61–72, 2013. doi:10.1145/2500365.2500577.
        10   Marc Bezem, Thierry Coquand, and Simon Huber. A Model of Type Theory in Cubical Sets.
             In 19th International Conference on Types for Proofs and Programs, TYPES 2013, April
             22-26, 2013, Toulouse, France, pages 107–128, 2013. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.TYPES.2013.107.
        11   Marc Bezem, Thierry Coquand, and Simon Huber. The Univalence Axiom in Cubical Sets. J.
             Autom. Reasoning, 63(2):159–171, 2019. doi:10.1007/s10817-018-9472-6.
        12   Guillaume Brunerie. Computer-generated proofs for the monoidal structure of the smash
             product. Homotopy Type Theory Electronic Seminar Talks, November 2018. URL: https:
             //www.uwo.ca/math/faculty/kapulkin/seminars/hottest.html.
        13   Ulrik Buchholtz and Edward Morehouse. Varieties of Cubical Sets. In Relational and Algebraic
             Methods in Computer Science - 16th International Conference, RAMiCS 2017, Lyon, France,
             May 15-18, 2017, Proceedings, pages 77–92, 2017. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-57418-9_5.
E. Cavallo and R. Harper                                                                                13:17


14   Evan Cavallo and Robert Harper. Higher inductive types in cubical computational type theory.
     PACMPL, 3(POPL):1:1–1:27, 2019. doi:10.1145/3290314.
15   Evan Cavallo and Robert Harper. Parametric Cubical Type Theory, 2019. arXiv:1901.00489.
16   James Cheney. A dependent nominal type theory. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 8(1),
     2012. doi:10.2168/LMCS-8(1:8)2012.
17   Cyril Cohen, Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. Cubical Type Theory:
     A Constructive Interpretation of the Univalence Axiom. In 21st International Conference
     on Types for Proofs and Programs, TYPES 2015, May 18-21, 2015, Tallinn, Estonia, pages
     5:1–5:34, 2015. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.TYPES.2015.5.
18   Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. On Higher Inductive Types in Cubical
     Type Theory. In LICS 2018, Oxford, UK, July 9-12, 2018, 2018. doi:10.1145/3209108.
     3209197.
19   Neil Ghani, Patricia Johann, Fredrik Nordvall Forsberg, Federico Orsanigo, and Tim Revell.
     Bifibrational Functorial Semantics of Parametric Polymorphism. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput.
     Sci., 319:165–181, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2015.12.011.
20   Martin Hofmann and Thomas Streicher. The groupoid interpretation of type theory. In
     Twenty-five years of constructive type theory (Venice, 1995), volume 36 of Oxford Logic Guides,
     pages 83–111. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1998.
21   Guilhem Moulin. Internalizing Parametricity. PhD thesis, Chalmers University of Technology,
     Gothenburg, Sweden, 2016. URL: https://research.chalmers.se/en/publication/235758.
22   Andreas Nuyts and Dominique Devriese. Degrees of Relatedness: A Unified Framework
     for Parametricity, Irrelevance, Ad Hoc Polymorphism, Intersections, Unions and Algebra
     in Dependent Type Theory. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
     Logic in Computer Science, LICS 2018, Oxford, UK, July 09-12, 2018, pages 779–788, 2018.
     doi:10.1145/3209108.3209119.
23   Andreas Nuyts, Andrea Vezzosi, and Dominique Devriese. Parametric quantifiers for dependent
     type theory. PACMPL, 1(ICFP):32:1–32:29, 2017. doi:10.1145/3110276.
24   Ian Orton and Andrew M. Pitts. Axioms for Modelling Cubical Type Theory in a Topos.
     Logical Methods in Computer Science, 14(4), 2018. doi:10.23638/LMCS-14(4:23)2018.
25   John C. Reynolds. Types, Abstraction and Parametric Polymorphism. In IFIP Congress,
     pages 513–523, 1983.
26   Emily Riehl. On the directed univalence axiom. Talk slides, AMS Special Session on Homotopy
     Type Theory, Joint Mathematics Meetings, January 2018. URL: http://www.math.jhu.edu/
     ~eriehl/JMM2018-directed-univalence.pdf.
27   Emily Riehl and Michael Shulman. A type theory for synthetic ∞-categories. Higher Structures,
     1(1):116–193, 2017. URL: https://journals.mq.edu.au/index.php/higher_structures/
     article/view/36.
28   Kristina Sojakova and Patricia Johann. A General Framework for Relational Parametricity. In
     Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, LICS
     2018, Oxford, UK, July 09-12, 2018, pages 869–878, 2018. doi:10.1145/3209108.3209141.
29   The RedPRL Development Team. redtt, 2018. URL: https://github.com/RedPRL/redtt.
30   The Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of
     Mathematics. https://homotopytypetheory.org/book, Institute for Advanced Study, 2013.
31   Floris van Doorn. On the Formalization of Higher Inductive Types and Synthetic Homotopy
     Theory. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2018.
32   Vladimir Voevodsky. The equivalence axiom and univalent models of type theory, 2014. Talk
     at CMU on February 4, 2010. arXiv:1402.5556.
33   Philip Wadler. Theorems for Free! In FPCA 1989, London, UK, September 11-13, 1989,
     pages 347–359, 1989. doi:10.1145/99370.99404.




                                                                                                       CSL 2020
