On the Complexity of Value Iteration
Nikhil Balaji
University of Oxford, UK
nikhil.balaji@cs.ox.ac.uk

Stefan Kiefer
University of Oxford, UK
stekie@cs.ox.ac.uk

Petr Novotný
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
petr.novotny@fi.muni.cz

Guillermo A. Pérez
University of Antwerp, Belgium
guillermoalberto.perez@uantwerpen.be

Mahsa Shirmohammadi
CNRS, Paris, France
IRIF, Paris, France
mahsa.shirmohammadi@irif.fr

      Abstract
Value iteration is a fundamental algorithm for solving Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). It
computes the maximal n-step payoff by iterating n times a recurrence equation which is naturally
associated to the MDP. At the same time, value iteration provides a policy for the MDP that is
optimal on a given finite horizon n. In this paper, we settle the computational complexity of value
iteration. We show that, given a horizon n in binary and an MDP, computing an optimal policy is
EXPTIME-complete, thus resolving an open problem that goes back to the seminal 1987 paper on
the complexity of MDPs by Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis. To obtain this main result, we develop
several stepping stones that yield results of an independent interest. For instance, we show that
it is EXPTIME-complete to compute the n-fold iteration (with n in binary) of a function given
by a straight-line program over the integers with max and + as operators. We also provide new
complexity results for the bounded halting problem in linear-update counter machines.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Probabilistic computation; Theory of
computation → Logic and verification; Theory of computation → Markov decision processes

Keywords and phrases Markov decision processes, Value iteration, Formal verification

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.102

Category Track B: Automata, Logic, Semantics, and Theory of Programming

Related Version A full version of the paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04920.

Funding Nikhil Balaji: Part of this work was done was when the author was a Postdoctoral fellow
at Ulm university supported by DFG grant TH 472/4.
Stefan Kiefer: is supported by a Royal Society University Research Fellowship.
Petr Novotný: is supported by the Czech Science Foundation, grant no. GJ19-15134Y “Verification
and Analysis of Probabilistic Programs.”
Mahsa Shirmohammadi: is supported by the “AAPS” PEPS JCJC grant.

Acknowledgements We thank James Worrell for helpful comments on early version of this work.
             © Nikhil Balaji, Stefan Kiefer, Petr Novotný, Guillermo A. Pérez, and
                                                                                                      EA




             Mahsa Shirmohammadi;
                                                                                                      TC S




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
46th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2019).
Editors: Christel Baier, Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Paola Flocchini, and Stefano Leonardi;
Article No. 102; pp. 102:1–102:15
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
102:2   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


            1    Introduction
        Markov decision processes (MDP) are a fundamental formalism of decision making under
        probabilistic uncertainty [29, 9]. As such, they play a prominent role in numerous domains,
        including artificial intelligence and machine learning [34, 33], control theory [10, 1], operations
        research and finance [11, 31], as well as formal verification [12, 5], to name a few. Informally,
        an MDP represents a system which is, at every time step, in one of the states from a finite
        set S. The system evolves in steps: in each step, we can perform an action (or decision) from
        a finite set A. When using an action a ∈ A in state s ∈ S, we collect an immediate reward
        R(s, a) and then transition stochastically to a successor state according to a rational-valued
        distribution P (s, a), which is given as a part of the MDP. This interaction with an MDP
        proceeds over either a finite or infinite horizon. In the finite-horizon case, we are given a
        bound H ∈ N (a horizon) such that the interaction stops after H steps; in the infinite horizon
        case the process goes on forever. To solve an MDP means to find an optimal policy; that is,
        a blueprint for selecting actions that maximizes the expected reward accumulated over a
        finite or infinite horizon. The accumulated rewards are typically discounted by some factor
        0 < γ ≤ 1; for infinite horizon, we need γ < 1 to ensure that the infinite sum is well defined.

        Value iteration. Given the importance of MDPs, it is hardly surprising that they have
        attracted significant interest in the theory community. Past research on MDPs included the
        study of complexity issues [27] as well as the design and analysis of algorithms for solving
        MDPs [22, 24, 38, 39]. In this paper, we provide a fresh look on one of the most familiar
        algorithms for MDPs: value iteration (VI). Introduced by Bellman in the 1950s [6], VI makes
        use of the optimality principle: the maximal n-step reward achievable from a state s, which
        we denote by ~vn (s), satisfies the recurrence
                          (                                            )
                                          X
                                                        0            0
            ~vn (s) = max R(s, a) + γ ·       P (s, a)(s ) · ~vn−1 (s ) ,                        (1)
                       a∈A
                                            s0 ∈S

        with ~v0 (s) = 0. Consequently, a finite-horizon policy is optimal if and only if it chooses, in
        a situation when the current state is s and n steps are remaining, an action maximizing
        the right-hand side (RHS) of (1). Thus, to solve an MDP with a finite horizon H, the VI
        algorithm computes the values ~vn (s) for all 0 ≤ n ≤ H and all states s, by iterating the
        recurrence (1). Using these values, VI then outputs (using some tie-breaking rule) some
        policy satisfying the aforementioned optimality characterization. VI can be deployed also
        for infinite-horizon MDPs: one can effectively compute a horizon H such that action a is
        optimal in state s for an infinite horizon1 if it maximizes the RHS of (1) for n = H [8]. This
        H has a bit-size which is polynomial in the size of the original MDP, but the magnitude of
        H can be exponential in the size of the MDP if the discount factor is given in binary [22].
            VI is one of the most popular MDP-solving algorithms due to its versatility (as shown
        above, it can be used for several MDP-related problems) and conceptual simplicity, which
        makes it easy to implement within different programming paradigms [30, 37], including
        implementation via neural nets [35]. Several variants of VI with improved performance were
        developed [36, 14]. For instance, the recent paper by Sidford et al. [32] presented a new class
        of randomized VI techniques with the best theoretical runtime bounds (for certain values


        1
            In infinite-horizon MDPs, there is always an optimal stationary policy, which makes decisions based
            only on the current state. [29]
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                102:3


of parameters) among all known MDP solvers. The paper also expresses hope that their
techniques “will be useful in the development of even faster MDP algorithms.” To get insight
into the underlying structure of VI, which might enable or limit further such accelerations, we
take a complexity-theoretic vantage point and study the theoretical complexity of computing
an outcome of a VI execution. That is, we consider the following decision problem ValIt:
given an MDP with a finite horizon H (encoded as a binary number), does a given action
a maximize the RHS of (1) for n = H? This problem is inspired by the paper of Fearnley
and Savani [16], where they show PSPACE-hardness (and thus also completeness) for the
problem of determining an outcome of policy iteration, another well-known algorithm for
MDP solving. To the best of our knowledge, VI has not yet been explicitly subjected to this
type of analysis. However, questions about the complexity of ValIt were implicitly raised by
previous work on the complexity of finite-horizon MDPs, as discussed in the next paragraph.

Finite-horizon MDPs. The complexity of finite-horizon MDPs is a long-standing open
problem. Since “finding an optimal policy” is a function problem, we can instead consider
the decision variant: “In a given finite-horizon MDP, is it optimal to use a given action in
the first step?” As discussed above, this is exactly the ValIt problem in disguise.
     In the seminal 1987 paper on the complexity of MDPs [27], Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis
showed P-completeness of a special case of finite-horizon optimization where the horizon H
has magnitude polynomial in the size of the MDP. At the same time, they noted that in the
general case of binary-encoded H, VI can be executed on an EXPTIME-bounded Turing
machine (since H is represented using log(H) bits, the number of iterations is exponential in
the size of the input). Hence ValIt is in EXPTIME. However, the exact complexity of
the general finite-horizon optimization remained open ever since, with the best lower bound
being the P-hardness inherited from the “polynomial H” sub-problem. Tseng [36] presented
a more efficient (though still exponential) algorithm for finite-horizon MDPs satisfying a
certain stability condition; in the same paper, he comments that “in view of the stability
assumptions needed to obtain an exact solution and the absence of negative results, we are
still far from a complete complexity theory for this problem.”
     In this paper, we address this issue, provide the missing negative results, and provide
tight bounds on the computational complexity of ValIt and finite-horizon MDP optimization.

Our Results
The main result of the paper is that ValIt is EXPTIME-complete (Theorem 1). In the
rest of this section, we first explain some challenges we needed to overcome to obtain the
result. Then we sketch our main techniques and conclude with discussing the significance of
our results, which extends beyond MDPs to several areas of independent interest.

Challenges
 Bitsize of numbers. One might be tempted to believe that ValIt is in PSPACE, since
 the algorithm needs to store only polynomially many values at a time. However, the bitsize
 of these values may become exponentially large during the computation (e.g., the quantity
~vn (s) may halve in every step). Hence, the algorithm cannot be directly implemented by
 a polynomial-space Turing machine (TM). One could try to adapt the method of Allender
 et al. [20, 2] based on an intricate use of the Chinese remainder representation (CRR) of
 integers. However, there is no known way of computing the max operation directly and
 efficiently on numbers in CRR.



                                                                                                  ICALP 2019
102:4   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


            EXPTIME-bounded        Prop 6      Bounded termination       Thm 7     Straight-Line
              Turing Machine                of simple counter programs           Program powering
               termination
                                                                                          Thm 5
               Finite-Horizon     Thm 3
                reachability                      Synchronizing          Thm 4       Monotone
                                                  reachability in                  SLP powering
                                  Thm 2      Markov decision processes
               Value Iteration

           Figure 1 Chain of reductions.


        Complex optimal policies. Another hope for PSPACE membership would be a possibly
        special structure of optimal policies. Fixing any concrete policy turns an MDP into a
        Markov chain, whose H-step behavior can be evaluated in polynomial space (using, e.g., the
        aforementioned CRR technique of Allender et al.). If we could prove that (A) an optimal
        policy can be represented in polynomial space and (B) that the Markov chain induced by
        such a policy is polynomially large in the size of the MDP, we would get the following
        PSPACE algorithm: cycle through all policies that satisfy (A) and (B), evaluate each of
        them, and keep track of the best one found so far. Tseng [36] commented that optimal
        policies in finite-horizon MDPs are “poorly understood”. Hence, there was still hope that
        optimal Markovian deterministic policies may have a shape that satisfies both (A) and (B).
        Unless PSPACE = EXPTIME, our results put such hopes to rest.

        No hardness by succinctness. One might try to prove EXPTIME-hardness using a
        succinctness argument. The results of [27] show that ValIt is P-hard when the horizon
        is written in unary, and many optimization problems over discrete structures incur an
        exponential blow-up in complexity when the discrete structure is encoded succinctly, e.g., by
        a circuit [28]. Giving a horizon H in binary amounts to a succinct encoding of an exponentially
        large MDP obtained by “unfolding” the original MDP into a DAG-like MDP of depth H.
        This unfolded MDP is “narrow” in the sense that it consists of many polynomial-sized layers,
        while standard EXPTIME-hardness-by-succinctness proofs, use succinct structures of an
        exponential “width” and “depth”, accommodating the tape contents of an EXPTIME-
        bounded TM. Hence, straightforward succinctness proofs do not apply here; e.g., there does
        not seem to be a direct reduction from the succinct circuit value problem.

        Our Techniques
        To obtain EXPTIME-hardness of ValIt, we proceed by a sequence of non-trivial reductions.
        Below we outline these reductions in the order in which they appear in the sequence, see
        Figure 1. In the main text, we present the reductions in a different order (indicated by
        the numbering of propositions and theorems), so that we start with MDPs and gradually
        introduce more technical notions.
            We start from a canonical EXPTIME-complete problem: the halting problem for an
        exponential-time TM. We then present a reduction to a halting problem for a class of counter
        programs (CPs; simple imperative programs with integer variables) that allow for linear
        variable updates. In this way, we encode the tape contents into numerical values (6). The
        crucial feature of this reduction is that the produced CP possesses a special simplicity
        property, which imposes certain restrictions on the use of tests during the computation.
            Next, we introduce straight-line programs (SLPs) with max, +, and − operations. SLPs
        are a standard model of arithmetic computation [3] and they can be equivalently viewed
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                 102:5


as arithmetic circuits consisting (in our case) of max, +, and − gates. We also consider
a sub-class of SLPs with only max, + operations, so called monotone SLPs. We define
the following powering problem: given a function f : Qn → Qn represented as an SLP, a
horizon H, an initial argument ~x ∈ {0, 1}n , and two indices 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, is it true that the
i-component of f H (~x), i.e. the image of ~x with respect to the H-fold composition of f , is
greater than the j-component of f H (~x)? Although VI in MDPs does not necessarily involve
integers, the powering problem for monotone SLPs captures the complexity inherent in
iterating the recurrence (1). To obtain a reduction from CPs to SLP powering, we construct
SLP gadgets with max, + and − (minus) operations to simulate the tests in CPs; the
simplicity of the input CP is crucial for this reduction to work (Theorem 7). To get rid of
the minus operation, we adapt a technique by Allender et al. [4], which introduces a new
“offset” counter and models subtraction by increasing the value of the offset (Theorem 5).
    A final step is to show a reduction from monotone SLP powering to ValIt. The reduction
proceeds via an intermediate problem of synchronizing reachability in MDPs (maximize the
probability of being in a target set of states T after exactly H steps [15]). This divides a
rather technical reduction into more comprehensible parts. We present novel reductions
from monotone SLP powering to synchronizing reachability (Theorem 4), and from the
latter problem to ValIt (Theorem 2). As a by-product, we present a reduction proving
EXPTIME-hardness of finite-horizon reachability in MDPs, arguably the conceptually
simplest objective in probabilistic decision-making (Theorem 3).


Significance
As our main result, we characterize the complexity of computing an outcome of VI, one of the
fundamental algorithms for solving both finite- and infinite-horizon MDPs. As a consequence,
we resolve a long-standing complexity issue [27] of solving finite-horizon MDPs.
    On our way to proving this result, we encounter non-trivial stepping stones which are of
an independent interest. First, we shed light on the complexity of succinctly represented
arithmetic circuits, showing that comparing two output wires of a given (max, +)-circuit
incurs an exponential blow-up in complexity already when employing a very rudimental form
of succinctness: composing a single (max, +)-circuit with H copies of itself, yielding a circuit
of exponential “height” but only polynomial “width.” Second, we obtain new hardness results
for the bounded reachability problem in linear-update counter programs. CPs are related
to several classical abstractions of computational machines, such as Minsky machines and
Petri nets [25], see [13] for a recent breakthrough in this area. Our work establishes a novel
connection between counter programs and MDPs.


Further Related Work
Our work is also related to a series of papers on finite-horizon planning [21, 17, 18, 23].
The survey paper [26] provides a comprehensive overview of these results. These papers
consider either MDPs with a polynomially large horizon, or succinctly represented MDPs
of possibly exponential “width” (the succinctness was achieved by circuit-encoding). The
aforementioned hardness-by-succinctness proofs are often used here. The arbitrary horizon
problem for standard MDPs, which we study, is left open in these papers, and our work
employs substantially different techniques. The complexity of finite-horizon decentralized
MDPs was studied in [7].



                                                                                                   ICALP 2019
102:6   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


         2       Markov Decision Processes and Finite-Horizon Problems
        We start with some preliminaries. A probability distribution d : S → [0, 1] over a finite set S is
                               P
        a function such that s∈S d(s) = 1. We denote by D(S) the set of all (rational) probability
        distributions over S. The Dirac distribution on s ∈ S assigns probability 1 to s.
            A Markov decision process (MDP) M = (S, A, P, R, γ) consists of a finite set S of
        states, a finite set A of actions, a transition function P : S × A → D(S), a reward function
        R : S × A → Q, and a discount factor γ ∈ (0, 1]. The transition function P assigns to each
        state s and action a a distribution over the successor states, while the reward function assigns
        to s and a a rational reward.
            A path % is an alternating sequence s0 a1 s1 · · · an sn of visited states and played actions
                                                                                                     %
        in M (that starts and ends in a state); write |%| = n for the length of %. We may use s0 → sn
        to denote that path % goes from s0 to sn . We extend the reward function R from single
        state-action pairs to paths by R(%) = 1≤i≤n R(si−1 , ai )γ i−1 .
                                                 P

            A policy for the controller is a function σ that assigns to each path a distribution over
        actions. Let PM,s,σ (%) denote the probability of a path % starting in s when the controller
        follows the policy σ. This probability is defined inductively by setting PM,s,σ (s0 ) = 1 if
        s = s0 , and PM,s,σ (s0 ) = 0 otherwise. For a path % = s0 a1 s1 · · · sn−1 an sn , we set

             PM,s,σ (%) = PM,s,σ (s0 · · · sn−1 ) · σ(s0 · · · sn−1 )(an ) · P (sn−1 , an )(sn ) .

        We omit the subscripts from PM,s,σ (·) if they are clear from the context. Additionally, we
        extend PM,s,σ (·) to sets of paths of the same length by summing the probabilities of all the
        paths in the set.
            In this paper, we focus on a special class of policies: A (deterministic) Markov policy is
        a function σ : N × S → A. Intuitively, a controller following a Markov policy plays σ(n, s)
        from s if it is the n-th visited state, irrespective of the other states in the path. Markov
        policies suffice for the problems we consider.

        2.1      Finite-Horizon Problems
        Given an MDP M, the core problem of MDPs is computing the values of states with respect
        to the maximum expected reward. Let ~vn ∈ QS denote the vector of n-step maximum expected
        rewards obtainable from each state of the MDP. That is, for all s ∈ S we have that
                                            
                            X
            ~vn (s) = max    Ps,σ (%) · R(%) .
                        σ
                               |%|=n


         Note that ~v0 = ~0 by this definition. The vector ~vn can be computed by value iteration, i.e.
         by iterating the recurrence stated in Equation (1). From that recurrence, for each n ∈ N and
         state s0 , one can extract an (optimal) Markov policy σ that achieves the maximum value
        ~vn (s0 ) after n steps: for each s ∈ S and for 1 ≤ i ≤ n we have
                                     (                                          )
                                                   X
                                                                 0            0
             σ(i − 1, s) = argmax R(s, a) + γ ·        P (s, a)(s ) · ~vn−i (s ) .
                               a∈A
                                                       s0 ∈S

            Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis posed the finite-horizon reward problem which asks to
        compute such an optimal policy for the controller [27]. Formally, given an MDP M, an
        initial state s0 ∈ S, a distinguished action a ∈ A, and a horizon H ∈ N encoded in binary,
        the finite-horizon reward problem asks whether there exists a policy achieving ~vH (s0 ) by
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                                           102:7

                                                                                                                        
                                                                                 1              1            1
          MDP N                    s2                        ~vn (s) = max         ~vn−1 (s1 ) + ~vn−1 (s2 ), ~vn−1 (s1 )
                                                                                 4              4            2
                   a, 0 : 12                                               1
                                              a, b, 2 : 1   ~vn (s1 ) =2 + ~vn−1 (s)
                                                                           2
              s                    s3                 t                    1
                                                            ~vn (s2 ) =2 + ~vn−1 (t)
                     a, b, 0 : 1        a, b, 1 : 1                        2
  a, 0 : 21                                                                1
                     a, b, 2 : 1                              ~vn (t) =1 + ~vn−1 (s3 )
  b, 0 : 1                                                                 2
                                                                       1
                                                            ~vn (s3 ) = ~vn−1 (s)
              s1                                                       2


   Figure 2 The transitions are labelled with actions, rewards and their probabilities. For example,
the reward of the transition from s to s1 on action a is 0, and its probability is 12 .


 choosing a as the first action from s0 . Note that this problem is equivalent to the ValIt
 problem defined in the introduction.
     Consider the MDP N depicted in Figure 2 with γ = 12 . By iterating the indicated
 recurrence, we have that ~v5 (s) = max( 14 ~v4 (s1 ) + 14 ~v4 (s2 ), 12 ~v4 (s1 )) = 41
                                                                                      32 . The value of
~v5 (s) is due to the second argument of max (corresponding to action b), hence a policy to
 maximize ~v5 (s) starts with b in s.
     The finite-horizon reward problem can be decided by value iteration in exponential
 time by unfolding recurrence (1) for H steps [29], while the best known lower bound is
 P-hardness [27]. Our main result closes this long-standing complexity gap:
I Theorem 1. The finite-horizon reward problem (and thus also the ValIt problem) is
EXPTIME-complete.
    To prove EXPTIME-completeness of the finite-horizon reward problem, we introduce a
variant of reachability, which we call synchronized reachability [15]. Let t ∈ S be a target
state. For reachability, the objective is to maximize the probability of taking a path from s
to t, whereas in synchronized reachability only a subset of such paths with the same length
are considered.
    Let M be an MDP, s0 an initial state, and a an action. Define p~≤n ∈ QS as the vector of
maximum probabilities of taking a path to t within n steps. Similarly, define p~=n ∈ QS to be
the vector of maximum probabilities of taking such a path with length exactly n. Formally,
for all s ∈ S we have that
                            %
                                                                         %
                                                                                         
    p~≤n (s) = max Ps,σ ({s → t : |%| ≤ n}) and p~=n (s) = max Ps,σ ({s → t : |%| = n}) .
                       σ                                                         σ

Given a horizon H, encoded in binary, the finite-horizon reachability problem asks
whether an optimal policy achieving p~≤H (s0 ) chooses action a as the first action from s0 ;
the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem asks whether an optimal policy
achieving p~=H (s0 ) chooses action a as the first action from s0 .

2.2      Connections Among Finite-Horizon Problems
We now prove the following theorem.
I Theorem 2. The finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem reduces, in polynomial
time, to the finite-horizon reward problem.
   Consider an MDP M, an initial state s0 , an action a and a target state t. The following
recurrence can be used to compute p~=n (s):
                  (                              )
                    X
                                 0             0
   p~=n (s) = max      P (s, a)(s ) · p~=n−1 (s ) ,                                     (2)
                     a∈A
                               s0 ∈S

                                                                                                                             ICALP 2019
102:8   On the Complexity of Value Iteration


        where p~0 (t) = 1 and p~0 (s) = 0 for all s 6= t. We construct a new MDP N obtained from M
        by replacing all transitions by two consecutive transitions. The construction is such that
        the probability of going from s to t with a path of length n in M is equal to the probability
        of going from s to t with a path of length 2n in N . More formally, for all s, s0 and a with
                                                   −:p                                1:p        0:1
        P (s, a)(s0 ) = p, the transition     s          s0   is replaced with   s                      s0   if
                                            1
                                0:p         γ :1
        s = t and with s                          s0 otherwise; where 0 < γ ≤ 1 is an arbitrary chosen
        discount factor for N , and the intermediate state in both cases is a new state. The MDP N
        in Figure 2 is the result of applying the construction to M in Figure 3 with γ = 12 .
            For the constructed MDP N , one can show that for all states s, an action is optimal to
        maximize p~=2H (s) if and only if it is optimal to maximize ~v2H+1 (s). Consider the MDPs
        from Figure 2 as an example. We have previously argued that a policy maximizing ~v5 (s)
        in N starts with action b. Observe that the optimal first choice to maximize p~4 (s) is also b.
        This implies that an optimal policy of M for synchronized-reachability with H = 2 starts
        with b, too. By the above argument, the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability problem
        reduces to the finite-horizon reward problem.
            Hence, to obtain Theorem 1, it remains to determine the complexity of the finite-horizon
        synchronized-reachability problem. To this aim, we show a close connection between MDPs
        and a class of piecewise-affine functions represented by straight line programs (SLPs). Section 3
        provides the details.

        Finite-horizon reachability. We also show the finite-horizon synchronized-reachability prob-
        lem reduces to the finite-horizon reachability problem. We remark that the natural probability-
        1 variants of these problems have different complexities: specifically, the problem of reaching t
        from s within H steps with probability 1 is in P; however, the analogous problem of reaching
        t from s in exactly H steps with probability 1 is PSPACE-complete [15].

        I Theorem 3. The finite-horizon synchronized reachability problem reduces, in polynomial
        time, to the finite-horizon reachability problem.


         3      Straight-Line Programs and The Powering Problem
        We now establish the connection between MDPs and SLP powering. We start with prelimin-
        aries.
            For all n ∈ N, define the set varn := {x1 , . . . , xn } of variables and the collection of terms

             Tn := {a1 xj1 + · · · + an xjn + b | ai , b ∈ {−1, 0, 1} and 1 ≤ ji ≤ n, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n}.

        A straight-line program (SLP) of order n is a sequence c1 , . . . , cm of commands of the form
        x ← max(T ), where x ∈ varn and T ⊆ Tn is non-empty. We refer to commands x ← b as
        initializations. Recall that min(x, y) = − max(−x, −y).
            For complexity analyses we shall assume that T , for every command, is given explicitly
        as a list of terms. Each term is also assumed to be explicitly represented as a constant, a
        list of coefficients ai , and a list of indices ji , both lists having length n (i.e. the number of
        variables). The size of T , and also that of the command, corresponds to the length of its list
        of terms; the size of the SLP, the sum of the sizes of its commands.
            A valuation ν is a vector in Zn , where the i-th coordinate gives the value of xi . The
        semantics of a command c is a function JcK : Zn → Zn , transforming a valuation into another.
        An SLP S = c1 , . . . , cm defines the function JSK : Zn → Zn obtained by composing the
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                         102:9


constituent commands: JSK = Jcm K ◦ · · · ◦ Jc1 K. Clearly this is a piecewise-affine function.
Given a function f : Zn → Zn , we define its m-th power as f m : Zn → Zn where

   fm = f ◦ · · · ◦ f
        | {z }
            m times

is the m-fold composition of f .
    We denote by Tn+ the set of terms a1 xj1 +· · ·+an xjn +b where the coefficients a1 , · · · , an , b
are in {0, 1}. An SLP that only uses terms in Tn+ is called monotone. Note that monotone
SLPs induce monotone functions from Zn to Zn (subtraction and min are not allowed).

3.1    The Powering Problem
For an SLP S of order n, a valuation ν ∈ Nn and m ∈ N (encoded in binary), let ν 0 =
JSKm (ν). Given two variables x, y ∈ varn of the SLP, the powering problem asks whether
ν 0 (x) ≥ ν 0 (y). Since the initial valuations ν are always non-negative, all valuations obtained
by powering monotone SLPs are non-negative. The above problem is P-complete if the
exponent m is written in unary [19].
     Observe that all numbers generated by powering an SLP can be represented using
exponentially-many bits in the bitsize of the exponent. It follows that the powered SLP can
be explicitly evaluated in exponential time. We provide a matching lower bound in Section 4.
Before that, we show the connection of SLP powering to MDPs.

3.2    Synchronized Reachability and SLP Powering
The connection is stated in the following Theorem.
I Theorem 4. The powering problem for monotone SLPs reduces, in polynomial time, to
the finite-horizon synchronized reachability problem in MDPs.
To illustrate this reduction, let us consider the SLP S of order 2:

   x1 ← max(x1 + x2 , x2 + x2 );               x2 ← max(x1 + x1 , x1 + x1 ).

This SLP is normalized, that is to say all its max commands have exactly two arguments
t1 , t2 ∈ Tn+ and furthermore t1 , t2 have exactly two summands. (Note that focusing on
normalized SLPs is no loss of generality.) We are interested in the 2-nd power of S with
initial valuation ν(x1 ) = 0 and ν(x2 ) = 1. In Figure 3, two copies of S are shown on the
right to visualize the concept of powering it. To obtain an MDP, we consider a set of actions
A = {a, b} and have each variable xi become a state. In the example, s and t are the
corresponding states for x1 and x2 . The t1 , t2 arguments of max commands determine the
successors of actions a, b, respectively, where each successor has probability 12 . The command
x1 ← max(x1 + x2 , x2 + x2 ) translates to P (s, a)(s) = P (s, a)(t) = 12 and P (s, b)(s) = 1, as
shown in the MDP in Figure 3. Since ν(x2 ) = 1, we make t a target state. Now the i-th
iteration of value iteration of (2) (corresponding to the i-th step before the horizon) is tightly
connected to the i-th power of the SLP. Indeed, letting νi = JSKi (ν), one can prove that
p~=i (s) = 21i νi (s) and p~=i (t) = 21i νi (t).

SLP vs. monotone SLP powering. It thus remains to provide a lower bound for the
Monotone SLP powering problem. The crucial step, which we cover in Section 4, is providing
lower bounds for the non-monotone variant. The remaining step from non-monotone to
monotone powering can be made by adapting the techniques of Allender et al. [4].



                                                                                                           ICALP 2019
102:10 On the Complexity of Value Iteration


             x1        x2                               s            t
                               2-nd power                                starting step
          max          max                              ?         ?

             +          +                          a        b    a, b
                                                                                            a : 21
                                                    1            1
                                                    2
                                                                                            b:1
                                                                 2
             x1        x2                               s            t                                a : 21
                               1-st power                                1-st step
          max          max                              ?         ?                           s                t

             +          +                          a        b    a, b                                MDP M
                                                    1            1
                                                    2            2
          x1 : 0      x2 : 1                            s            t
                               initialization                            2-nd step

             Figure 3 An example for the translation from SLPs to MDPs.


        I Theorem 5. The powering problem for arbitrary SLPs reduces, in polynomial time, to the
        powering problem for monotone SLPs.


         4         Main Reductions
        To show EXPTIME-hardness of all the problems introduced so far, we introduce a class of
        counter programs that allow linear updates on counters and show that a (time-)bounded
        version of the termination problem for these programs is EXPTIME-complete. Finally, we
        reduce this bounded termination problem to the powering problem.
            A deterministic linear-update counter program (CP) consists of n counters {ci | 1 ≤ i ≤ n},
        ranging over Z, and a sequence of m instructions. We consider instructions of the form

             p : c1 ← c2 + c3            p : if c1 ≥ c2 goto t           p : c1 ← c2 − c3

        where 1 ≤ p < m and 1 ≤ t ≤ m, and the final instruction is always m : halt. More precisely,
        the instructions allow
          (i) adding or subtracting two counters, assigning the result to a third one, and continuing
              to the next instruction;
         (ii) testing two counters against each other, and jumping to some given instruction if the
              result of the test is positive, continuing to the next instruction otherwise.
        The halt instruction only loops to itself.
            A configuration of a CP is a tuple (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) ∈ {1, . . . , m} × Zn consisting of an
        instruction p and values of the counters (e.g., v1 is the value for the counter c1 ). We equip
        CPs with a fixed initial configuration lying in {1} × Nn . Given a CP, the termination prob-
        lem asks whether the halt instruction is reached. The bounded termination problem
        additionally takes as input an integer N ∈ N, encoded in binary, and asks whether the halt
        instruction is reached within N steps.
            The bounded termination problem is in EXPTIME: in a computation with N steps,
        the magnitude of the counters is bounded by 2N , so each step can be simulated in time
        exponential in the bitsize of N . We will now show that the problem is EXPTIME-hard
        already for a certain subclass of CPs which facilitates the reductions to the powering problem.

        Simple counter programs. A CP is simple if it satisfies the following conditions. First,
        all values in all reachable configurations (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) are non-negative: vi ∈ N for all
        1 ≤ i ≤ n (one may “guard” subtractions by test instructions to achieve this). Second, all test
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                             102:11


instructions q : if ci ≥ cj goto r use counters c1 and c2 exclusively. Moreover, for each such
instruction q, there are counters cq̄1 , cq̄2 such that in all reachable configurations (q, v1 , . . . , vn )
we have that
 1. v1 = a1 vq̄1 and v2 = a2 vq̄2 with a1 , a2 ∈ {64, 64 · 10, 64 · 12}. That is, the values of tested
    counters are “scaled-up” versions of the values of other counters.
 2. Additionally, the absolute difference of the values of the tested counters is larger than the
    values of all other counters, in symbols |v1 − v2 | ≥ max{vk | 3 ≤ k ≤ n}.
Note that the class of simple CPs is a semantically defined subclass of all CPs. Further
observe that for every test instruction we necessarily have that q̄1 , q̄2 ≥ 3.
    The following proposition kick-starts our sequence of reductions.
I Proposition 6. The bounded termination problem for simple CPs is EXPTIME-complete.
    To prove the proposition, we follow the classical recipe of first simulating a Turing machine
using a machine with two stacks, and then simulating the two-stack machine by a CP. We
note two key differences between our construction and the classical reduction: (1) We use
the expressiveness of linear updates in CPs to simulate pushing and popping on the stack in
a linear number of steps of the CP. (2) We instrument the two-stack machine to ensure that
the height of the two stacks differs by at most 1 along any computation. This is crucial to
allow us to simulate the two-stack machine by a simple linear-update counter program.

4.1     From the Termination Problem to the Powering Problem
We now sketch the main ideas behind the last (and most technically involved) missing link
in our sequence of reductions.
I Theorem 7. The bounded termination problem for simple CPs reduces, in polynomial
time, to the powering problem for SLPs.

The encoding. Given a CP C we construct an SLP S of order ≥ 2n with variables including
{x1 , . . . , x2n }. Let us denote xn+i by Qi for 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The reduction is such that a
configuration (p, v1 , . . . , vn ) of C is encoded as a valuation ν : var2n → Z of the SLP with
the property that ν(xi ) = vi and ν(Qi ) = pν(xi ) = pvi for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. In this way, the
instruction p of the CP is encoded in the variables of the SLP (recall that SLPs are stateless).
    Given this encoding, the main challenge is to realize the transition function of the CP
as a function computed by an SLP. Once this is accomplished, for every m ∈ N, the m-th
power of the SLP S represents the m-step transition function of the CP.

Conditional commands. Intuitively, to encode the transition function we would like to equip
the SLP with conditional commands, whose execution depends on a conditional. Specifically,
we want to implement the following two kinds of conditional updates
    (y ← y ± xk if Qk = pxk ) and (Qk ← p · xk if xi ≥ xj )
in terms of primitive commands of an SLP. In both commands, if the condition is not satisfied,
the command is not executed, and the value of y or Qk remains unchanged. For example,
one can simulate the first type of conditional commands by executing y ← y ± max(0, xk + t),
where t is an expression that is 0 if the test is passed and less than −xk otherwise. Intuitively,
we think of t as “masking” the assignment if the test fails.
    For the following result, which formalizes how we implement conditional commands, we
call a valuation ν valid if there exists q ∈ {1, . . . , m} with ν(xi ) ≥ 0 and ν(Qi ) = qν(xi ) for
all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.



                                                                                                                ICALP 2019
102:12 On the Complexity of Value Iteration


        I Lemma 8. Let p ∈ {1, . . . , m} and i, j, k ∈ {1, . . . , n} be distinct. The following equation
        holds for all valid valuations ν:
                                                                          (
                                                                           ν(xk )    if ν(Qk ) = pν(xk )
             max(0, ν(xk ) + min(ν(Qk ) − pν(xk ), pν(xk ) − ν(Qk ))) =                                    (3)
                                                                            0        otherwise.

       Moreover, if |ν(xi ) − ν(xj )| ≥ ν(xk ), then the following holds:
                                                          (
                                                           ν(xk )   if ν(xi ) ≥ ν(xj )
             max(0, ν(xk ) + min(0, ν(xi ) − ν(xj ))) =                                                    (4)
                                                           0        otherwise.

        Proof. The equations follow directly from the assumption that ν is valid, since if ν(Qj ) 6=
        pν(xj ) then we also have |ν(Qj ) − pν(xj )| ≥ ν(xj ). In addition, if |ν(xi ) − ν(xj )| ≥ ν(xk )
        and ν(xi ) < ν(xj ), we will have ν(xk ) + ν(xi ) − ν(xj ) ≤ 0.                               J

           Using the property that the simulated program is simple, Equation (3) can be used to
        simulate the conditional update (y ← y ± xk if Qk = pxk ) where t = min(Qk − pxk , pxk − Qk )
        masks the update. Likewise, Equation (4) can be used to simulate the second type of
        conditional update (Qk ← p·xk if xi ≥ xj ) where the masking expression is t = min(0, xi −xj ).
        Finally, the multiplication-by-a-constant required for the second type of the conditional
        update is achieved via repeated addition.


        Encoding the instructions. We recall that we encode being at the instruction p of the CP
        by a valuation ν such that ν(Qi ) = pν(xi ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
            Using the aforementioned conditional commands, we can construct the SLP S as the
        composition of m smaller SLPs. Each sub-SLP πp simulates an instruction p from the given
        CP C. Hence S, when applied upon a valid valuation ν (i.e., a properly-encoded configuration
        of C), simulates all of its instructions at once. By using conditional commands, we make
        sure that only one sub-SLP results in a non-zero update: executing πp has no effect on the
        valuation unless pν(xi ) = ν(Qi ) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
            In this way, powering S allows us to simulate consecutive steps of C. In particular, for all
        N ∈ N we have that JSKN (ν)(Q1 ) ≥ m · JSKN (ν)(x1 ), where m is the halt instruction, holds
        if and only if C halts after at most N steps.


         5       Conclusion

        By the virtue of our chain of reductions (see Figure 1), we get the following theorem.

        I Theorem 9. All the following problems are EXPTIME-complete:
           The finite-horizon reward problem for MDPs, and thus also the ValIt problem.
           The finite-horizon reachability and synchronized reachability problems for MDPs.
           The powering problem for SLPs and for monotone SLPs.
           The bounded termination problem for simple counter programs.

           The exact complexity of the following variant of the problem remains open: given an
        MDP and a horizon encoded in binary, determine whether there exists a policy achieving
        some given expected-reward threshold (with no restriction on the actions used to do so).
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                  102:13


     References
 1   Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y. Ng. Learning first-order Markov models for control. In
     L. K. Saul, Y. Weiss, and L. Bottou, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
     cessing Systems 17, pages 1–8. MIT Press, 2005. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/
     2569-learning-first-order-markov-models-for-control.pdf.
 2   Eric Allender, Nikhil Balaji, and Samir Datta. Low-Depth Uniform Threshold Circuits and
     the Bit-Complexity of Straight Line Programs. In Erzsébet Csuhaj-Varjú, Martin Dietzfel-
     binger, and Zoltán Ésik, editors, Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science 2014 - 39th
     International Symposium, MFCS 2014, Budapest, Hungary, August 25-29, 2014. Proceedings,
     Part II, volume 8635 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 13–24. Springer, 2014.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44465-8_2.
 3   Eric Allender, Peter Bürgisser, Johan Kjeldgaard-Pedersen, and Peter Bro Miltersen. On the
     complexity of numerical analysis. SIAM Journal on Computing, 38(5):1987–2006, 2009.
 4   Eric Allender, Andreas Krebs, and Pierre McKenzie. Better complexity bounds for cost register
     automata. Theory of Computing Systems, pages 1–19, 2017.
 5   Christel Baier and Katoen Joost-Pieter, editors. Principles of Model Checking. MIT Press,
     2008.
 6   Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1957.
 7   Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity
     of decentralized control of Markov decision processes. Mathematics of Operations Research,
     27(4):819–840, 2002.
 8   Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming: Deterministic and Stochastic Models. Prentice-
     Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1987.
 9   Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control. Athena scientific Belmont,
     MA, 2005.
10   Vincent D Blondel and John N Tsitsiklis. A survey of computational complexity results in
     systems and control. Automatica, 36(9):1249–1274, 2000.
11   Nicole Bäuerle and Ulrich Rieder. Markov Decision Processes with Applications to Finance.
     Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2011.
12   Edmund M. Clarke, Thomas A. Henzinger, Helmut Veith, and Bloem Roderick, editors.
     Handbook of Model Checking. Springer International Publishing, 2018.
13   Wojciech Czerwinski, Slawomir Lasota, Ranko Lazic, Jérôme Leroux, and Filip Mazowiecki.
     The Reachability Problem for Petri Nets is Not Elementary (Extended Abstract). CoRR,
     abs/1809.07115, 2018. arXiv:1809.07115.
14   Peng Dai, Mausam, Daniel S. Weld, and Judy Goldsmith. Topological Value Iteration Al-
     gorithms. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 42:181–209, 2011. URL: http://jair.org/papers/paper3390.
     html.
15   Laurent Doyen, Thierry Massart, and Mahsa Shirmohammadi. Limit Synchronization in
     Markov Decision Processes. In Anca Muscholl, editor, Foundations of Software Science and
     Computation Structures - 17th International Conference, FOSSACS 2014, Held as Part of
     the European Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2014, Grenoble,
     France, April 5-13, 2014, Proceedings, volume 8412 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
     pages 58–72. Springer, 2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-54830-7_4.
16   John Fearnley and Rahul Savani. The Complexity of the Simplex Method. In Proceedings
     of the Forty-seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’15, pages
     201–208, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM. doi:10.1145/2746539.2746558.
17   Judy Goldsmith, Michael L Littman, and Martin Mundhenk. The complexity of plan existence
     and evaluation in probabilistic domains. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth conference on
     Uncertainty in artificial intelligence (UAI’97), pages 182–189. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
     Inc., 1997.
18   Judy Goldsmith and Martin Mundhenk. Complexity Issues in Markov Decision Processes.
     In Proceedings of the 13th Annual IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity, Buffalo,




                                                                                                     ICALP 2019
102:14 On the Complexity of Value Iteration


             New York, USA, June 15-18, 1998, pages 272–280. IEEE Computer Society, 1998. doi:
             10.1109/CCC.1998.694621.
        19   R. Greenlaw, H.J. Hoover, and W.L. Ruzzo. Limits to Parallel Computation: P-completeness
             Theory. Oxford University Press, 1995. URL: https://books.google.fr/books?id=
             YZHnCwAAQBAJ.
        20   William Hesse, Eric Allender, and David A. Mix Barrington. Uniform constant-depth threshold
             circuits for division and iterated multiplication. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 65(4):695–716, 2002.
             doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(02)00025-9.
        21   Michael L Littman. Probabilistic propositional planning: Representations and complexity. In
             AAAI’97, pages 748–754, 1997.
        22   Michael L. Littman, Thomas L. Dean, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. On the Complex-
             ity of Solving Markov Decision Problems. In Philippe Besnard and Steve Hanks, edit-
             ors, UAI ’95: Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artifi-
             cial Intelligence, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, August 18-20, 1995, pages 394–402. Morgan
             Kaufmann, 1995. URL: https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.jsp?mmnu=1&
             smnu=2&article_id=457&proceeding_id=11.
        23   Michael L Littman, Judy Goldsmith, and Martin Mundhenk. The computational complexity
             of probabilistic planning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 9:1–36, 1998.
        24   Yishay Mansour and Satinder P. Singh. On the Complexity of Policy Iteration. In Kathryn B.
             Laskey and Henri Prade, editors, UAI ’99: Proceedings of the Fifteenth Conference on
             Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Stockholm, Sweden, July 30 - August 1, 1999, pages 401–
             408. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. URL: https://dslpitt.org/uai/displayArticleDetails.
             jsp?mmnu=1&smnu=2&article_id=192&proceeding_id=15.
        25   Ernst W. Mayr. An algorithm for the general Petri net reachability problem. In Proceedings
             of the thirteenth annual ACM Symposium on Theory of computing (STOC’81), pages 238–246.
             ACM, 1981.
        26   Martin Mundhenk, Judy Goldsmith, Christopher Lusena, and Eric Allender. Complexity
             of Finite-horizon Markov Decision Process Problems. J. ACM, 47(4):681–720, July 2000.
             doi:10.1145/347476.347480.
        27   Christos H. Papadimitriou and John N. Tsitsiklis. The Complexity of Markov Decision
             Processes. Math. Oper. Res., 12(3):441–450, 1987. doi:10.1287/moor.12.3.441.
        28   Christos H. Papadimitriou and Mihalis Yannakakis. A Note on Succinct Representations
             of Graphs. Information and Control, 71(3):181–185, 1986. doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(86)
             80009-2.
        29   Martin L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes. Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
        30   Tim Quatmann and Joost-Pieter Katoen. Sound Value Iteration. In Hana Chockler and Georg
             Weissenbacher, editors, Computer Aided Verification, pages 643–661. Springer International
             Publishing, 2018.
        31   Manfred Schäl. Markov decision processes in finance and dynamic options. In Handbook
             of Markov Decision Processes, International Series in Operations Research & Management
             Science, pages 461–487. Springer, 2002.
        32   Aaron Sidford, Mengdi Wang, Xian Wu, and Yinyu Ye. Variance Reduced Value Iteration
             and Faster Algorithms for Solving Markov Decision Processes, pages 770–787. SIAM, 2018.
             doi:10.1137/1.9781611975031.50.
        33   Olivier Sigaud and Olivier Buffet. Markov Decision Processes in Artificial Intelligence. John
             Wiley & Sons, 2013.
        34   R.S. Sutton and A.G Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Adaptive Computation
             and Machine Learning. MIT Press, 2018.
        35   Aviv Tamar, YI WU, Garrett Thomas, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Value Iteration
             Networks. In D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. V. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett, editors,
             Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29, pages 2154–2162. Curran Associates,
             Inc., 2016. URL: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/6046-value-iteration-networks.pdf.
N. Balaji, S. Kiefer, P. Novotný, G. A. Pérez, and M. Shirmohammadi                                  102:15


36   Paul Tseng. Solving H-horizon, Stationary Markov Decision Problems in Time Proportional
     to log(H). Operations Research Letters, 9(5):287–297, 1990.
37   Zhimin Wu, Ernst Moritz Hahn, Akin Günay, Lijun Zhang, and Yang Liu. GPU-accelerated
     value iteration for the computation of reachability probabilities in mdps. In Gal A. Kaminka,
     Maria Fox, Paolo Bouquet, Eyke Hüllermeier, Virginia Dignum, Frank Dignum, and Frank van
     Harmelen, editors, ECAI 2016 - 22nd European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
     1726–1727. IOS Press, 2016. doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-672-9-1726.
38   Yinyu Ye. A New Complexity Result on Solving the Markov Decision Problem. Mathematics
     of Operations Research, 30(3):733–749, 2005.
39   Yinyu Ye. The Simplex and Policy-Iteration Methods are Strongly Polynomial for the Markov
     Decision Problem with a Fixed Discount Rate. Mathematics of Operations Research, 36(4):593–
     603, 2011.




                                                                                                     ICALP 2019
