Proceedings of Machine Learning Research vol 98:1–23, 2019    30th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory




                                 Optimal Collusion-Free Teaching

David Kirkpatrick                                                                                  KIRK @ CS . UBC . CA
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
Hans U. Simon                                                                                HANS . SIMON @ RUB . DE
Department of Mathematics, Ruhr-University Bochum
Sandra Zilles                                                                             ZILLES @ CS . UREGINA . CA
Department of Computer Science, University of Regina


Editors: Aurélien Garivier and Satyen Kale


                                                        Abstract
     Formal models of learning from teachers need to respect certain criteria to avoid collusion. The
     most commonly accepted notion of collusion-freeness was proposed by Goldman and Mathias
     (1996), and various teaching models obeying their criterion have been studied. For each model M
     and each concept class C, a parameter M -TD(C) refers to the teaching dimension of concept class
     C in model M —defined to be the number of examples required for teaching a concept, in the worst
     case over all concepts in C.
          This paper introduces a new model of teaching, called no-clash teaching, together with the
     corresponding parameter NCTD(C). No-clash teaching is provably optimal in the strong sense that,
     given any concept class C and any model M obeying Goldman and Mathias’s collusion-freeness
     criterion, one obtains NCTD(C) ≤ M -TD(C). We also study a corresponding notion NCTD+ for
     the case of learning from positive data only, establish useful bounds on NCTD and NCTD+ , and
     discuss relations of these parameters to the VC-dimension and to sample compression.
          In addition to formulating an optimal model of collusion-free teaching, our main results are
     on the computational complexity of deciding whether NCTD+ (C) = k (or NCTD(C) = k) for
     given C and k. We show some such decision problems to be equivalent to the existence question
     for certain constrained matchings in bipartite graphs. Our NP-hardness results for the latter are of
     independent interest in the study of constrained graph matchings.
     Keywords: machine teaching, constrained graph matchings, sample compression


1. Introduction
Models of machine learning from carefully chosen examples, i.e., from teachers, have gained in-
creased interest in recent years, due to various application areas, such as robotics (Argall et al.,
2009), trustworthy AI (Zhu et al., 2018), and pedagogy (Shafto et al., 2014). Machine teaching
is also related to inverse reinforcement learning (Ho et al., 2016), to sample compression (Moran
et al., 2015; Doliwa et al., 2014), and to curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009). The paper at
hand is concerned with abstract notions of teaching, as studied in computational learning theory.
    A variety of formal models of teaching have been proposed in the literature, for example, the
classical teaching dimension model (Goldman and Kearns, 1995), the optimal teacher model (Bal-
bach, 2008), recursive teaching (Zilles et al., 2011), or preference-based teaching (Gao et al., 2017).
    In each of these models, a mapping T (the teacher) assigns a finite set T (C) of correctly labelled
examples to a concept C in a concept class C in a way that the learner can reconstruct C from T (C).


c 2019 D. Kirkpatrick, H.U. Simon & S. Zilles.
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Intuitively, unfair collusion between the teacher and the learner should not be allowed in any formal
model of teaching. For example, one would not want the teacher and learner to agree on a total order
over the domain and a total order over the concept class and then to simply use the ith instance in
the domain for teaching the ith concept, irrespective of the actual structure of the concept class.
     However, there is no general definition of what constitutes collusion, and of what constitutes
desirable or undesirable forms of learning. In this manuscript, we focus on a notion of collusion
that was proposed by Goldman and Mathias (1996) and that has been adopted by the majority of
teaching models studied in the literature. In a nutshell, Goldman and Mathias’s model demands that,
(i) the examples in T (C) are labelled consistently with C, and (ii) if the learner correctly identifies
C from T (C), then it will also identify C from any superset S of T (C) as long as the sample set
S remains consistent with C. In other words, adding more information about C to T (C) will not
divert the learner to an incorrect hypothesis.
     Most existing abstract models of machine teaching are collusion-free in this sense. Historically,
some of these models were designed in order to overcome weaknesses of the previous models. For
example, the optimal teacher model by Balbach (2008) is designed to overcome limitations of the
classical teaching dimension model, and was likewise superseded by the recursive teaching model
(Zilles et al., 2011). The latter again was inapplicable to many interesting infinite concept classes,
which gave rise to the model of preference-based teaching (Gao et al., 2017). Each model strictly
dominates the previous one in terms of the teaching complexity, i.e., the worst-case number of
examples needed for teaching a concept in the underlying concept class C. In this context, one quite
natural question has been ignored in the literature to date: what is the smallest teaching complexity
that can be achieved under Goldman and Mathias’s condition of collusion-freeness? This is exactly
the question addressed in this paper.
     Our first contribution is the formal definition of a collusion-free teaching model that has, for
every concept class C, the provably smallest teaching complexity among all collusion-free teach-
ing models. We call this model no-clash teaching, since its core property, which turns out to be
characteristic for collusion-freeness, requires that no pair of concepts are consistent with the union
of their teaching sets. A similar property was used once in the literature in the context of sample
compression schemes (Kuzmin and Warmuth, 2007), and dubbed the non-clashing property.
     For example, consider a concept class (i.e., set system) C over the instance space {1, 2, 3, 4},
consisting of the four concepts of the form {i, (i + 1) mod 4} for 1 ≤ i ≤ 4. Then no-clash
teaching is possible by assigning the singleton set {(i, 1)} (interpreted as the information “i belongs
to the target concept”) as a teaching set to the concept {i, (i + 1) mod 4}; no two distinct concepts
are consistent with the union of their assigned teaching sets. Thus, in the no-clash setting, each
concept in C can be taught with a single example. By comparison, consider the classical teaching
dimension model, in which a teaching set for a given concept is required to be inconsistent with all
other concepts in the concept class (Goldman and Kearns, 1995). It is not hard to see that, under
such constraints, no concept in C can be taught with a single example; a smallest teaching set for
concept {i, (i + 1) mod 4} would then be {(i, 1), ((i + 1) mod 4, 1)}.
     We call the worst-case number of examples needed for non-clashing teaching of any concept C
in a given concept class C the no-clash teaching dimension of C, abbreviated NCTD(C), and we
study a variant NCTD+ (C) in which teaching uses only positive examples. In the example above,
NCTD = NCTD+ = 1, while the classical teaching dimension is 2.
     The value NCTD(C) being the smallest collusion-free teaching complexity parameter of C
makes it interesting for several reasons.


                                                   2
                              O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




     (1) NCTD represents the limit of data efficiency in teaching when obeying Goldman and Math-
ias’s notion of collusion-freeness. Therefore the study of NCTD has the potential to further our
understanding how collusion-freeness constrains teaching. It will also help to compare other no-
tions of collusion-freeness (see, e.g., (Zilles et al., 2011)) to that of Goldman and Mathias.
     (2) An open question in computational learning theory is whether the VC-dimension (VCD),
(Vapnik and Chervonenkis, 1971), which characterizes the sample complexity of learning from
randomly chosen examples, also characterizes teaching complexity for some reasonable notion of
teaching. Recently, the first strong connections between teaching and VCD were established, cul-
minating in an upper bound on the recursive teaching dimension (RTD) that is quadratic in VCD
(Hu et al., 2017), but it remains open whether this bound can be improved to be linear in VCD.
Obviously, now NCTD is a much stronger candidate for a linear relationship with VCD than RTD
is. In fact, there is no concept class known yet for which NCTD exceeds VCD.
     (3) The problem of relating teaching complexity to VCD is connected to the famous open prob-
lem of determining whether VCD is an upper bound on the size of the smallest possible sam-
ple compression scheme (Littlestone and Warmuth, 1986; Floyd and Warmuth, 1995) of a concept
class. Some interesting relations between sample compression and teaching have been established
for RTD (Moran et al., 2015; Doliwa et al., 2014; Darnstädt et al., 2016). The study of NCTD can
potentially strengthen such relations.
     In addition, an important contribution of our paper is to link NCTD to the extensively devel-
oped theory of constrained graph matching. We show that the question whether NCTD+ = 1 is
equivalent to a very natural constrained bipartite matching problem which has apparently not yet
been studied in the literature. We proceed by proving that this particular matching problem is NP-
hard—a result that generalizes to larger values of NCTD+ as well as to NCTD. By comparison,
the question whether RTD+ = 1 or RTD = 1 can be answered in linear time; see the expanded
version of this paper (Kirkpatrick et al., 2019) for details.
     To sum up, our new notion of optimal collusion-free teaching is of relevance to the study of
important open problems in computational learning theory as well as of fundamental graph-theoretic
decision problems, and therefore appears to be worth studying in more detail.

2. Preliminaries
Given a domain X , a concept over X is a subset C ⊆ X , and we usually denote by C a concept class
over X , i.e., a set of concepts over X . Implicitly, we identify a concept C over X with a mapping
C : X → {0, 1}, where C(x) = 1 iff x ∈ C. By VCD(C), we denote the VC-dimension of C.
    A labelled example is a pair (x, `) ∈ X × {0, 1}, and it is consistent with a concept C if
C(x) = `. Likewise, a set S of labelled examples over X , which is also called a sample set, is
consistent with C, if every element of S is consistent with C. An example with the label ` = 1 is a
positive example, while ` = 0 is the label of a negative example.
    Intuitively, the notion of teaching refers to compressing any concept in a given concept class to
a consistent sample set.

Definition 1 Let C be a concept class over a domain X . A teacher mapping for C is a mapping T
on C such that, for all C ∈ C, T (C) is a finite sample set S ⊆ X × {0, 1} that is consistent with C.

   The first model of teaching that was proposed in the literature required from a teacher mapping
T that the concept C ∈ C be the only concept in C that is consistent with T (C), for any C ∈ C

                                                 3
                                O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




(Shinohara and Miyano, 1991; Goldman and Kearns, 1995). This led to the definition of the well-
known teaching dimension parameter.

Definition 2 (Shinohara and Miyano (1991); Goldman and Kearns (1995)) Let C be a concept
class over a domain X and C ∈ C be a concept. A teaching set for C (with respect to C) is a sample
set S such that C is the only concept in C consistent with S. The teaching dimension of C in C,
denoted by TD(C, C), is the size of the smallest teaching set for C with respect to C. The teaching
dimension of C is then defined as TD(C) = sup{TD(C, C) | C ∈ C}.

    For example, let C be a concept class over a domain X of exactly m elements, containing
the empty concept, all singleton concepts over X , and no other concepts. Then TD({x}, C) = 1
for each singleton concept {x}, since {(x, 1)} serves as a teaching set for {x}. By comparison,
TD(∅, C) = m, since any set of up to m − 1 negative examples is consistent with some singleton
concept, so that all m negative examples need to be presented in order to identify the empty concept.
Consequently, TD(C) = sup{TD(C, C) | C ∈ C} = m.
    As mentioned in the introduction, various notions of teaching have been proposed in the litera-
ture. The one that is most relevant to our work is the model of preference-based teaching. In this
model, intuitively, a preference relation on C is used to reduce the size of teaching sets. In particular,
a concept C need no longer be the only concept consistent with its teaching set T (C); it suffices
if C is the unique most preferred concept in C that is consistent with C. In order to avoid cyclic
preferences, the preference relation is required to form a partial order over C.

Definition 3 (Gao et al. (2017)) Let C be a concept class over a domain X and  any binary
relation that forms a strict (possibly non-total) order over C. We say that concept C is preferred
over concept C 0 (with respect to ), if C  C 0 . The preference-based teaching dimension of C with
respect to C and , denoted by PBTD(C, C, ), is the size of the smallest sample set S such that

   1. S is consistent with C, and

   2. C  C 0 for all C 0 ∈ C \ {C} such that S is consistent with C 0 .

We write PBTD(C, ) = sup{PBTD(C, C, ) | C ∈ C}. Finally, the preference-based teaching
dimension of C, denoted by PBTD(C), is defined by

         PBTD(C) = min{PBTD(C, ) | ⊆ C × C and  forms a strict order on C} .

    An interesting variant of preference-based teaching is obtained when disallowing negative ex-
amples in teaching. Learning from positive examples only has been studied extensively in the
computational learning theory literature, see, e.g., (Denis, 2001; Angluin, 1980) and is motivated
by studies on language acquisition (Wexler and Culicover, 1980) or, more recently, by problems of
learning user preferences from a user’s interactions with, say, an e-commerce system (Schwab et al.,
2000), as well as by problems in bioinformatics (Wang et al., 2006).

Definition 4 (Gao et al. (2017)) Let C be a concept class over a domain X . The positive preference-
based teaching dimension of C, denoted by PBTD+ (C), is defined analogously to PBTD(C), where
the sets S in Definition 3 are required to contain only positive examples.



                                                    4
                                    O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




   In the same way, one can define the notion TD+ . The following property, proven by Gao et al.
(2017), is crucial when computing the PBTD and PBTD+ of finite classes.

Proposition 5 (Gao et al. (2017)) Let C be a finite concept class. If PBTD(C) = d, then C contains
some C with TD(C, C) ≤ d. If PBTD+ (C) = d, then C contains some C with TD+ (C, C) ≤ d.

     This result immediately implies that PBTD and the well-known notion of RTD1 coincide for
finite concepts classes, and so do PBTD+ and RTD+ .

3. Collusion-free Teaching and the Non-Clashing Property
While there is no objective measure of how “reasonable” a formal model of teaching is, the literature
offers some notions of what constitutes an “acceptable” model of teaching, i.e., one in which the
teacher and learner do not collude. So far, the notion of collusion-free teaching that found the most
positive resonance in the literature is the one defined by Goldman and Mathias.

Definition 6 (Goldman and Mathias (1996)) Let C be a concept class over X and T a teacher
mapping on C. Let L be a learner mapping that assigns to each set of labelled examples a concept
over X . The pair (T, L) is successful on C if L(T (C)) = C for all C ∈ C. The pair (T, L) is
collusion-free on C if L(S) = L(T (C)) for any C ∈ C and any set S of labelled examples such that
S is consistent with C and S contains T (C).

Intuitively, Goldman and Mathias’s definition captures the idea that a learner conjecturing concept
C will not change its mind when given additional information consistent with C.
    For example, teacher-learner pairs following the classical teaching dimension model, Balbach’s
optimal teacher model, the recursive teaching model, or the preference-based teaching model are
always collusion-free according to Definition 6. Of these models, the classical teaching dimension
model is the one imposing the most constraints on the mapping T , followed by Balbach’s optimal
teaching, recursive teaching, and preference-based teaching in that order. Consequently, the “teach-
ing complexity” among these models is lowest for preference-based teaching; if every concept in a
concept class C can be taught with at most z examples in any of these models, then every concept
in C can be taught with at most z examples in the preference-based model.
    One can still argue that the preference-based model is unnecessarily constraining. Preference-
based teaching of a concept class C relies on a preference relation that induces a strict order on C.
However, this strict order is used by the learner only after the teaching set has been communicated,
since the learner chooses the unique most preferred concept among those consistent with the set of
examples provided by the teacher. One might consider loosening the constraints by, for example,
demanding only that the set of concepts consistent with any chosen teaching set be ordered under
the chosen preference relation (rather than requiring acyclic preferences over the whole concept
class). In the same vein, one could relax more conditions—every relaxation might result in a more
powerful model of teaching satisfying the collusion-free property.
    In this manuscript, we will define the provably most powerful model of teaching that is collusion-
free in the sense proposed by Goldman and Mathias (1996), namely a model that adheres to no other
constraints on the teacher-learner pairs (T, L) than those given by Goldman and Mathias: (i) T is a
teacher mapping; (ii) (T, L) is successful on C; and (iii) (T, L) is collusion-free on C.
 1. The RTD, short for “recursive teaching dimension, is a well-studied teaching parameter defined by Zilles et al. (2011).


                                                            5
                                O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




   Before we define this model formally, we introduce a crucial property that was originally pro-
posed by Kuzmin and Warmuth (2007) in the context of unlabeled sample compression.

Definition 7 Let C be a concept class and T be a teacher mapping on C. We say that T is non-
clashing (on C) if and only if there are no two distinct C, C 0 ∈ C such that both T (C) is consistent
with C 0 and T (C 0 ) is consistent with C.

    It turns out that, for a teacher mapping T , the non-clashing property is equivalent to the existence
of a learner mapping L such that (T, L) is successful and collusion-free:

Theorem 8 Let C be a concept class over the instance space X . Let T be a teacher mapping on C.
Then the following two conditions are equivalent:
   1. T is non-clashing on C.
   2. There is a mapping L : 2X ×{0,1} → C such that (T, L) is successful and collusion-free on C.

Proof First, suppose T is a non-clashing teacher mapping, and define L as follows. Given any set
S of labelled examples as input, L checks for the existence of a concept C ∈ C such that T (C) ⊆ S
and C is consistent with S. If such a concept C is found, L returns an arbitrary such C; otherwise
L returns some default concept in C.
    To show that (T, L) is successful and collusion-free, suppose there is some concept C ∈ C such
that a given set S of labelled examples is consistent with C and contains T (C). We claim that then
such C is uniquely determined. For if there were two distinct concepts C, C 0 ∈ C consistent with
S such that T (C) ∪ T (C 0 ) ⊆ S, then T (C 0 ), being a subset of S, would be consistent with C and,
likewise, T (C) would be consistent with C 0 —in contradiction to the non-clashing property of T .
From the definition of L, it then follows that (T, L) is successful and collusion-free.
    Second, suppose T is a teacher mapping and there is a mapping L such that (T, L) is successful
and collusion-free, i.e., for all C ∈ C, we have L(S) = L(T (C)) = C whenever S is consistent
with C and contains T (C). To see that T is non-clashing, suppose two concepts C, C 0 ∈ C are both
consistent with T (C) ∪ T (C 0 ). Then C = L(T (C)) = L(T (C) ∪ T (C 0 )) = L(T (C 0 )) = C 0 .

    Consequently, teaching with non-clashing teacher mappings is, in terms of the worst-case num-
ber of examples required, the most efficient model that obeys Goldman and Mathias’s notion of
collusion-freeness. We hence define the notion of no-clash teaching dimension as follows.

Definition 9 Let C be a concept class over the instance space X . Let T : C → (X × {0, 1})∗
be a non-clashing teacher mapping. The order of T on C, denoted by ord(T, C), is then defined
by ord(T, C) = sup{|T (C)| | C ∈ C}. The No-Clash Teaching Dimension of C, denoted by
NCTD(C), is defined as NCTD(C) = min{ord(T, C) | T is a non-clashing teacher mapping for C}.

    From Theorem 8 we obtain that, for every concept class C,

NCTD(C) = min{ord(T, C) | there exists an L s.t. (T, L) is successful and collusion-free on C} .

    T 0 is said to be an extension of T if T (C) ⊆ T 0 (C) holds for every C ∈ C. Clearly, if T 0 is an
extension of T and T is non-clashing, then T 0 is non-clashing. Thus, without loss of generality, we
can assume that all sets T (C) used by a non-clashing teacher mapping on the concept class C are of
the same size:

                                                   6
                             O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Proposition 10 Let T be a non-clashing teacher mapping for C. Then there is a non-clashing
teacher mapping T 0 for C such that ord(T, C) = ord(T 0 , C) = |T 0 (C)| for all C ∈ C.

    As in the case of preference-based teaching, it is natural to study a variant of non-clashing
teaching that uses positive examples only.

Definition 11 Let C be a concept class over the domain X . A teacher mapping T is called pos-
itive on C if T (C) ⊆ X × {1} for all C ∈ C. We then define NCTD+ (C) = min{ord(T, C) |
T is a positive non-clashing teacher mapping for C}.

    While many of our definitions and results apply to both finite and infinite concept classes, we
will hereafter assume that X (and C) are finite.

4. Lower Bounds on NCTD and NCTD+
To establish lower bounds on NCTD and NCTD+ for finite concept classes,we first show that
NCTD(C) must be at least as large as the smallest d satisfying |C| ≤ 2d |Xd | . A similar state-
ment then follows for NCTD+ . In fact, we prove a slightly stronger result, replacing |X | with a
potentially smaller value:

Definition 12 We define XT ⊆ X as the set of instances that are part of a labelled example in a
teaching set T (C) for some C ∈ C. Moreover, we define

X(C) = min{|XT | : T is a non-clashing teacher mapping for C with ord(T, C) = NCTD(C)} .

    Intuitively, X(C) is the smallest number of instances that must be employed by any optimal non-
clashing teacher mapping for C. Likewise, we define X + (C) for positive non-clashing teaching.

Theorem 13 Let C be any concept class.

   1. If NCTD(C) = d, then |C| ≤ 2d X(C)
                                        
                                     d    .
                                     Pd       X + (C)
   2. If NCTD+ (C) = d, then |C| ≤
                                                      
                                        i=0      i    .

Proof To prove statement 1, let X 0 be a subset of size X(C) of X . Let C 7→ T (C) ⊆ X 0 × {0, 1}
be a consistent and non-clashing mapping which witnesses that NCTD(C) = d, and let L be the
mapping such that L(T (C)) = C for all C ∈ C. By Proposition 10, one may assume without loss
of generality that |T (C)| = d for all C ∈ C. Since T is an injective mapping and there are only
2d X(C)
        
     d    labelled teaching sets at our disposal, the claim follows.
    Statement 2 is proven analogously, taking into consideration that, in the NCTD+ case, we do
not have an analogous statement to Proposition 10, since a concept does not in general contain d or
more elements. Note that the formula has no factors 2i since there are no options for labelling the
instances in any set T (C).

    We will next establish a useful lower bound on NCTD(C) based on the number of neighbors of
any concept in C, as well as a related lower bound on NCTD+ (C). A concept C 0 ∈ C is a neighbor
of concept C ∈ C if it differs from C on exactly one instance, i.e., if the symmetric difference

                                                  7
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




C∆C 0 := (C \ C 0 ) ∪ (C 0 \ C) has size one. The degree of C ∈ C, denoted as degC (C), is defined
as the number of neighbors of C in C. The average degree of concepts in C is then denoted by
                                                1 X
                                degavg (C) :=      ·    degC (C) .
                                               |C|
                                                      C∈C

The dominance of C ∈ C, denoted as domC (C), is defined as the number of smaller neighbors of
C in C, i.e. neighbors that contain exactly one fewer instance than C.
Theorem 14 Every concept class C over a finite domain satisfies NCTD(C) ≥ 12 · degavg (C) .
                                                                                        

Proof Let T be any non-clashing teacher mapping for C. If C1 and C2 are neighbors,  P say C1 ∆C2 =
{xiP}, then at least one of the sets T (C1 ), T (C2 ) must contain xi . We obtain C∈C |T (C)| ≥
1                            1
2 ·    C∈C degC (C) = |C| · 2 · degavg(C). According   to the pigeon-hole principle, there must exist
                                        1
                                                      
a concept C ∈ C such that |T (C)| ≥ 2 · degavg (C) , which concludes the proof of the theorem.

Theorem 15 Every concept class C over a finite domain satisfies NCTD+ (C) ≥ maxC∈C domC (C).
Proof If the smaller neighbor C 0 of C ∈ C differs from C on instance xi , then (xi , 1) must be used
in teaching C. Hence, every C ∈ C must have a positive teaching set of size at least domC (C).

    Although the lower bounds in Theorems 14 and 15 are not expected to be attained very often,
the following example shows that they are sometimes tight:
Example 1 Let P2 be the powerset of {a, b}. Every concept in P2 has degree 2, so that degavg (P2 ) =
2. It follows from Theorem 14 that NCTD(P2 ) ≥ 21 · degavg (P2 ) = 1. As the mapping T given by
                ∅ 7→ {(a, 0)}, {a} 7→ {(b, 0)}, {b} 7→ {(b, 1)}, {a, b} 7→ {(a, 1)} ,
is non-clashing for P2 , it follows that NCTD(P2 ) ≤ 1. Furthermore, since domP2 ({a, b}) = 2, it
follows from Theorem 15 that NCTD+ (P2 ) ≥ 2. But the positive mapping T that maps S ∈ P2 to
S × {1} is trivially non-clashing, and hence NCTD+ (P2 ) ≤ 2.

5. Sub-additivity of NCTD and NCTD+
In this section, we will show that the NCTD is sub-additive with respect to the free combination of
concept classes. As an application of this result, we will determine the NCTD of the powerset over
any finite domain X . While the powerset is a rather special concept class, knowing its NCTD will
turn out useful to obtain a variety of further results.
Definition 16 Let C1 and C2 be concept classes over disjoint domains X1 and X2 , respectively.
Then the free combination C1 t C2 of C1 and C2 is a concept class over the domain X1 ∪ X2 defined
by C1 t C2 = {C1 ∪ C2 | C1 ∈ C1 and C2 ∈ C2 }.
Lemma 17 Let C = C1 tC2 be the free combination of C1 and C2 . Moreover, for i = 1, 2, let Ti be a
non-clashing mapping for Ci . Then, for T (C1 tC2 ) defined by setting T (C1 ∪C2 ) = T1 (C1 )∪T2 (C2 ),
we have that T is a non-clashing teacher mapping for C1 t C2 . Moreover, as witnessed by T , NCTD
acts sub-additively on t, i.e.,
                          NCTD(C1 t C2 ) ≤ NCTD(C1 ) + NCTD(C2 ) .                                 (1)

                                                  8
                                O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Proof Suppose that concepts Ci1 , Cj1 ∈ C1 and Ci2 , Cj2 ∈ C2 give rise to distinct concepts Ci1 ∪Ci2
and Cj1 ∪ Cj2 ∈ C1 t C2 that clash under T . (Without loss of generality we can assume that
i1 6= j1 .) Then Cj1 ∪ Cj2 is consistent with T1 (Ci1 ) ∪ T2 (Ci2 ) and Ci1 ∪ Ci2 is consistent with
T1 (Cj1 ) ∪ T2 (Cj2 ). Hence Cj1 is consistent with T1 (Ci1 ) and Ci1 is consistent with T1 (Cj1 ), that
is concepts Ci1 and Cj1 in C1 clash under the mapping T1 .


Remark 18 In Lemma 17, if T1 and T2 are positive non-clashing mappings, then the same proof
shows that T (a positive non-clashing mapping) witnesses the fact that NCTD+ also acts sub-
additively on t, i.e.,

                        NCTD+ (C1 t C2 ) ≤ NCTD+ (C1 ) + NCTD+ (C2 ) .                                 (2)

Furthermore, since t is associative it follows immediately that, for any concept class C

               NCTD(C k ) ≤ k · NCTD(C) and NCTD+ (C k ) ≤ k · NCTD+ (C)                               (3)

where C k := C1 t . . . t Ck and Ci := {C × {i}| C ∈ C} for i = 1, . . . , k.
    These sub-additivity results can be applied in order to determine the NCTD and NCTD+ of
the powerset over an arbitrary finite domain.

Theorem 19 Let Pm be the powerset over the domain {x1 , . . . , xm }. Then NCTD(Pm ) = dm/2e
and NCTD+ (Pm ) = m.

Proof Since every concept in Pm has degree m, the average degree of concepts in Pm equals m as
well. Furthermore, the concept {x1 , . . . , xm } clearly has dominance m in Pm . Now NCTD(Pm ) ≥
dm/2e and NCTD+ (Pm ) ≥ m follow from Theorems 14 and 15 respectively.
    Obviously NCTD+ (Pm ) ≤ m. To show that NCTD(Pm ) ≤ dm/2e it suffices to verify this
                                                                    m/2
upper bound for even m. When m is even, we have Pm = P2 . Now NCTD(Pm ) ≤ dm/2e
follows from NCTD(P2 ) = 1 (compare with Example 1) and from (3).

    Since the NCTD of any concept class over a domain X is trivially upper bounded by the NCTD
of the power set over X , this result in particular implies that d|X |/2e is an upper bound on the
NCTD of any concept class over a domain X .
    A further consequence of Theorem 19 is that NCTD is sometimes strictly subadditive with
respect to free combination, i.e., that inequality (1) is sometimes strict. An example for that is the
free combination Pm t Pm of two copies of Pm for odd m. Since the domain of Pm t Pm has size
2m, we obtain NCTD(Pm t Pm ) = m, while NCTD(Pm ) + NCTD(Pm ) = 2d m                          m+1
                                                                                     2e = 2 2 =
m + 1.
    A situation (that we will exploit later) where NCTD+ acts strictly additively on t is captured
in the following:
Lemma 20 Let Pm be the powerset over the domain {x1 , . . . , xm } and let C be a concept class
with domain X disjoint from {x1 , . . . , xm }. Then, NCTD+ (Pm tC) = NCTD+ (Pm )+NCTD+ (C).
Proof By (2) it suffices to show that NCTD+ (Pk tC) ≥ NCTD+ (Pk )+NCTD+ (C). Theorem 15
implies that, for each Ci ∈ C, any positive non-clashing mapping T for Pk t C must use k =
NCTD+ (Pk ) examples from {x1 , . . . , xk } to teach the single concept {x1 , . . . , xk } t Ci within the

                                                    9
                                    O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




concept class Pk t Ci . So the only way that T could use fewer than k + NCTD+ (C) examples in
total for each concept in {x1 , . . . , xk } t C is if each such concept is taught with exactly k examples
from {x1 , . . . , xk }, and hence fewer than NCTD+ (C) examples from X , a contradiction.

    Furthermore, it is easily seen that the average degree acts additively on t:

Lemma 21 Let C1 and C2 be concept classes over disjoint and finite domains. Then the following
holds:
                      degavg (C1 t C2 ) = degavg (C1 ) + degavg (C2 ) .                    (4)

Proof Let C := C1 t C2 . The concepts in C that are neighbors of C1 ∪ C2 ∈ C are precisely the
concepts of the form C1 ∪ C20 or C10 ∪ C2 where C20 is a neighbor of C2 in C2 and C10 is a neighbor
of C1 in C1 . Hence
                          degC (C1 ∪ C2 ) = degC1 (C1 ) + degC2 (C2 ) .
Moreover |C| = |C1 | · |C2 |. It follows that
X                X X                                       X                       X
    degC (C) =                   degC (C1 ∪ C2 ) = |C2 | ·   degC1 (C1 ) + |C1 | ·   degC2 (C2 ) .
 C∈C                C1 ∈C1 C2 ∈C2                         C1 ∈C1                     C2 ∈C2

Division by |C1 | · |C2 | immediately yields (4).

   The free combination of classes with a tight degree lower bound is again a class with a tight
degree lower bound:

Corollary 22 Let C1 and C2 be two concept classes over disjoint and finite domains, and let C =
C1 t C2 . Then NCTD(Ci ) = 12 · degavg (Ci ) for i = 1, 2 implies that NCTD(C) = 12 · degavg (C).

Proof The assertion is evident from the chain of inequalities:
              (1)                                   1                 1               (4) 1
  NCTD(C) ≤ NCTD(C1 ) + NCTD(C2 ) =                   · degavg (C1 ) + · degavg (C2 ) = · degavg (C)
                                                    2                 2                   2
and Theorem 14.


6. Relation to Other Learning-theoretic Parameters
In this section, we set NCTD in relation to PBTD and VCD, as well as to the smallest possible
size of a sample compression scheme for a given concept class.

6.1. PBTD and VCD
Since preference-based teaching is collusion-free (Gao et al., 2017), we obtain the following bounds.

Proposition 23 Let C be any concept class. Then NCTD(C) ≤ PBTD(C) and NCTD+ (C) ≤
PBTD+ (C).



                                                     10
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Remark 24 The first inequality in Proposition 23 is sometimes strict, as witnessed by Theorem 19,
which states that NCTD(Pm ) = dm/2e. By comparison, PBTD(Pm ) = m. In particular, this
yields a family of concept classes of strictly increasing NCTD for which PBTD exceeds NCTD
by a factor of 2. The fact that the second inequality in Proposition 23 is sometimes strict is witnessed
by the simple class C described in the introduction, with NCTD+ (C) = 1. Since no concept in C
has a positive teaching set of size 1, Proposition 5 implies PBTD+ (C) = 2. In particular, these
examples witness that Proposition 5 does not hold for non-clashing teaching.
    Results from the literature can now be combined in a straightforward way in order to formulate
an upper bound on NCTD in terms of the VC-dimension.

Proposition 25 NCTD(C) is upper-bounded by a function quadratic in VCD(C).

Proof PBTD is known to lower-bound the recursive teaching dimension (Gao et al., 2017). Hu
et al. (2017) proved that, when VCD(C) = d, the recursive teaching dimension of C is no larger
than 39.3752 · d2 − 3.6330 · d. By Proposition 23, the same upper bound applies to NCTD.

   However, VCD can also be arbitrarily larger than NCTD, a result that follows immediately
from the corresponding result for TD:

Proposition 26 (Goldman and Kearns (1995))
   Let k ∈ N, k ≥ 1. Then there exists a finite concept class C such that TD+ (C) = TD(C) = 1
and VCD(C) = k.

   So far, there is no concept class for which VCD is known to exceed NCTD. Note that any
such concept class would have to fulfill PBTD > VCD as well. We tested those classes for which
PBTD > VCD is known from the literature, but found that all of them satisfy NCTD ≤ VCD.
   As an example, here we present “Warmuth’s class.” This concept class, shown in Table 1,
was communicated by Manfred Warmuth and proven by Darnstädt et al. (2016) to be the smallest
concept class for which PBTD exceeds VCD. In particular, VCD(CW ) = 2 while PBTD(CW ) = 3.

                         x1    x2   x3    x4   x5              x1   x2   x3   x4   x5
                   C1    1     0    0     0    1         C10   1    0    1    0    1
                   C2    1     1    0     0    0         C20   1    1    0    1    0
                   C3    0     1    1     0    0         C30   0    1    1    0    1
                   C4    0     0    1     1    0         C40   1    0    1    1    0
                   C5    0     0    0     1    1         C50   0    1    0    1    1

Table 1: Warmuth’s class CW , with the highlighted entries (in bold) corresponding to the images of
         a positive non-clashing teacher mapping. The domain of this class is {x1 , . . . , x5 }, and it
         contains 10 concepts, named C1 through C5 and C10 through C50 .



Proposition 27 NCTD(CW ) = NCTD+ (CW ) = 2.

Proof The highlighted labels in Table 1 correspond to a positive non-clashing mapping for CW ,
which immediately shows that NCTD+ (CW ) ≤ 2 and thus NCTD(CW ) ≤ 2. To show that

                                                    11
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




NCTD(CW ) ≥ 2, suppose by way of contradiction that NCTD(CW ) = 1. Then there is a non-
clashing teacher mapping T that assigns every concept in CW a teaching set of size 1.
      Since C1 and C10 differ only on the instance x3 , the mapping T must fulfill either T (C1 ) =
{(x3 , 0)} or T (C10 ) = {(x3 , 1)}.
      Case 1. T (C1 ) = {(x3 , 0)}. Since C2 is consistent with T (C1 ), the teaching set for C2 must be
inconsistent with C1 . In particular, T (C2 ) 6= {(x4 , 0)}. This implies T (C20 ) = {(x4 , 1)}, since x4
is the only instance on which C2 and C20 disagree. By an analogous argument concerning C5 and
C50 , one obtains T (C50 ) = {(x2 , 1)}. Now T has a clash on C20 and C50 , which is a contradiction.
      Case 2. T (C10 ) = {(x3 , 1)}. One argues as in Case 1, with C30 and C40 in place of C2 and C5 ,
yielding T (C3 ) = {(x5 , 0)} and T (C4 ) = {x1 , 0)}. This is a clash, resulting in a contradiction.
      As both cases result in a contradiction, we have NCTD(CW ) > 1 and thus NCTD(CW ) = 2.
Since NCTD+ is an upper bound on NCTD, we also have NCTD+ (CW ) = 2.

     While the general relationship between NCTD and VCD remains open, it is now known that
NCTD(C) is upper-bounded by VCD(C) when C is a finite maximum class. For a finite instance
space XP           class C of VC dimension d is called maximum if its size |C| meets Sauer’s upper
         , a concept
bound di=0 |Xi | (Sauer, 1972) with equality. Recently, Chalopin et al. (2018) showed that every
finite maximum class C admits a so-called representation map, i.e., a function r that maps every
concept in C to a set of at most d(= VCD(C)) instances, in a way that no two distinct concepts
C, C 0 ∈ C both agree on all the instances in r(C) ∪ r(C 0 ). By definition, any representation map is,
translated into our setting, simply a non-clashing teacher mapping of order d for C. Therefore, the
result by Chalopin et al. implies that NCTD(C) ≤ VCD(C) for finite maximum C.

6.2. Sample Compression
Intuitively, a sample compression scheme (Littlestone and Warmuth, 1986) for a (possibly infinite)
concept class C provides a lossless compression of every set S of labeled examples for any concept
in C in the form of a subset of S. It was proven that the existence of a finite upper bound on the
size of the compression sets is equivalent to PAC-learnability, i.e., to finite VC-dimension (Moran
and Yehudayoff, 2016; Littlestone and Warmuth, 1986). Open for over 30 years now is the question
how closely such an upper bound can be related to the VC-dimension.
    Formally, a sample compression scheme of size k for a concept class C over X is a pair (f, g)
of mappings, where, for every sample set S consistent with some concept C ∈ C, (i) f maps S to a
subset f (S) ⊆ S with |f (S)| ≤ k; and (ii) g(f (S)) maps the compressed set to a concept C 0 over
X (not necessarily in C) that is consistent with S. By CN(C) we denote the size of the smallest-size
sample compression scheme for C. The open question then is whether CN(C) is upper-bounded by
(a function linear in) VCD(C).
    Some connections between sample compression and teaching have been established in the liter-
ature (Doliwa et al., 2014; Darnstädt et al., 2016). The non-clashing property bears some similarities
to sample compression and has in fact been used in the context of unlabelled sample compression
(in which f (S) is an unlabelled set) (Kuzmin and Warmuth, 2007). It is thus natural to ask whether
CN is an immediate upper or lower bound on NCTD. Below, we answer this question negatively.

Proposition 28
   1. For every k ∈ N, k ≥ 1, there is a concept class C such that NCTD(C) = PBTD(C) = 1
      but CN(C) > k.

                                                   12
                                 O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




   2. Let Pm be the powerset over a domain of size m, where m ≥ 5 is odd. Then CN(Pm ) <
      NCTD(Pm ) and 2CN(Pm ) < PBTD(Pm ).

Proof Statement 1 is due to Remark 26, which implies the existence of a concept class C with
NCTD(C) = PBTD(C) = 1 and VCD(C) = 5k. Then CN(C) > k follows from a result by Floyd
and Warmuth (1995) that states that no concept class of VC-dimension d has a sample compression
scheme of size at most d5 .
   Statement 2 follows from the obvious fact that PBTD(Pm ) = m, in combination with The-
orem 19, as well as with a result by Darnstädt et al. (2016) that shows CN(Pm ) ≤ b m
                                                                                     2 c, for any
m ≥ 4 2.

    Note that the compression function f in a sample compression scheme for C trivially induces a
teacher mapping Tf defined by Tf (C) = f ({(x, C(x)) | x ∈ X}). The decompression mapping
g then satisfies g(Tf (C)) = C for all C ∈ C. Hence (Tf , g) is a successful teacher-learner pair.
Proposition 28.2 now states that there are concept classes for which the teacher-learner pairs (Tf , g)
induced by any optimal sample compression scheme necessarily display collusion. In other words,
optimal sample compression yields collusive teaching.
An interesting problem is to find more examples of concept classes for which optimal sample com-
pression yields collusive teachers and to determine necessary or sufficient conditions on the structure
of such classes. Moreover, at present we do not know how large the gap between sample compres-
sion scheme size and NCTD can be.
    As mentioned above, representation maps, which were proposed by Kuzmin and Warmuth
(2007) and Chalopin et al. (2018), yield non-clashing teacher mappings. Clearly, in unlabelled
compression, the representation map that compresses any concept in a class C to a subset of X must
be injective, so that any two concepts in C remain distinguishable after compression. In other words,
the non-clashing teacher mappings induced by representation maps are repetition-free, i.e., they do
not map any two distinct concepts C, C 0 ∈ C to labelled samples T (C), T (C 0 ) for which

                                             6 {x ∈ X | (x, l0 ) ∈ T (C 0 ) for some l0 ∈ {0, 1}} .
{x ∈ X | (x, l) ∈ T (C) for some l ∈ {0, 1}} =

Requiring no-clash teacher mappings to be repetition-free would be a limitation, as the example of
the powerset over any set of m instances, m ≥ 2, shows. In this case, no-clash teaching can be done
with teacher mappings of order d m 2 e, but it is not hard to see that the best possible repetition-free
no-clash teacher mapping is of order m.

7. Complexity of Decision Problems Related to No-clash Teaching
In this section, we address the complexity of the problem of deciding whether or not every concept
in a given finite concept class can be taught with a non-clashing teaching set of size at most k,
for some specified k ≥ 1. Surprisingly perhaps, such decision problems are NP-hard, even when
k = 1 and teaching is done using positive examples only. In contrast, all such decision problems
have polynomial time solutions in the PBTD (equivalently, RTD) teaching model; see (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2019) for details.
 2. When m = 5k for some k ≥ 1, Darnstädt et al. (2016) even show that CN(Pm ) ≤ 2k; hence there is a family of
    concept classes with CN < NCTD for which the gap between CN and NCTD grows linearly with the size of the
    instance space.


                                                      13
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




    We show an equivalence between the most highly constrained such decision problem (testing if
NCTD+ = 1, for a given concept class) and a natural (but apparently not previously studied) con-
strained bipartite matching problem that is related to the well-studied notion of induced matchings.
We begin by establishing a preliminary result that will allow us to restrict our complexity analysis
to certain normalized concept classes.

Proposition 29 Let C be any non-trivial concept class over a finite domain, with at least two non-
empty concepts. Then, NCTD+ (C) = NCTD+ (C \ {∅}).

Proof Let C 0 denote C \ {∅}. If C 0 = C there is nothing to show. So, suppose that C contains the
empty concept. If NCTD+ (C) = k then trivially NCTD+ (C 0 ) ≤ k.
    For the converse, suppose that NCTD+ (C 0 ) = k, as witnessed by a mapping T .
Case 1. [T does not assign the empty set to any concept.] In this case one can obviously extend T to
assign the empty set to the empty concept and thus teach all of C without clashing using no negative
examples and with teaching sets of size at most k. (There are no clashes, because the empty concept
cannot be consistent with any of the teaching sets that use at least one positive example.)
Case 2. [T assigns the empty set to some concept C in C 0 .] Then let x be an element of C. Such x
exists because C is not empty. Define T 0 to be the same as T , except that T 0 assigns {(x, 1)} to C.
The mapping T 0 is non-clashing since it is an extension of T . Thus Case 2 can be reduced to Case
1.


Remark 30 It follows immediately from the proof of Proposition 29 that, for any concept class C 0
that does not contain the empty concept, NCTD+ (C 0 ) = k ≥ 1 if and only if NCTD+ (C 0 ) = k is
witnessed by a positive non-clashing teacher mapping in which every concept is taught with at least
one positive instance (i.e. the empty set is not used for teaching). Hereafter, in our consideration of
NCTD+ decision problems, we will assume that concept classes do not contain the empty set and
that positive teacher mappings are restricted to those that use at least one positive instance for each
concept.
    Our goal in the remainder of this section is to set out hardness results for testing NCTD = k?
and NCTD+ = k?, for fixed k ≥ 1. We begin by establishing that testing NCTD+ = 1?, for
a given concept class C is NP-hard. Other results follow by reduction from the NCTD+ = 1?
decision problem. (It is straightforward to confirm that all of the decision problems NCTD ≤ k?
and NCTD+ ≤ k? are in NP.)

7.1. Testing if NCTD+ = 1 is NP-hard
We start by observing that a concept class C over a finite domain X can be viewed as a bipartite
graph BC,X , with vertex classes C (black vertices) and X (white vertices) and an edge from Ci ∈ C
to xj ∈ X whenever xj ∈ Ci . Under this interpretation, it follows from Remark 30 that deciding if
C has NCTD+ = 1 is equivalent to deciding if BC,X admits a matching M such that (i) M saturates
all of the black vertices, and (ii) no two edges of M are part of a 4-cycle in BC,X . (Condition (i)
ensures that each concept in C has an associated positive teaching set of size 1, and condition (ii)
ensures that the resulting teacher mapping is non-clashing.)
    We refer to the problem of deciding if a given bipartite graph B with vertex partition (Vb , Vw )
admits a matching M such that (i) M saturates all of the vertices in Vb , and (ii) no two edges of M


                                                  14
                                O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




are part of a 4-cycle in B, as the Non-Clashing Bipartite Matching Problem. The NP-hardness of
deciding NCTD = 1? is thus an immediate consequence of the following:

Theorem 31 The Non-Clashing Bipartite Matching Problem is NP-hard.

    The proof of Theorem 31 is by reduction from the familiar NP-hard problem 3-SAT. The details
are given in Appendix A.

Remark 32 The reduction produces a bipartite graph whose vertices have degree bounded by five.
One can conclude then that testing NCTD+ = 1? is NP-hard even if concepts contain at most
five instances, and instances are contained in at most five concepts. It is natural to ask to what
extent this can be tightened. In Appendix B.1, we describe a modification of the reduction that
produces a bipartite graph whose vertices have degree bounded by three, from which it follows that
testing NCTD+ = 1? is NP-hard even if concepts contain at most three instances, and instances are
contained in at most three concepts. On the other hand, if either (i) all concepts have at most two
instances, or (ii) all instances are contained in at most two concepts, the bipartite graph BC,X has
the property that the degree of all vertices in one of its two parts bounded by at most two. In this
case, it follows immediately from the algorithm in Appendix B.2 that testing NCTD+ = 1? can be
done in polynomial time.

7.2. Testing if NCTD = 1 is NP-hard
We reduce the NCTD+ = 1 decision problem to the NCTD = 1 decision problem. Given an
instance of the NCTD+ = 1 decision problem, specifically a pair (C, X ), where C is a concept
class over the finite domain X , we make four disjoint copies (C i , X i ), i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}, and take their
union to be an instance of the NCTD = 1 decision problem. We will argue that any NCTD = 1
solution of this composite concept class must use only positive examples for teaching concepts in
at least one of the four component concept classes; in this sense it must include a NCTD+ = 1
solution of the instance (C, X ).
      Suppose that some NCTD = 1 solution of the composite concept class uses a negative example
for at least one concept in each of the four component concept classes, and consider any four such
concepts C i ∈ C i , i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. Note that there cannot exist concepts C i and C j , with i 6= j
                                                          0           0
that are taught using negative examples drawn from X i and X j , respectively, where i0 6= j and
j 0 6= i, since these would necessarily clash. It follows immediately that no concept C i is taught
with a negative example drawn from its own domain X i . Furthermore, every domain X i must be
the source of a negative example for some concept C j , where j 6= i. But this leaves only the
possibility that, for some (possibly different) indexing of these four concepts, C 1 is taught with a
negative example from X 2 and C 3 is taught with a negative example from X 4 , which once again
violates the non-clashing property.

7.3. Testing if NCTD+ = k is NP-hard, for k > 1.
Again we describe a reduction from the NCTD+ = 1 decision problem. Given an instance of the
NCTD+ = 1 decision problem, specifically a pair (C, X ), where C is a concept class over the finite
domain X disjoint from {x1 , . . . , xk−1 }, we construct the concept class Pk−1 t C, where Pk−1
denotes the power set on {x1 , . . . , xk−1 }. By Lemma 20, we know that NCTD+ (Pk−1 t C) =
k − 1 + NCTD+ (C), so NCTD+ (C) = 1 iff NCTD+ (Pk−1 t C) = k.

                                                    15
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




    Using a slightly move involved reduction from the NCTD+ = 1 decision problem, we can
show that the NCTD = k decision problem is also NP-hard. By comparison, the corresponding
decision problems for PBTD (equivalently, for RTD) can be solved efficiently. See (Kirkpatrick
et al., 2019) for details.

8. Conclusions
No-clash teaching represents the limit of data efficiency that can be achieved in teaching settings
obeying Goldman and Mathias’s notion of collusion-freeness. Therefore, it is the sole most promis-
ing collusion-free teaching model to shed light on two open problems in computational learning
theory, namely (i) to find a teaching complexity parameter that is upper-bounded by a function lin-
ear in VCD, and (ii) to establish an upper bound on the size of smallest sample compression schemes
that is linear in VCD. If any collusion-free teaching model yields a complexity upper-bounded by
(a function linear in) VCD, then no-clash teaching does. Likewise, if any collusion-free model
is powerful enough to compress concepts as efficiently as sample compression schemes do, then
no-clash teaching is.
    The most fundamental open question resulting from our paper is probably whether NCTD is
upper-bounded by VCD in general.
    Furthermore, our results introduce some intriguing connections between NCTD and the well-
studied field of constrained matching in bipartite graphs that may open up a line of study that relates
teaching complexity, as well as sample compression and VCD, to fundamental issues in matching
theory.

References
Dana Angluin. Inductive inference of formal languages from positive data. Information and Control,
  45(2):117–135, 1980.

Brenna Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela M. Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learn-
  ing from demonstration. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009.

Frank Balbach. Measuring teachability using variants of the teaching dimension. Theoretical Com-
  puter Science, 397(1–3):94–113, 2008.

Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum learning. In
  Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pages
  41–48, 2009.

Jérémie Chalopin, Victor Chepoi, Shay Moran, and Manfred K. Warmuth. Unlabeled sample com-
    pression schemes and corner peelings for ample and maximum classes. ArXiv, abs/1812.02099,
    2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02099.

Malte Darnstädt, Thorsten Kiss, Hans Ulrich Simon, and Sandra Zilles.            Order compression
 schemes. Theor. Comput. Sci., 620:73–90, 2016.

François Denis. Learning regular languages from simple positive examples. Machine Learning, 44
  (1/2):37–66, 2001.


                                                  16
                             O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Thorsten Doliwa, Gaojian Fan, Hans Ulrich Simon, and Sandra Zilles. Recursive teaching dimen-
  sion, VC-dimension and sample compression. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 15:3107–3131, 2014.

Sally Floyd and Manfred Warmuth. Sample compression, learnability, and the Vapnik-Chervonenkis
  dimension. Machine Learning, 21(3):1–36, 1995.

Ziyuan Gao, Christoph Ries, Hans Ulrich Simon, and Sandra Zilles. Preference-based teaching. J.
  Mach. Learn. Res., 18(31):1–32, 2017.

Sally A. Goldman and Michael J. Kearns. On the complexity of teaching. Journal of Computer and
  System Sciences, 50(1):20–31, 1995.

Sally A. Goldman and H. David Mathias. Teaching a smarter learner. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 52(2):
  255–267, 1996.

Mark K Ho, Michael Littman, James MacGlashan, Fiery Cushman, and Joseph L Austerweil. Show-
 ing versus doing: Teaching by demonstration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems 29 (NIPS), pages 3027–3035. 2016.

Lunjia Hu, Ruihan Wu, Tianhong Li, and Liwei Wang. Quadratic upper bound for recursive teaching
  dimension of finite VC classes. In Proceedings of the 30th Conference on Learning Theory, COLT
  2017, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 7-10 July 2017, pages 1147–1156, 2017.

David Kirkpatrick, Hans U. Simon, and Sandra Zilles. Optimal collusion-free teaching. ArXiv,
  2019.

Dima Kuzmin and Manfred K. Warmuth. Unlabeled compression schemes for maximum classes.
  J. Mach. Learn. Res., 8:2047–2081, 2007.

Nick Littlestone and Manfred K. Warmuth. Relating data compression and learnability. Technical
  Report, UC Santa Cruz, 1986.

Shay Moran and Amir Yehudayoff. Sample compression schemes for VC classes. J. ACM, 63(3):
  21:1–21:10, 2016.

Shay Moran, Amir Shpilka, Avi Wigderson, and Amir Yehudayoff. Teaching and compressing for
  low VC-dimension. CoRR, abs/1502.06187, 2015.

Norbert Sauer. On the density of families of sets. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 13
  (1):145–147, 1972.

Ingo Schwab, Wolfgang Pohl, and Ivan Koychev. Learning to recommend from positive evidence.
  In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI, pages
  241–247, 2000.

Patrick Shafto, Noah D. Goodman, and Thomas L. Griffiths. A rational account of pedagogical
  reasoning: Teaching by, and learning from, examples. Cognitive psychology, 71:55–89, 2014.

Ayumi Shinohara and Satoru Miyano. Teachability in computational learning. New Gen. Comput.,
  8:337–348, 1991.


                                              17
                                                       O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




Vladimir N. Vapnik and Alexey Ya. Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequen-
  cies of events to their probabilities. Theor. Probability and Appl., 16(2):264–280, 1971.

Chunlin Wang, Chris H. Q. Ding, Richard F. Meraz, and Stephen R. Holbrook. Psol: a positive
  sample only learning algorithm for finding non-coding RNA genes. Bioinformatics, 22(21):2590–
  2596, 2006.

Kenneth Wexler and Peter W. Culicover. Formal principles of language acquisition. MIT Press,
  1980.

Xiaojin Zhu, Adish Singla, Sandra Zilles, and Anna N. Rafferty. An overview of machine teaching.
  CoRR, abs/1801.05927, 2018.

Sandra Zilles, Steffen Lange, Robert Holte, and Martin Zinkevich. Models of cooperative teaching
  and learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 12:349–384, 2011.


Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 31
Proof We describe a parsimonious reduction from the familiar NP-hard problem 3-SAT, an instance
of which is a set D = {D1 , . . . , Dm } of clauses, each of which is a disjunction of three literals
drawn from an underlying set V = {V 1 , . . . , V n } of variables. Specifically, given an instance D
of 3-SAT, we construct a bipartite graph BD (vertices are either black or white, and all edges join a
black vertex to a white vertex) that admits a matching M such that (i) M saturates all of the black
vertices, and (ii) no two edges of M are part of a 4-cycle in B, if and only if the instance D is
satisfiable.
    To this end, we first associate with each variable V i a variable gadget: a ring of 4m vertices,
with alternating subscripted labels v i and wi , emphasizing its bipartite nature (cf. Figure 1(a)). A
matching that saturates all of the v i -vertices (black) of this gadget is of one of two types, illustrated
in Figure 1(b) and (c)), which we associate with the two possible truth assignments to V i .


                                         w3i                                                        w3i                                                    w3i
                       w2i                               w4i                      w2i                            w4i                                                    w4i
                                   v3i           v4i                                          v3i         v4i                            w2i         v3i         v4i
                            v2i                         v5i                            v2i                      v5i                                                    v5i
                                                                                                                                              v2i
                                             i                      w5i                                                     w5i
                w1i                      V                                 w1i               V i ≡ true                           w1i
                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                    V ≡ false                      w5i
                             v1i                         v6i                           v1i                       v6i                          v1i                       v6i
                      w0i          v0i                        w6i                             v0i                     w6i                           v0i
                                                                                 w0i                                                    w0i                                  w6i

                                     (a)                                                            (b)                                                    (c)

                                                                          Figure 1: VariableGadget

    We associate with each clause Dj a clause gadget consisting of 10 vertices, with subscripted
labels pj , q j , rj and sj (cf. Figure 2(a)). It is straightforward to confirm that any matching that
saturates all of the rj and q j -vertices (black) must use exactly one of the three pj q j -edges, illustrated
in Figure 2(b) (c) and (d)). We refer to the pj q j -edges as portals of the clause gadget, since their
endpoints are the only points of connection with other parts of the full construction.

                                                                                                     18
                                             O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




                                                                        r1j           r2j
                                                                 pj1                         pj3
                                                                               pj2
                                                           (a)
                                                                 q1j           q2j           q3j
                                                                        sj1           sj2

                                r1j         r2j                          r1j           r2j                      r1j         r2j
                          pj1                       pj3           pj1                         pj3         pj1                     pj3
                                      pj2                                       pj2                                   pj2
                    (b)                                    (c)                                      (d)
                          q1j         q2j          q3j            q1j           q2j           q3j         q1j         q2j         q3j
                                sj1         sj2                          sj1           sj2                      sj1         sj2




                                                          Figure 2: ClauseGadget


    We complete the construction by adding edges from vertex gadgets to appropriate clause gadget
portals. Specifically, (i) if the k-th literal in clause Dj is V i , then we add edges from v2ji to pj and q j
                                                                                                     k      k
to w2j (cf. Figure 3(a)) and (ii) if the k-th literal in clause D is V , then we add edges from v2j to pjk
     i                                                              j     i                           i

and qkj to w2j−1
              i   (cf. Figure 3(b)). These connector edges, shown dashed in Figures 3(a) and (b), are
forbidden in any matching satisfying the constraints set out above, by the inclusion, for each such
edge, of a pair of additional vertices and associated edges, as illustrated in Figure 3(c). (Observe
that since the graph has the same number of black and white vertices, a matching that saturates all
of the black vertices must also saturate all of the white vertices. Thus, for each connector edge, the
middle edge of its bridging path is forced to belong to the matching; otherwise, the end edges of the
bridging path must both be chosen, resulting in a clash.)
    It follows that if the k-th literal in clause Dj is V i , and the edge pjk qkj belongs to the constrained
matching then edge v2j  i w i cannot belong. Similarly, if the k-th literal in clause D j is V i , and the
                             2j
edge pjk qkj belongs to the constrained matching then edge v2j      i wi
                                                                        2j−1 cannot belong.




                                                  pjk                                               pjk
                   i                                                i
                  w2j−1                                            w2j−1
                      i                                                i
                     v2j                                              v2j
              (a)      i
                      w2j                         qkj
                                                            (b)                 i
                                                                               w2j                  qkj
                                                                                                                (c)


                                                    Figure 3: ConnectorGadgets

    To complete the proof it remains to argue that the resulting graph BD admits a matching M
such that (i) M saturates all of the black vertices, and (ii) no two edges of M are part of a 4-cycle
in BD , if and only if the instance D is satisfiable. Suppose first that BD admits such a matching
M . Since none of the connector edges are included in M , it follows (as argued above) that in every
vertex gadget the black vertices are saturated in one of the two ways illustrated in Figure 1(b) and
1(c)). Similarly, in every clause gadget, the black vertices are saturated in one of the three ways

                                                                                19
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




illustrated in Figure 2(b), 2(c) and 2(d)). Suppose that the portal edge pjk qkj of the gadget associated
with clause Dj belongs to the matching M . Then, by our choice of connector edges, if the k-th
literal in clause Dj is V i , it must be that edge v2ji w i does not belong to M , that is the matching
                                                          2j
                                              i
on the variable gadget associated with V has the associated truth assignment true. Similarly, if
                                                             i wi
the k-th literal in clause Dj is V i , it must be that edge v2j   2j−1 does not belong to M , that is the
                                                        i
matching on the variable gadget associated with V has the associated truth assignment false. It
follows that the truth assignment to the variables in V, associated with the matchings induced on the
vertex gadgets, satisfies all of the clauses in D.
     On the other hand, suppose that D is satisfiable, that is there is an assignment of truth values to
the variables in V that satisfies all of the clauses in D. Then, if we (i) choose the matching on the
vertex gadget associated with V i to be the one corresponding to its truth assignment, and (ii) choose
any matching on the clause gadget associated with clause Dj including a portal edge associated
with one of the satisfied literals in Dj , and (iii) choose all of the edges added to prevent the choice
of connector edges, it is straightforward to confirm that the chosen edges form a matching M in BD
such that (i) M saturates all of the black vertices, and (ii) no two edges of M are part of a 4-cycle
in BD .


Appendix B. Complexity of Degree-bounded Instances of Non-clashing Bipartite
            Matching
The reduction described in the proof of Theorem 31 produces a bipartite graph whose vertices have
degree bounded by five. (This occurs for the vertices pj2 and q2j of the clause gadgets, both of which
have three incident edges within the gadget and two from a bridged connector.) It is natural to ask
if the hardness result continues to hold if this degree bound is reduced. In the next subsection we
describe a fairly simple modification of both our clause and connector structures allow us to reduce
the maximum degree to three. Following that, we show that if the maximum degree among vertices
in either part of a given bipartite graph is reduced to two there is a polynomial time algorithm to
decide if it admits a non-clashing matching.

B.1. A modified reduction with maximum degree three
We begin by describing a new clause gadget, illustrated in Figure 4(a), with the same p-q portal
structure as before but with the additional property that all p and q vertices have degree two. It is
straightforward to confirm that, up to symmetry, the matching illustrated in Figure 4(b) is the only
matching that saturates all of the vertices using only edges internal to the gadget.
     Next we describe a somewhat more complicated connector structure that is used to link vertices
in the variable gadgets with portal vertices of the new clause gadget. Schematically, as illustrated in
Figures 5(a) and (b), the connector structure plays exactly the same role as its counterpart (pair of
bridged edges) in the earlier construction. The new connector structure, illustrated in Figures 5(c),
also contains edges, dashed as before, that cannot be part of any perfect non-clashing matching.
Their role, as before, is simply to constrain the choice of other edges (in any perfect non-clashing
matching).
     It is easiest to argue first that neither of the dashed diagonals can be used. If both are used then
edge r4 s4 must also be used, creating a clash. On the other hand if just one, say r3 s5 is used, then
either r4 s4 must also be used or both r4 r5 and s3 s4 must be used, creating a clash in either case.

                                                   20
       O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




                 aj                                          aj

      bj1        bj2        bj3                    bj1       bj2        bj3
      pj1        pj2        pj3                    pj1       pj2        pj3
(a)                                          (b)
       q1j       q2j        q3j                     q1j      q2j        q3j
       cj1       cj2        cj3                     cj1      cj2        cj3

                  dj                                          dj




                  Figure 4: NewClauseGadget




                                  pjk                                         pjk
              i                                            i
             w2j−1                                        w2j−1
                 i                                             i
                v2j                                           v2j
 (a)              i
                 w2j              qkj             (b)              i
                                                                  w2j         qkj




                       w r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 p
      (c)

                       v s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 q

                       v s1 s2 s3                 r5 r6 r7 p
        0
      (c )                              s4
                                        r4

                       w r1 r2 r3                 s5 s6 s7 q




               Figure 5: NewConnectorGadgets




                                             21
                                O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




     By parity, an even number of the horizontal dashed edges are used in any perfect matching.
Since it is impossible to choose both wr1 and vs1 (or both r7 p and s7 q) in a non-clashing matching,
it suffices to rule out the case where exactly one of wr1 and vs1 and exactly one of r7 p and s7 q
belong to a perfect matching. Suppose r7 p (but not s7 q) is chosen. Then the matching is forced to
include r5 r6 and s6 s7 (in order to saturate r6 and s7 ). This in turn forces the choice of r3 r4 and s4 s5
(in order to saturate r4 and s5 ), creating a clash. By symmetry, it follows that none of the horizontal
dashed edges can be used in a perfect non-clashing matching.
     It remains to argue that (i) if a non-clashing matching contains edge pq then edge vw cannot
belong (and vice versa); (ii) there is a non-clashing matching of the connector gadget that contains
edge pq but leaves both v and w exposed (and vice versa); and (iii) there is a non-clashing matching
of the connector gadget that leaves all of v, w, p and q exposed. For (i), we observe that, by chained
forcing as above, the inclusion of pq forces the inclusion of r1 s1 (and, by symmetry, the inclusion
of vw forces the inclusion of r7 s7 ). Properties (ii) and (iii) are illustrated in Figure 6.




                                    w r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 p



                                    v s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 q


                                    w r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 p



                                    v s1 s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 q



                                     Figure 6: ConnectorMatchings


B.2. An efficient algorithm for Non-Clashing Bipartite Matching, when the maximum degree
     on either part is at most two
Suppose we are given a bipartite graph B whose vertices are either black or white, and all edges
join a black vertex to a white vertex. We want to determine if B admits a matching M such that (i)
M saturates all of the black vertices, and (ii) no two edges of M are part of a 4-cycle in B.
    Suppose further that the vertices on one of the two parts of B all have degree at most two. We
can assume, without loss of generality that they all have degree exactly two, since edges with an
endpoint of degree one can be (incrementally) included in a maximum matching M without risk of
being part of a 4-cycle in B.
    We say that a pair of vertices in this degree-bounded part are twins if they have the same adjacent
vertices. We can assume that B has no twins since (i) twins cannot both be saturated without
producing a forbidden 4-cycle, and therefore (ii) the existence of black twins immediately precludes



                                                    22
                               O PTIMAL C OLLUSION -F REE T EACHING




a non-clashing matching, and (iii) any pair of white twins can be replaced by a single copy of the
twinned vertex.
    With this simplification it is easy to confirm that any matching that saturates the black vertices,
the existence of which can be determined in polynomial time, must be non-clashing,




                                                  23
