First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion
Classes
Jakub Gajarský1
Technical University Berlin, Germany

Stephan Kreutzer1
Technical University Berlin, Germany

Jaroslav Nešetřil2
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic

Patrice Ossona de Mendez2
CAMS (CNRS, UMR 8557), Paris, France

Michał Pilipczuk3
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland

Sebastian Siebertz3
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland

Szymon Toruńczyk4
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland


      Abstract
The notion of bounded expansion captures uniform sparsity of graph classes and renders vari-
ous algorithmic problems that are hard in general tractable. In particular, the model-checking
problem for first-order logic is fixed-parameter tractable over such graph classes. With the aim
of generalizing such results to dense graphs, we introduce classes of graphs with structurally
bounded expansion, defined as first-order interpretations of classes of bounded expansion. As a
first step towards their algorithmic treatment, we provide their characterization analogous to
the characterization of classes of bounded expansion via low treedepth decompositions, replacing
treedepth by its dense analogue called shrubdepth.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Logic, Theory of computation →
Finite Model Theory

Keywords and phrases Logical interpretations/transductions, structurally sparse graphs, bound-
ed expansion

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2018.126


1
  J. Gajarský and S. Kreutzer are supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European
  Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ERC Consolidator Grant DISTRUCT, grant
  agreement No 648527).
2
  J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez are supported by CE-ITI P202/12/G061 of GACR and European
  Associated Laboratory (LEA STRUCO).
3
  M. Pilipczuk and S. Siebertz are supported by the National Science Centre of Poland
  (NCN) via POLONEZ grant agreement UMO-2015/19/P/ST6/03998, which has received
  funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Marie
  Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 665778).
4
  Sz. Toruńczyk is supported by the NCN grant 2016/21/D/ST6/01485.
             © Jakub Gajarský, Stephan Kreutzer, Jaroslav Nešetřil, Patrice Ossona de Mendez,
                                                                                                      EA




             Michał Pilipczuk, Sebastian Siebertz, and Szymon Toruńczyk;
                                                                                                      TC S




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
45th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2018).
Editors: Ioannis Chatzigiannakis, Christos Kaklamanis, Dániel Marx, and Donald Sannella;
Article No. 126; pp. 126:1–126:14
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
126:2   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


         1     Introduction

        The interplay of methods from logic and graph theory has led to many important results in
        theoretical computer science, notably in algorithmics and complexity theory. The combination
        of logic and algorithmic graph theory is particularly fruitful in the area of algorithmic meta-
        theorems. Algorithmic meta-theorems are results of the form: every computational problem
        definable in a logic L can be solved efficiently on any class of structures satisfying a property P.
        In other words, these theorems show that the model-checking problem for the logic L on any
        class C satisfying P can be solved efficiently, where efficiency usually means fixed-parameter
        tractability.
            The archetypal example of an algorithmic meta-theorem is Courcelle’s theorem [1, 2],
        which states that model-checking a formula ϕ of monadic second-order logic can be solved
        in time f (ϕ) · n on any graph with n vertices which comes from a fixed class of graphs
        of bounded treewidth, for some computable function f . Seese [27] proved an analogue of
        Courcelle’s result for the model-checking problem of first-order logic on any class of graphs
        of bounded degree. Following this result, the complexity of first-order model-checking on
        specific classes of graphs has been studied extensively in the literature. See e.g. [17, 7, 19,
        21, 4, 9, 10, 27, 8, 22, 28, 16, 5, 6, 13, 20]. One of the main goals of this line of research is to
        find a structural property P which precisely defines those graph classes C for which model
        checking of first-order logic is tractable.
            So far, research on algorithmic meta-theorems has focused predominantly on sparse
        classes of graphs, such as classes of bounded treewidth, excluding a minor or which have
        bounded expansion or are nowhere dense. The concepts of bounded expansion and nowhere
        denseness were introduced by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez with the goal of capturing
        the intuitive notion of sparseness. See [25] for an extensive cover of these notions. The
        large number of equivalent ways in which they can be defined using either notions from
        combinatorics, theoretical computer science or logic, indicate that these two concepts capture
        some very natural limits of “well-behavedness” and algorithmic tractability. For instance,
        Grohe et al. [19] proved that if C is a class of graphs closed under taking subgraphs then
        model checking first-order logic on C is tractable if, and only if, C is nowhere dense (the
        lower bound was proved in [7]). As far as algorithmic meta-theorems for fixed-parameter
        tractability of first-order model-checking are concerned, this result completely solves the case
        for graph classes which are closed under taking subgraphs, which is a reasonable requirement
        for sparse but not for dense graph classes.
             Consequently, research in this area has shifted towards studying the dense case, which is
        much less understood. While there are several examples of algorithmic meta-theorems on
        dense classes, such as for monadic second-order logic on classes of bounded cliquewidth [3]
        or for first-order logic on interval graphs, partial orders, classes of bounded shrubdepth and
        other classes, see e.g. [13, 11, 14, 12], a general theory of meta-theorems for dense classes is
        still missing. Moreover, unlike the sparse case, there is no canonical hierarchy of dense graph
        classes similar to the sparse case which could guide research on algorithmic meta-theorems
        in the dense world.
            Hence, the main research challenge for dense model-checking is not only to prove tract-
        ability results and to develop the necessary logical and algorithmic tools. It is at least as
        important to define and analyze promising candidates for “structurally simple” classes of
        graph classes which are not necessarily sparse. This is the main motivation for the research in
        this paper. Since bounded expansion and nowhere denseness form the limits for tractability
        of certain problems in the sparse case, any extension of the theory should provide notions
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                      126:3


which collapse to bounded expansion or nowhere denseness, under the additional assumption
that the classes are closed under taking subgraphs. Therefore, a natural way of seeking such
notions is to base them on the existing notions of bounded expansion or nowhere denseness.
    In this paper, we take bounded expansion classes as a starting point and study two different
ways of generalizing them towards dense graph classes preserving their good properties. In
particular, we define and analyze classes of graphs obtained from bounded expansion classes
by means of first-order interpretations and classes of graphs obtained by generalizing another,
more combinatorial characterization of bounded expansion in terms of low treedepth colorings
into the dense world. Our main structural result shows that these two very different ways of
generalizing bounded expansion into the dense setting lead to the same classes of graphs.
This is explained in greater detail below.


Interpretations and transductions. One possible way of constructing “well-behaved” and
“structurally simple” classes of graphs is to use logical interpretations, or the related concept of
transductions studied in formal language and automata theory. For our purpose, transductions
are more convenient and we will use them in this paper. Intuitively, a transduction is a
logically defined operation I which takes a structure as input and nondeterministically
produces as output a target structure. In this paper we use first-order transductions, which
involve first-order formulas (see Section 2 for details). Two examples of such transductions
are graph complementation, and the squaring operation which, given a graph G, adds an
edge between every pair of vertices at distance 2 from each other.
    We postulate that if we start with a “structurally simple” class C of graphs, e.g. a class
of bounded expansion or a nowhere dense class, and then study the graph classes D which
can be obtained from C by first-order transductions, then the resulting classes should still
have a simple structure and thus be well-behaved algorithmically as well as in terms of logic.
In other words, the resulting classes are interesting graph classes with good algorithmic and
logical properties, and which are certainly not sparse in general. For instance, a useful feature
of transductions is that they provide a canonical way of reducing model-checking problems
from the generated classes D to the original class C, provided that given a graph H ∈ D,
we can effectively compute some graph G ∈ C that is mapped to H by the transduction. In
general, this is a hard problem, requiring a combinatorial understanding of the structure of
the resulting classes D.
    The above principle has so far been successfully applied in the setting of graph classes
of bounded treewidth and monadic second-order transductions: it was shown by Courcelle,
Makowsky and Rotics [3] that transductions of classes of bounded treewidth can be com-
binatorially characterized as classes of bounded cliquewidth. This, combined with Oum’s
result [26] gives a fixed-parameter algorithm for model-checking monadic second-order logic
on classes of bounded cliquewidth. More recently, the same principle, but for first-order logic,
has been applied to graphs of bounded degree [12], leading to a combinatorial characterization
of first-order transductions of such classes, and to a model-checking algorithm.
    Applying our postulate to bounded expansion classes yields the central notion of this
paper: a class of graphs has structurally bounded expansion if it is the image of a class of
bounded expansion under some fixed first-order transduction. This paper is a step towards a
combinatorial, algorithmic, and logical understanding of such graph classes.


Low Shrubdepth Covers. The method of transductions is one way of constructing complex
graphs out of simple graphs. A more combinatorial approach is the method of decompositions
(or colorings) [25], which we reformulate below in terms of covers. This method can be used



                                                                                                       ICALP 2018
126:4   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes



                                              transduction
             bounded treedepth                                         transduction of bounded treedepth
                                                                            =(1) bounded shrubdepth
                          cover
                                                                                             cover
         bounded treedepth covers             transduction                 low shrubdepth covers =(?)
          =(2) bounded expansion                                         structurally bounded expansion


            Figure 1 The nodes in the diagram depict properties of graph classes, and the arrows depict
        operations on properties of graph classes. Equality (1) is by [14]. Equality (2) is by [24]. Equality (?)
        is the main result of this paper, Theorem 5.1.


        to provide a characterization of bounded expansion classes in terms of very simple graph
        classes, namely classes of bounded treedepth. A class of graphs has bounded treedepth if
        there is a bound on the length of simple paths in the graphs in the class (see Section 2 for a
        different but equivalent definition). A class C has low treedepth covers if for every number
        p ∈ N there is a number N and a class of bounded treedepth T such that for every G ∈ C,
        the vertex set V (G) can be covered by N sets U1 , . . . , UN so that every set X ⊆ V (G) of at
        most p vertices is contained in some Ui , and for each i = 1, . . . , N , the subgraph of G induced
        by Ui belongs to T . A consequence of a result by Nešetřil and Ossona de Mendez [24] on a
        related notion of low treedepth colorings is that a graph class has bounded expansion if, and
        only if, it has low treedepth covers.
            The decomposition method allows to lift algorithmic, logical, and structural properties
        from classes of bounded treedepth to classes of bounded expansion. For instance, this was
        used to show tractability of first-order model-checking on bounded expansion classes [7, 18].
            An analogue of treedepth in the dense world is the concept of shrubdepth, introduced
        in [14]. Shrubdepth shares many of the good algorithmic and logical properties of treedepth.
        This notion is defined combinatorially, in the spirit of the definition of cliquewidth, but can
        be also characterized by logical means, as first-order transductions of classes of bounded
        treedepth. Applying the method of decompositions to the notion of shrubdepth leads to
        the following definition. A class C of graphs has low shrubdepth covers if for every number
        p ∈ N there is a number N and a class B of bounded shrubdepth such that for every G ∈ C,
        there is a p-cover of G consisting of N sets U1 , . . . , UN ⊆ V (G), so that every set X ⊆ V (G)
        of at most p vertices is contained in some Ui and for each i = 1, . . . , N , the subgraph of G
        induced by Ui belongs to B. Shrubdepth properly generalizes treedepth and consequently
        classes admitting low shrubdepth covers properly extend bounded expansion classes.
            It was observed earlier [23] that for every fixed r ∈ N and every class C of bounded
        expansion, the class of rth power graphs Gr of graphs from C (the rth power of a graph is a
        simple first-order transduction) admits low shrubdepth colorings.

        Our contributions. Our main result, Theorem 5.1, states that the two notions introduced
        above are the same: a class of graphs C has structurally bounded expansion if, and only if, it
        has bounded shrubdepth covers. That is, transductions of classes of bounded expansion are
        the same as classes with low shrubdepth covers (cf. Figure 1). This gives a combinatorial
        characterization of structurally bounded expansion classes, which is an important step
        towards their algorithmic treatment.
            One of the key ingredients of our proof is a quantifier-elimination result (Lemma 5.5)
        for transductions on classes of structurally bounded expansion. This result strengthens
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                  126:5


in several ways similar results for bounded expansion classes due to Dvořák, Kráľ, and
Thomas [7] and Grohe and Kreutzer [18]. Our assumption is more general, as they assume
that C has bounded expansion, and here C is only required to have low shrubdepth covers.
Also, our conclusion is stronger, as their results provide quantifier-free formulas involving
some unary functions and unary predicates which are computable algorithmically, whereas
our result shows that these functions can be defined using very restricted transductions.
Quantifier-elimination results of this type proved to be useful for the model-checking problem
on bounded expansion classes [7, 18], and this is also the case here.
    As explained earlier, the transduction method allows to reduce the model-checking
problem to the problem of finding inverse images under transductions, which is a hard
problem in general and depends very much on the specific transduction. On the other hand,
as we show, the cover method allows to reduce the model-checking problem for classes with
low shrubdepth covers to the problem of computing a bounded shrubdepth cover of a given
graph. In fact, as a consequence of our proof, in Theorem 6.1 we show that it is enough
to compute a 2-cover of a given graph G from a structurally bounded expansion class, in
order to obtain an algorithm for the model-checking problem for such classes. We strongly
conjecture that such an algorithm exists and that therefore first-order model-checking is
fixed-parameter tractable on any class of graphs of structurally bounded expansion. We leave
this problem for future work.


 2     Transductions
In this section, apart from recalling some background notions from logic and graph theory,
we introduce the notion of transductions which we use in this paper.

Structures. We use standard logical notation and terminology with the following exceptions.
A signature Σ is a finite set of relation and function symbols. We allow relations of any finite
arity but only unary functions. We use boldface letters A for logical structures and denote
their domains by V (A). A structure A over Σ is defined as usual with the exception that
each function symbol f ∈ Σ is interpreted as a partial function f A : V (A) * V (A). If A
is a structure and X ⊆ V (A) then we define the substructure of A induced by X in the
usual way except that a unary function f (x) in A becomes undefined on all x ∈ X for which
f (x) 6∈ X. The semantics of first-order logic is defined as usual, with the proviso that an
atomic formula evaluates to false if any of the terms involved in it is undefined.

Graphs and colored graphs. We consider finite, simple and undirected graphs. These can
be viewed as finite structures over the signature consisting of a binary relation symbol E,
interpreted as the edge relation, in the usual way. For a finite label set Λ, by a Λ-colored
graph we mean a graph enriched by a unary predicate Uλ for every λ ∈ Λ. We will follow the
convention that if C is a class of colored graphs, then we implicitly assume that all graphs
in C are over the same fixed finite signature. A rooted forest is an acyclic graph F together
with a unary predicate R ⊆ V (F ) selecting one root in each connected component of F .

Transductions. We now define the notion of transduction used in the sequel. A transduction
is a special type of first-order interpretation with set parameters, which we see here (from a
computational point of view) as a nondeterministic operation that maps input structures
to output structures. Transductions are defined as compositions of atomic operations listed
below.



                                                                                                   ICALP 2018
126:6   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


            An extension operation is parameterized by a first-order formula ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk ) and a
        relation symbol R. Given an input structure A, it outputs the structure A extended by the
        relation R interpreted as the set of k-tuples of elements satisfying ϕ in A. A restriction
        operation is parameterized by a unary formula ψ(x). Applied to a structure A it outputs the
        substructure of A induced by all elements satisfying ψ. A reduct operation is parameterized
        by a relation symbol R, and results in removing the relation R from the input structure.
        Copying is an operation which, given a structure A outputs a disjoint union of two copies
        of A extended with a new unary function which maps both copies of a vertex v back to v. A
        function extension operation is parameterized by a binary formula ϕ(x, y) and a function
        symbol f , and extends a given input structure by a partial function f defined as follows:
        f (x) = y if y is the unique vertex such that ϕ(x, y) holds. Note that if there is no such y or
        more than one such y, then f (x) is undefined. Finally, suppose σ is function that maps each
        structure A to a nonempty family σ(A) of subsets of its universe. A unary lift operation,
        parametrized by σ, takes as input a structure A and outputs the structure A enriched by a
        unary predicate X interpreted by a nondeterministically chosen set U ∈ σ(A).
            We remark that a function extension operations can be simulated by extension operations,
        defining the graphs of the functions in the obvious way. They are, however, useful as a means
        of extending the expressive power of transductions in which only quantifier-free formulas are
        allowed, as defined below.


        I Definition 2.1. Transductions are defined inductively: every atomic transduction is a
        transduction, and the composition of two transductions I and J is the transduction I; J that,
        given a structure A, first applies J to A and then I to the output J(A). A transduction
        is deterministic if it does not use unary lifts. In this case, for every input structure there
        is exactly one output structure. A transduction is almost quantifier-free if all formulas
        that parameterize atomic operations comprising it are quantifier-free (observe that such
        transductions still can access elements that are not among its free variables via functions,
        hence, to avoid confusion we do not speak of quantifier-free transductions), and is deterministic
        almost quantifier-free if it additionally does not use unary lifts.


            If C is a class of structures, we write I(C) for the class which contains all possible
        outputs I(A) for A ∈ C. We say that two transductions I and J are equivalent on a class C of
        structures if every possible output of I(A) is also a possible output of J(A), and vice versa,
        for every A ∈ C.


        I Example 2.2. Let C be the class of rooted forests of depth at most d, for some fixed
        d ∈ N. We describe an almost quantifier-free transduction which defines the parent function
        in C. First, using unary lifts introduce d + 1 unary predicates D0 , ..., Dd , where Di marks
        the vertices of the input tree which are at distance i from a root. Next, using a function
        extension, define a function f which maps a vertex v in the input tree to its parent, or is
        undefined in case of a root. This can be done by a quantifier-free formula, which selects
        those pairs x, y such that x and y are adjacent and Di (x) implies Di−1 (y).


            It will sometimes be convenient to work with the encoding of bounded-depth trees and
        forests as node sets endowed with the parent function, rather than graphs with prescribed
        roots. As seen in Example 2.2, these two encodings can be translated to each other by means
        of almost quantifier-free transductions, which render them essentially equivalent.
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                         126:7


 3     Treedepth, shrubdepth and bounded expansion
Treedepth. The depth of a node x in a rooted forest F is the number of edges on the
root-to-x path in F . The depth of F is the maximal depth of any of its nodes. The treedepth
of a graph G is the minimal depth of a rooted forest F with the same vertex set as G, such
that for every edge vw of G, v is an ancestor of w, or w is an ancestor of v in F . A class C
of graphs has bounded treedepth if there is a bound d ∈ N such that every graph in C has
treedepth at most d. Equivalently, there is some number k such that no graph in C has a
simple path of length k [25].

Shrubdepth. The following notion of shrubdepth has been proposed in [14] as a dense
analogue of treedepth. Originally, shrubdepth was defined using the notion of tree-models.
We present an equivalent definition based on the notion of connection models, introduced
in [14] under the name of m-partite cographs of bounded depth.
I Definition 3.1. A connection model with labels from Λ is a rooted labeled tree T in which
every leaf x is assigned a label λ(x) ∈ Λ, and every non-leaf node v is labeled by a (symmetric)
binary relation C(v) ⊆ Λ × Λ. Such a model defines a graph G on the leaves of T , in which
two distinct leaves x and y are connected by an edge if and only if (λ(x), λ(y)) ∈ C(v),
where v is the common ancestor of x and y of largest depth. We say that T is a connection
model of the resulting graph G.
I Example 3.2. Fix n ∈ N, and let Gn be the bi-complement of a matching of order n, i.e.,
the bipartite graph with nodes a1 , . . . , an and b1 , . . . , bn , such that ai is adjacent to bj if,
and only if, i 6= j. A connection model for Gn is shown below:
                                                          {( , ) , ( , )}

                             ∅         ∅         ∅                             ∅

                           a1    b1   a2   b2   a3   b3                     an bn

I Definition 3.3. A class C of graphs has bounded shrubdepth if there is an h ∈ N and a
finite set Λ such that every G ∈ C has a connection model of depth at most h using labels
from Λ. A class of colored graphs has bounded shrubdepth if the class of underlying graphs
has bounded shrubdepth.
Note that contrary to other graph parameters, it is meaningless to speak about the shrubdepth
of a single graph. Rather, shrubdepth measures directly the complexity of a class.
    Shrubdepth can be equivalently defined in terms of another graph parameter, as follows.
I Definition 3.4. Given a graph G and a set of vertices W ⊆ V (G), the graph obtained
by flipping the adjacency within W is the graph G0 with vertices V (G) and edge set which
is the symmetric difference of the edge set of G and the edge set of the clique on W . The
subset-complementation depth, or SC-depth, of a graph is defined inductively as follows: (1) a
graph with one vertex has SC-depth 0, and (2) for d ⩾ 1 a graph G has SC-depth at most d
if there is a set W ⊆ V (G) of vertices such that in the graph obtained from G by flipping
the adjacency within W all connected components have SC-depth at most d − 1.
    The notion of SC-depth leads to a natural notion of decompositions. An SC-decomposition
of a graph G of SC-depth at most d is a rooted tree T of depth d with leaf set V (G), equipped
with unary predicates W0 , . . . , Wd on the leaves. Each child s of the root in T corresponds
to a connected component Cs of the graph G0 obtained from G by flipping the adjacency
within W0 , such that the subtree of T rooted at s, together with the unary predicates
W1 , . . . , Wd restricted to V (Cs ), form an SC-decomposition of Cs .


                                                                                                          ICALP 2018
126:8   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


            We will make use of the following properties, where the first one follows from the definition
        of shrubdepth, and the remaining ones follow from [14].
        I Proposition 3.5. Let C be a class of graphs. Then:
        1. If C has bounded shrubdepth, then the class of all induced subgraphs of graphs from C also
           has bounded shrubdepth.
        2. C has bounded shrubdepth if and only if for some d ∈ N all graphs in C have SC-depth at
           most d.
        3. If C has bounded treedepth, then C has bounded shrubdepth.
        4. If C has bounded shrubdepth and I is a transduction that outputs colored graphs, then I(C)
           has bounded shrubdepth.

        Bounded expansion. A graph H is a depth-r minor of a graph G if H can be obtained
        from a subgraph of G by contracting mutually disjoint connected subgraphs of radius at
        most r. A class C of graphs has bounded expansion if there is a function f : N → N such
               |E(H)|
        that |V  (H)| ⩽ f (r) for every r ∈ N and every depth-r minor H of a graph from C. Examples
        include the class of planar graphs, or any class of graphs with bounded maximum degree.
             The connection between treedepth and graph classes of bounded expansion can be
        established via treedepth-p colorings. For an integer p, a function c : V (G) → C is a
        treedepth-p coloring if, for every i ⩽ p and set X ⊆ V (G) with |c(X)| = i, the induced
        graph G[X] has treedepth at most i. A graph class C has low treedepth colorings if for every
        p ∈ N there is a number Np such that for every G ∈ C there exists a treedepth-p coloring
        c : V (G) → C with |C| ⩽ Np .
        I Theorem 3.6 ([24]). A class C of graphs has bounded expansion if, and only if, it has low
        treedepth colorings.

         4     Structurally bounded expansion and low shrubdepth covers
        In this section we introduce two notions which generalize the concept of bounded expansion.
        First, we introduce classes of structurally bounded expansion. This notion arises from closing
        bounded expansion graph classes under transductions.
        I Definition 4.1. A class C of graphs has structurally bounded expansion if there exists a
        class of graphs D of bounded expansion and a transduction I such that C ⊆ I(D).
           The second notion, low shrubdepth covers, arises from the low treedepth coloring char-
        acterization of bounded expansion (see Theorem 3.6) by replacing treedepth by its dense
        counterpart, shrubdepth. For convenience, we formally define this in terms of covers.
        I Definition 4.2. A cover of a graph G is a family UG of subsets of V (G) such that
        S
           UG = V (G). A cover UG is a p-cover, where p ∈ N, if every set of at most p vertices
        is contained in some U ∈ UG . If C is a class of graphs, then a (p-)cover of C is a family
        U = (UG )G∈C , where UG is a (p-)cover of G. The cover U is finite if sup{|UG | : G ∈ C} is
        finite. Let C[U] denote the class of graphs {G[U ] : G ∈ C, U ∈ UG }. We say that the cover U
        has bounded treedepth (respectively, bounded shrubdepth) if the class C[U] has bounded
        treedepth (respectively, shrubdepth).

        I Example 4.3. Let T be the class of trees and p ∈ N be a number. We construct a finite
        p-cover U of T which has bounded treedepth. Given a rooted tree T , let UT = {U0 , . . . , Up },
        where Ui is the set of vertices of T whose depth is not congruent to i modulo p + 1. Note
        that T [Ui ] is a forest of height p, and that UT is a p-cover of T . Hence U = (UT )T ∈T is a
        finite p-cover of T of bounded treedepth.
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                126:9


    In analogy to low treedepth colorings, we can now characterize graph classes of bounded
expansion using covers. We say that a class C of graphs has low treedepth covers if for every
p ∈ N there is a finite p-cover U of C with bounded treedepth. The following lemma follows
easily from Theorem 3.6.
I Lemma 4.4. A class of graphs has bounded expansion if, and only if, it has low treedepth
covers.
   We now define the second notion generalizing the concept of bounded expansion. The
idea is to use low shrubdepth covers instead of low treedepth covers.
I Definition 4.5. A class C of structures has low shrubdepth covers if, and only if, for every
p ∈ N there is a finite p-cover U of C with bounded shrubdepth.
    It is easily seen that Lemma 4.4 together with Proposition 3.5 (3) imply that every class
of bounded expansion has low shrubdepth covers.

 5     Main Result
The main result of our paper is the followiong.
I Theorem 5.1. A class of graphs has structurally bounded expansion if, and only if, it has
low shrubdepth covers.
    We prove the left-to-right direction of Theorem 5.1 in Section 5.1 and the right-to-left
direction in Section 5.2. But before we need some lemmas on classes of bounded shrubdepth.
    The first lemma is an analogue of a known fact that every class of bounded cliquewidth
which excludes a fixed bi-clique as a subgraph has bounded treewidth. The lemma is proved
by an easy induction on the depth of the connection models.
I Lemma 5.2. A class C of graphs has bounded treedepth if, and only if, C has bounded
shrubdepth and all G ∈ C exclude some fixed bi-clique as a subgraph.
   The second lemma, Lemma 5.3 below, is substantially more involved, and is the com-
binatorial cornerstone of our approach. Essentially, it says that if C is a class of bounded
shrubdepth, then a bounded-depth SC-decomposition of a graph G ∈ C can be computed
using an almost quantifier-free transduction B. In other words, an SC-decomposition of a
graph G ∈ C can be encoded in G using a finite number of unary predicates and reconstructed
using function extension operations involving deterministic almost quantifier-free formulas.
I Lemma 5.3. Let B be a class of graphs of bounded shrubdepth. Then there is a class T of
colored trees of bounded height and a pair of transductions T and B such that T is almost
quantifier-free, B is deterministic almost quantifier-free, T(B) ⊆ T , B(T ) ⊆ B, and

     B(T(G)) = {G} for all G ∈ B      and   T(B(t)) 3 t for all t ∈ T .

Moreover, for any G ∈ B, every t ∈ T(G) is an SC-decomposition of G.
    The key ingredient in the proof of Lemma 5.3 is that we can provide an almost quantifier-
free transduction that defines connected components in graphs of bounded shrubdepth, as
formulated in the following lemma.
I Lemma 5.4. Let C be a class of graphs of bounded shrubdepth. There is an almost
quantifier-free transduction F such that for a given G ∈ C, every output of F on G is equal to
G enriched by a function g : V (G) → V (G) such that g(v) = g(w) if, and only if, v and w
are in the same connected component of G.



                                                                                                 ICALP 2018
126:10   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


            In the proof of Lemma 5.4 we use the fact that bounded shrubdepth implies bounded
         diameter [14], and the connection between bounded shrubdepth and (bi-)cographs [15].

         5.1    Structurally bounded expansion implies low shrubdepth covers
         The left-to-right implication of Theorem 5.1 – that every graph class with structurally
         bounded expansion has low shrub-depth covers – follows from the two lemmas below, whose
         proofs are outlined later in this section.

         I Lemma 5.5. Let C be a class of colored graphs which has low shrubdepth covers. Then
         every transduction I is equivalent on C to an almost quantifier-free transduction J.

         I Lemma 5.6. If a class of graphs C has low shrubdepth covers and J is an almost quantifier-
         free transduction which outputs graphs, then J(C) also has low shrubdepth covers.

            We first show how to conclude the left-to-right implication of Theorem 5.1 from Lemma 5.5
         and Lemma 5.6. Let C be a class of bounded expansion and I be a transduction which outputs
         graphs. By Lemma 4.4, C has low treedepth covers and hence, by Lemma 3.5, also has low
         shrubdepth covers. Applying Lemma 5.5, we obtain an almost quantifier-free transduction
         J such that I(C) = J(C). By Lemma 5.6, we deduce that J(C) = I(C) has low shrubdepth
         covers, proving the left-to-right implication of Theorem 5.1.
            In the remainder of this section we sketch the proofs of Lemma 5.5 and Lemma 5.6.

         Proof outline for Lemma 5.5. Our proof of Lemma 5.5 is a quantifier elimination procedure
         similar to that of Dvořák et al. [7] and Grohe and Kreutzer [18]. First, we prove the statement
         for classes of colored trees of bounded depth, just as in [7, 18]. Lemma 5.3 allows us to
         immediately lift the statement to classes of bounded shrubdepth. Finally, this is lifted to
         classes with low shrubdepth covers.                                                          J

         Proof outline for Lemma 5.6. To prove the lemma, we first observe that every almost
         quantifier-free transduction is equivalent to a transduction which consists of a sequence
         of unary lifts followed by a deterministic almost quantifier-free transduction. Since, by
         Proposition 3.5, adding colors (the result of applying unary lifts) to a graph class of bounded
         shrubdepth will again result in a graph class of bounded shrubdepth, it suffices to prove the
         lemma for a deterministic almost quantifier-free transduction and a class of colored graphs C.
             Consider a p-cover U of C of bounded shrubdepth. As a very special case, suppose that I
         is a single quantifier-free extension operation that does not use any functions in the formula
         governing it. Then I(G[W ]) = I(G)[W ] for G ∈ C and any W ⊆ V (G). As a consequence,
         UG is a p-cover of I(G) and hence I(C[U]) = I(C)[U] is a p-cover of I(C). Moreover, by
         Proposition 3.5, I(C)[U] has bounded shrubdepth, so U is a finite cover of C of bounded
         shrubdepth. As p is arbitrary, this proves that I(C) has bounded shrubdepth covers.
             For a general deterministic almost quantifier-free transduction I, the equality I(G[W ]) =
         I(G)[W ] may fail, due to the fact that I may involve functions which reach outside of W .
         However, the value of any term involved in I depends only on a bounded number of vertices
         of G. This leads to the following lemma.
         I Lemma 5.7. For every deterministic almost quantifier-free transduction I there is a
         number c such that the following holds. For every graph G and vertex v of I(G) there is a set
         Sv ⊆ V (G) of size at most c such that for any sets U, W with W ⊆ V (I(G)) and U ⊆ V (G),
               S
         if U ⊇ v∈W Sv , then

            I(G)[W ] = I(G[U ])[W ].
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                   126:11


    We now proceed to the general case. Choose any p ∈ N. Let c be as in Lemma 5.7. Let U
be a finite (p · c)-cover of U of bounded shrubdepth. For a graph G ∈ C and a set U ∈ UG ,
define WU ⊆ I(G) as the set of all vertices v ∈ I(G) such that Sv ⊆ U , where Sv is as in
Lemma 5.7. From the lemma and the fact that classes of bounded shrubdepth are closed under
transductions and induced subgraphs it follows easily that letting WI(G) = {WU : U ∈ UG }
yields a p-cover of I(G), which collectively, for all G ∈ C, form a p-cover of I(C) which has
bounded shrubdepth. Since p is arbitrary, this proves the lemma.                           J

5.2    Low shrubdepth covers imply structurally bounded expansion
For the right-to-left implication of Theorem 5.1, we prove the following statement.

I Lemma 5.8. Let C be a class of graphs with low shrubdepth covers. There is a pair of
transductions S and I, where S is almost quantifier-free and I is deterministic almost quantifier-
free, such that S(C) is a class of colored graphs of bounded expansion and I(S(G)) = {G} for
each G ∈ C.

    Clearly, the lemma implies that C has structurally bounded expansion, since it can be
obtained as a result of a transduction I to a class S(C) of bounded expansion. Thus, the
right-to-left implication of Theorem 5.1 is a consequence of the lemma.

Proof outline. Let U be a finite 2-cover of C, and let N = sup{|UG | : G ∈ C}. We define
a transduction S as follows. For a given G ∈ C, let {U1 , . . . , UN } = UG . Given G, the
transduction S introduces unary predicates U1 , . . . , UN , and then, using the transduction T
                                        SN
from Lemma 5.3, computes the union i=1 T(G[Ui ]), which is a union of N trees glued along
the leaves. It is easy to see that the resulting graph excludes the bi-clique KN +1,N +1 as a
subgraph. By Lemma 5.6, the class S(C) has low shrubdepth covers. Any p-cover of S(C)
of bounded shrubdepth has bounded treedepth by Lemma 5.2. Therefore, S(C) has low
treedepth covers, so has bounded expansion.
    The transduction I is easily constructed from the transduction B from Lemma 5.3, allowing
to reconstruct the graph G from the colored union of the trees produced by S.                 J

 6     Algorithmic aspects
In this section we give a partial result about efficient computability of transductions on
classes with structurally bounded expansion. When we refer to the size of a structure in the
algorithmic context, we refer to its total size, i.e., the sum of its universe size and the total
sum of sizes of tuples in its relations.
    Call a class C of graphs of structurally bounded expansion efficiently decomposable if
there is a finite 2-cover U of C and an algorithm that, given a graph G ∈ C, in linear time
computes the cover UG and for each U ∈ UG , an SC-decomposition SU of depth at most d of
the graph G[U ], for some constant d depending only on C. Our result is as follows.

I Theorem 6.1. Suppose J is a deterministic transduction and C is a class of graphs that has
structurally bounded expansion and is efficiently decomposable. Then given a graph G ∈ C,
one may compute J(G) in time linear in the size of the input plus the size of the output.

    We remark that instead of efficient decomposability we could assume that the 2-cover UG
of a graph G and corresponding SC-decompositions for all U ∈ UG is given together with G
as input. If only the cover is given but not the SC-decompositions, we would obtain cubic
running time because bounded shrubdepth implies bounded cliquewidth and we can compute



                                                                                                     ICALP 2018
126:12   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


         an approximate clique decomposition in cubic time [26]. Then, SC-decompositions of small
         height are definable in monadic second-order logic, and hence they can be computed in linear
         time using the result of Courcelle, Makowski and Rotics [3].
             Observe that the theorem implies that we can efficiently evaluate a first-order sentence
         and enumerate all tuples satisfying a formula ϕ(x1 , . . . , xk ) on the given input graph, since
         this amounts to applying the theorem to a transduction consisting of a single extension
         operation. This strengthens the analogous result of Kazana and Segoufin [21] for classes of
         bounded expansion.

         Proof outline. We will make use of transductions S and I constructed in the proof of
         Lemma 5.8. Recall that S(C) is a class of colored graphs of bounded expansion, I is
         deterministic, and I(S(G)) = {G} for each G ∈ C. Observe that J is equivalent to S; I; J on C.
         Defining K as I; J, we get that J(G) = K(S(G)) for G ∈ C. Moreover, since I is deterministic,
         it follows that K is deterministic.
             Let G ∈ C be an input graph. By efficient decomposability of C, in linear time we can
         compute a cover UG of G together with an SC-decomposition SU of depth at most d of G[U ],
         for U ∈ UG . Each SU is a colored tree, and by the construction described in the proof of
         Lemma 5.8, the trees SU for U ∈ UG , glued along the leaves form a structure belonging
         to S(G). As J(G) = K(S(G)), it suffices to apply the enumeration result of Kazana and
         Segoufin for classes of bounded expansion [21] to the colored graph S(G) and to all formulas
         occurring in the transduction K.                                                            J


          7     Conclusion

         In this paper we have provided a natural combinatorial characterization of graph classes that
         are first-order transductions of bounded expansion classes of graphs. Our characterization
         parallels the known characterization of bounded expansion classes by the existence of low
         treedepth decompositions, by replacing the notion of treedepth by shrubdepth. We believe
         that we have thereby taken a big step towards solving the model-checking problem for
         first-order logic on classes of structurally bounded expansion.
             On the structural side we remark that transductions of bounded expansion graph classes
         are just the same as transductions of classes of structures of bounded expansion (i.e., classes
         whose Gaifman graphs or whose incidence encodings have bounded expansion). On the
         other hand, it remains an open question to characterize classes of relational structures,
         rather than just graphs, which are transductions of bounded expansion classes. We are
         lacking the analogue of Lemma 5.3; the problem is that within the proof we crucially use the
         characterization of shrubdepth via SC-depth, which works well for graphs but is unclear for
         structures of higher arity.
             Finally, observe that classes of bounded expansion can be characterized among classes
         with structurally bounded expansion as those which are bi-clique free. It follows, that
         every monotone (i.e., subgraph closed) class of structurally bounded expansion has bounded
         expansion. Exactly the same statement holds characterizing bounded treedepth among
         bounded shrubdepth, and the second item holds for treewidth vs cliquewidth. In particular,
         for monotone graph classes all pairs of notions collapse.
             We do not know how to extend our results to nowhere dense classes of graphs, mainly
         due to the fact that we do not know whether there exists a robust quantifier-elimination
         procedure for these graph classes. Obtaining such a procedure remains an open problem of
         prime importance in this field of research.
J. Gajarský et al.                                                                                   126:13


     References
 1   B. Courcelle. Graph rewriting: an algebraic and logic approach. In Handbook of Theoretical
     Computer Science, volume 2, chapter 5, pages 142–193. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1990.
 2   B. Courcelle. The monadic second-order logic of graphs I: recognizable sets of finite graphs.
     Inform. and Comput., 85:12–75, 1990.
 3   B. Courcelle, J. A. Makowsky, and U. Rotics. Linear time solvable optimization problems
     on graphs of bounded clique-width. Theory of Computing Systems, 33:125–150, 2000.
 4   A. Dawar, M. Grohe, and S. Kreutzer. Locally excluding a minor. In 22nd Annual IEEE
     Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 270–279, 2007.
 5   A. Durand and E. Grandjean. First-order queries on structures of bounded degree are
     computable with constant delay. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic (TOCL),
     8(4):21, 2007.
 6   A. Durand, N. Schweikardt, and L. Segoufin. Enumerating answers to first-order queries
     over databases of low degree. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART
     symposium on Principles of database systems, pages 121–131. ACM, 2014.
 7   Z. Dvořák, D. Kráľ, and R. Thomas. Testing first-order properties for subclasses of sparse
     graphs. Journal of the ACM, 60:5 Article 36, 2013.
 8   K. Eickmeyer and K. Kawarabayashi. FO model checking on map graphs. In Proceedings
     of the 21st International Symposium on Fundamentals of Computation Theory, FCT 2017,
     pages 204–216, 2017.
 9   J. Flum and M. Grohe. Fixed-parameter tractability, definability, and model checking.
     SIAM Journal of Computing, 31:113–145, 2001.
10   M. Frick and M. Grohe. Deciding first-order properties of locally tree-decomposable struc-
     tures. Journal of the ACM, 48:1148–1206, 2001.
11   J. Gajarský, P. Hliněný, D. Lokshtanov, J. Obdržálek, S. Ordyniak, M.S. Ramanujan, and
     S. Saurabh. Fo model checking on posets of bounded width. In 56th Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2015, pages 963–974. IEEE, 2015.
12   J. Gajarský, P. Hliněný, J. Obdržálek, D. Lokshtanov, and M. S. Ramanujan. A new
     perspective on fo model checking of dense graph classes. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual
     ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 176–184. ACM, 2016.
13   R. Ganian, P. Hliněný, J. Obdržálek, J. Schwartz, J. Teska, and D. Kráľ. Fo model checking
     of interval graphs. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming,
     pages 250–262. Springer, 2013.
14   R. Ganian, P. Hliněný, J. Nešetřil, J. Obdržálek, P. Ossona de Mendez, and R. Ramadurai.
     When trees grow low: Shrubs and fast MSO1 . In MFCS 2012, volume 7464 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 419–430. Springer-Verlag, 2012.
15   V. Giakoumakis and J.-M. Vanherpe. Bi-complement reducible graphs. Adv. Appl. Math.,
     18:389–402, 1997.
16   M. Grohe. Generalized model-checking problems for first-order logic. In Annual Symposium
     on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, pages 12–26. Springer, 2001.
17   M. Grohe and S. Kreutzer. Methods for algorithmic meta-theorems. Contemporary Math-
     ematics, 588, American Mathematical Society 2011.
18   M. Grohe and S. Kreutzer. Methods for algorithmic meta theorems. In Model Theoretic
     Methods in Finite Combinatorics, Contemporary mathematics, pages 181–206, 2011.
19   M. Grohe, S. Kreutzer, and S. Siebertz. Deciding first-order properties of nowhere dense
     graphs. Journal of the ACM, 64(3):17:1–17:32, 2017.
20   Petr Hlinený, Filip Pokrývka, and Bodhayan Roy. FO model checking of geometric graphs.
     In 12th International Symposium on Parameterized and Exact Computation, IPEC 2017,
     pages 19:1–19:12, 2017. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.IPEC.2017.19.




                                                                                                     ICALP 2018
126:14   First-Order Interpretations of Bounded Expansion Classes


         21   W. Kazana and L. Segoufin. Enumeration of first-order queries on classes of structures
              with bounded expansion. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Database
              Theory, pages 10–20, 2013.
         22   W. Kazana and L. Segoufin. Enumeration of first-order queries on classes of structures with
              bounded expansion. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI symposium
              on Principles of database systems, pages 297–308. ACM, 2013.
         23   O. Kwon, Mi. Pilipczuk, and S. Siebertz. On low rank-width colorings. In 43rd International
              Workshop on Graph-Theoretic Concepts in Computer Science, WG 2017, pages 372–385,
              2017.
         24   J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Grad and classes with bounded expansion I. decom-
              positions. European Journal of Combinatorics, 29(3):760–776, 2008.
         25   J. Nešetřil and P. Ossona de Mendez. Sparsity (Graphs, Structures, and Algorithms),
              volume 28 of Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer, 2012. 465 pages.
         26   S. Oum. Approximating rank-width and clique-width quickly. ACM Transactions on Al-
              gorithms (TALG), 5(1):10, 2008.
         27   D. Seese. Linear time computable problems and first-order descriptions. Mathematical
              Structures in Computer Science, 5:505–526, 1996.
         28   L. Segoufin and W. Kazana. First-order query evaluation on structures of bounded degree.
              Logical Methods in Computer Science, 7, 2011.
