Stabbing Planes∗†
Paul Beame1 , Noah Fleming2 , Russell Impagliazzo3 ,
Antonina Kolokolova4 , Denis Pankratov5 , Toniann Pitassi6 , and
Robert Robere7

1       University of Washington, Seattle, USA
        beame@cs.washington.edu
2       University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
        noahfleming@cs.toronto.edu
3       University of California, San Diego, USA
        russell@cs.ucsd.edu
4       Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, Canada
        kol@mun.ca
5       University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
        denisp@cs.toronto.edu
6       University of Toronto and Institute for Advanced Study, Toronto, Canada
        toni@cs.toronto.edu
7       University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
        robere@cs.toronto.edu



        Abstract
We introduce and develop a new semi-algebraic proof system, called Stabbing Planes that is in
the style of DPLL-based modern SAT solvers. As with DPLL, there is only one rule: the current
polytope can be subdivided by branching on an inequality and its “integer negation.” That is, we
can (nondeterministically choose) a hyperplane ax ≥ b with integer coefficients, which partitions
the polytope into three pieces: the points in the polytope satisfying ax ≥ b, the points satisfying
ax ≤ b − 1, and the middle slab b − 1 < ax < b. Since the middle slab contains no integer points it
can be safely discarded, and the algorithm proceeds recursively on the other two branches. Each
path terminates when the current polytope is empty, which is polynomial-time checkable. Among
our results, we show somewhat surprisingly that Stabbing Planes can efficiently simulate Cutting
Planes, and moreover, is strictly stronger than Cutting Planes under a reasonable conjecture.
We prove linear lower bounds on the rank of Stabbing Planes refutations, by adapting a lifting
argument in communication complexity.

1998 ACM Subject Classification F.0 General

Keywords and phrases communication complexity, cutting planes, proof complexity

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ITCS.2018.10


    1    Introduction
While defined in terms of non-deterministic algorithms for the Tautology problem, proof
complexity has also provided indispensable tools for understanding deterministic algorithms
for search problems, and in particular, for Satisfiability algorithms. Many algorithms for


∗
  This work was partially supported by NSERC and by NSF awards CCF-1524246, CCF-1412958,
  CCF-1213151. Part of the work was done while at Simons institute.
†
  Full version of this paper is available at[1], https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.03219
             © Paul Beame, Noah Fleming, Russell Impagliazzo, Antonina Kolokolova, Denis Pankratov,
             Toniann Pitassi, and Robert Robere;
             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
9th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2018).
Editor: Anna R. Karlin; Article No. 10; pp. 10:1–10:20
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
10:2   Stabbing Planes


       search can be classified according to the types of reasoning they implicitly use for case-
       analysis and pruning unpromising branches. Particular families of search algorithms can be
       characterized by formal proof systems; the size of proofs in these formal proof system, the
       time of the non-deterministic algorithm, captures the time taken on the instance by an ideal
       implementation of the search algorithm. This allows us to factor understanding the power of
       search algorithms of a given type into two questions:
       1. How powerful is the proof system? For which kinds of input are there small proofs?
       2. How close can actual implementations of the search method come to the ideal non-
           deterministic algorithm?
       As an illustrative example, let us recall the DPLL algorithm [10, 9], which is one of the
       simplest algorithms for SAT and forms the basis of modern conflict-driven clause learning
       SAT solvers. Let F = C1 ∧ C2 ∧ · · · ∧ Cm be a CNF formula over variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn .
       A DPLL search tree for solving the SAT problem for F is constructed as follows. Begin by
       choosing a variable xi (non-deterministically, or via some heuristic), and then recurse on the
       formulas F  xi = 0, F  xi = 1. If at any point we have found a satisfying assignment, the
       algorithm outputs SAT. Otherwise, if we have falsified every literal in some clause C, then
       we record the clause and halt the recursion. If every recursive branch ends up being labelled
       with a clause and a falsifying assignment, then the original formula F is unsatisfiable and
       one can take the tree as a proof of this fact; in fact, such a DPLL tree is equivalent to a
       tree-like Resolution refutation of the formula F.
           Modern SAT solvers still have a DPLL algorithm at the core (now with a highly tuned
       branching heuristic that chooses the “right” order for variables and assignments to recurse on
       in the search tree), but extends the basic recipe in two ways: smart handling of unit clauses
       (if F contains a clause with a single variable x under the current partial assignment, x can
       be immediately set so that the clause is satisfied), and clause learning to speed up search: if
       a partial assignment ρ falsifies a clause, then the algorithm derives a new clause Cρ by a
       resolution proof that “explains” this conflict, and adds the new clause to the formula F.
           It is the synergy between these three mechanisms – branching heuristics, unit propagation,
       and clause learning – that results in the outstanding performance of modern SAT solvers. In
       other words, while these algorithms are all formalizable in the same simple proof system,
       the sophistication of modern SAT-solvers comes from the attempt to algorithmically find
       small proofs when they exist. In many ways, the simplicity of the proof system enables this
       sophistication in proof-search methods.
           In this work, we introduce a natural generalization of the DPLL-style branching algorithm
       to reasoning over integer-linear inequalities, formalized as a new semi-algebraic proof system
       that we call the Stabbing Planes (SP) system. We will give a more detailed description later,
       but intuitively, Stabbing Planes has the same branching structure as DPLL, but generalizes
       branching on single variables to branching on linear inequalities over the variables. We feel
       the closeness to DPLL makes Stabbing Planes a better starting point for understanding
       search algorithms based on linear inequalities, as in integer linear programming (ILP) based
       solvers, than established proof systems such as Cutting Planes.
           We compare the power of Stabbing Planes proofs to these other proof systems. Recall
       that Cutting Planes (CP) is a proof system for reasoning over linear inequalities using
       linear combination and division with rounding rules, and Krajícek’s system R(CP) combines
       resolution and CP rules. We show that tree-like R(CP) is polynomially equivalent to Stabbing
       Planes (Theorem 9). However, the new formulation as Stabbing Planes proofs both gives
       greater motivation to studying R(CP) and greatly clarifies the power of this proof system.
       Our main results about this system are:
P. Beame et al.                                                                                             10:3


1. Stabbing Planes has quasi-polynomial size and poly-log rank proofs of any tautology
     provable using linear algebra over a constant modulus. In particular, this is true for the
     Tseitin graph tautologies, that are very frequently used to prove lower bounds for other
     proof systems. (Theorem 6)
2. Stabbing Planes can simulate tree-like Cutting Planes proofs with only constant factor
     increases in size and rank (Theorem 11), and general Cutting Planes proofs with a
     polynomial increase in size (Theorem 12 )
3. Lower bounds on real communication protocols imply rank lower bounds for Stabbing
     Planes proofs (Lemma 17)
4. Stabbing Planes proofs cannot be balanced (Theorem 21).
Together, these show that Stabbing Planes is at least as strong as established proof systems
using inequalities, and possibly much stronger. So the proof system combines strength
as a proof system with a simple branching structure that raises the possibility of elegant
algorithms based on this proof system, in particular for pseudoBoolean solvers.
     We now give a more precise description of the proof system. Let us formalize the
system in stages. First, observe that the setting is quite different: we are given a system
A1 x ≥ b1 , A2 · x ≥ b2 , . . . , Am · x ≥ bm of integer-linear inequalities over real-valued variables
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn (for simplicity we will always assume that the inequalities 0 ≤ xi ≤ 1 are
present for each variable xi ), and we seek to prove that no {0, 1}-solution exists. The basic
DPLL algorithm works in this setting with little modification: one can still query variables
and assign them to {0, 1} values; now we label leaves of the search tree with any inequality
ai · x ≥ bi in the system that is falsified by the sequence of assignments made on the path
from the root to the leaf. If every leaf ends up being labelled with a falsified inequality, then
the tree certifies that the system of inequalities has no {0, 1}-solutions.
     However, with the expanded domain we can consider the DPLL tree geometrically. To be
more specific, imagine replacing each {0, 1} query to a variable xi in the decision tree with
two “inequality queries” xi ≤ 0 and xi ≥ 1. Each node u in the tree after this replacement is
now naturally associated with a polyhedral set Pu of points satisfying each of the the input
inequalities and each of the inequalities on the path to this node. Since we began with a
DPLL refutation, it is clear that for any leaf ` the polyhedral set P` associated with the leaf
is empty, as any {0, 1} solution would have survived each of the inequalities queried on some
path in the tree and thus would exist in one of the polyhedral sets at the leaves.
     The stabbing planes system is then the natural generalization of the previous object: an
SP refutation consists of a generalized DPLL refutation where each node is labelled with an
arbitrary integral linear inequality Ax ≥ b (that is, the vector A and the parameter b are both
integral), and the outgoing edges are labelled with the inequalities Ax ≥ b and Ax ≤ b − 1.
Clearly, any integral vector x ∈ Zn will satisfy at least one of the inequalities labelling the
outgoing edges, and so if the polyhedral set at each leaf (again, obtained by intersecting the
original system with the inequalities on the path to the leaf) is empty then we have certified
that the original system of inequalities has no integral solutions. (See Figure 1 for a simple
example.) The main innovation of Stabbing Planes is its simplicity: refutations are simply
decision trees that query linear inequalities. Note that the more obvious extension of DPLL
to linear inequalities would branch on Ax ≥ b and its actual negation, Ax < b. However with
this branching rule, we would have to add additional rules in order to have completeness. By
branching on an inequality and its “integer negation”, we are able to get by with just one
rule analogous to the resolution rule in DPLL.
     From the perspective of SAT solving, even though tree-like Resolution and the search
for satisfying assignments encapsulated by DPLL are equivalent, it is the search point of
view of DPLL that has led to the major advances in SAT algorithms now found in modern


                                                                                                          ITCS 2018
10:4   Stabbing Planes



                                                                                   x+y ≥2


                                        x+y
                            x+y ≤1              x+y ≥2                 1<x+y <2
                                                             x+y ≤1
                               x−y
                                                             x−y ≥1
                 x−y ≥1                 x−y ≤0
                                                                   0<x−y <1




                                                                                x−y ≤0


          Figure 1 A partial SP refutation and the result on the unit square. The shaded areas are
       “removed” from the polytope, and we recurse on each side.


       conflict-directed clause learning (CDCL) SAT solvers. A natural hypothesis is that it is much
       easier to invent useful heuristics in the language of query-based algorithms, as opposed to
       algorithms based on the resolution rule. Stabbing Planes offers a similar benefit with respect
       to reasoning about inequalities.
           With the exception of mixed integer programming (MIP) solvers (such as CPLEX [19]),
       current solvers that, like Stabbing Planes, manipulate integer linear inequalities over Boolean
       variables are generally built on the same backtracking-style infrastructure as DPLL and
       CDCL SAT solvers but maintaining information as integer linear inequalities as opposed to
       clausal forms. The solvers are known as pseudoBoolean solvers and have been the subject of
       considerable effort and development.
           PseudoBoolean solvers work very well at handling the kinds of symmetric counting
       problems associated with, for example, the pigeonhole principle (PHP), which is known to be
       hard for CDCL SAT solvers, as well as other problems where the input constraints are much
       more succinctly and naturally expressed in inequality rather than clausal form. Innovations
       in pseudoBoolean solvers include use of normal forms for expressing constraints, techniques
       to generalize fast unit propogation and watched literals from DPLL to the analogue for
       integer linear inequalities, as well as methods to learn from conflicts and simplify learned
       constraints when integer coefficients from derived inequalities get too large [29, 5]. Despite
       all of this, even for the best pseudoBoolean solvers, the benefits of expressibility are usually
       not enough compensation for the added costs of manipulating and deriving new inequalities
       and they outperform CDCL solvers only in very limited cases in practice [5].
           A key limitation of these pseudoBoolean solvers is the fact that all branching is based
       on assigning values to individual variables; i.e., dividing the problem by slabs parallel to
       one of the coordinate axes. Stabbing Planes eliminates this constraint on the search and
       allows one to apply a divide and conquer search based on arbitrary integer linear constraints
       that are not necessarily aligned with one of these coordinate axes. This opens up the space
       of algorithmic ideas considerably and should allow future pseudoBoolean solvers to take
       fuller advantage of the expressibility of integer linear constraints. For example, a Stabbing
       Planes search could choose to branch on a linear inequality that is derived from the geometric
       properties of the rational hull of the current constraints by, say, splitting the volume, or
       by doing a balanced split at a polytope vertex, since properties of the rational hull can be
       determined efficiently. Such operations could be done in conjunction with solvers such as
       CPLEX to obtain the best of both kinds of approaches.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                       10:5


    Beyond the prospect of Stabbing Planes yielding improved backtracking search for
pseudoBoolean solvers, Stabbing Planes should allow the same kind of learning of inequalities
from conflicts that is being done in existing pseudoBoolean solvers, and hence get the benefits
of both. In this work we do not focus on the theoretical benefits of learning from conflicts
because we already can show considerable theoretical benefit from the more general branching
alone and because the theoretical benefits of the restricted kinds of learned linear inequalities
from conflicts available even in existing solvers are not at all clear.
    From a proof complexity perspective, the SP system turns out to be polynomially
equivalent to the semi-algebraic proof system tree-like R(CP), introduced by Krajíček [23].
Roughly speaking one can think of R(CP) as a mutual generalization of both Cutting Planes
and Resolution – the lines of an R(CP) proof are clauses of integer linear inequalities, and
in a single step one can take two clauses and either apply a cutting-planes rule to a single
inequality in each clause or apply a resolution-style “cut”. However, SP perspective turns
out to be quite useful: we show that SP has quasi-polynomial size refutations of the Tseitin
principle, and also that SP can polynomially-simulate Cutting Planes (neither result was
previously known to hold for tree-like R(CP)).
    We also investigate the relationship between SP refutations and communication complexity.
Given an unsatisfiable CNF F and any partition of the variables (X, Y ) of F into two sets,
one can consider the following two-party search problem SearchX,Y (F): Alice receives an
assignment to the X-variables, Bob receives an assignment to the Y -variables, and they
must communicate and output a falsified clause of F under their joint assignment. At this
time all strong lower bound results for Cutting Planes refutations essentially follow from
studying the communication complexity of SearchX,Y (F). In particular, depth-d (respectively,
length-L tree-like, length-L space s) CP refutation of F yields an d-round (respectively,
O(log L)-round, O(s log L)-round) real communication protocols for SearchX,Y (F), and a
length-L CP refutation of F yields a size L real communication game [24, 27, 6, 11, 16].
    Each of these results has been used to derive strong lower bounds on Cutting Planes
refutations by proving the corresponding lower bound against the search problem [24, 11,
17, 13, 27, 6]. Furthermore, the above lower bound techniques hold even for the stronger
semantic Cutting Planes system (the lines of which are integer linear inequalities, and from
two integer linear inequalities we are allowed to make any sound deduction over integer
points) [12]. This makes the known lower bounds much stronger, and it is quite surprising
that all one needs to exploit for strong lower bounds is that the lines are linear inequalities
(rather than exploiting some weakness of the deduction rules). However, this strength also
illustrates a weakness of current techniques, as once the lines of a proof system P become
expressive enough, semantic proof techniques (i.e. ones that work for the semantic version of
the proof systems) completely break down since every tautology has a short semantic proof.
Therefore, it is of key importance to develop techniques which truly exploit the “syntax” of
proof systems, and not just the expressive power of the lines.
    Hence, it is somewhat remarkable that we are able to show that these results still hold if
we replace real communication protocols with SP refutations. That is, we show:
    A depth-d CP refutation of F yields a depth-d SP refutation of F.
    A length-L tree-like CP refutation of F yields a depth O(log L) SP refutation of F.
    A length-L, space s CP refutation of F yields a depth O(s log L) SP refutation of F.
    A length-L CP refutation of F yields a size O(L) SP refutation of F.
Since SP is a syntactic system this further motivates studying its depth- and size-complexity.
We can use semantic techniques to get some lower bounds for SP: we show that a size-S and
depth-d SP refutation yields a real communication protocol with cost O(d) and for which



                                                                                                    ITCS 2018
10:6   Stabbing Planes


       the protocol tree has size O(S · n). This simulation yields new proofs of some depth lower
       bounds already known in the literature; however, these lower bounds are complemented
       by showing that neither SP refutations nor real communication protocols can be balanced.
       This should be viewed in a positive light: the depth- and size-complexity problems are truly
       different for SP, and furthermore, one seemingly cannot obtain size lower bounds for SP by
       proving depth lower bounds for real communication protocols (in contrast to, say, tree-like
       Cutting Planes). In sum, SP appears to be a very good candidate for a proof system on the
       “boundary” where current techniques fail to prove strong size lower bounds.
           The rest of the paper is outlined as follows. After some preliminaries in Section 2, we give
       a simple refutation of the Tseitin problem in SP in Section 3. In Section 4, we prove a raft of
       simulation and equivalence results for SP – showing it is equivalent to R(CP), relating it to
       Cutting Planes in various measures such as depth, length, and space, and showing how an
       SP proof yields a real communication protocol for the canonical search problem. Finally, in
       Section 5, we prove depth lower bounds for SP and some impossibility results for balancing.


        2      Preliminaries
       Before we define the new proof system formally, we need to make a few general definitions
       that are relevant to semi-algebraic proof systems.
           An integer linear inequality (or simply a linear inequality) in the variables x = x1 , . . . , xn
       is Ax ≥ b, where A ∈ Zn and b ∈ Z. A system of linear inequalities F is unsatisfiable if there
       is no Boolean assignment α ∈ {0, 1}n which simultaneously satisfies every inequality in F.
       We sometimes refer to inequalities as lines and write L ≡ Ax ≥ b. The integer negation of a
       line L is the inequality ¬L ≡ Ax ≤ b − 1.
           An unsatisfiable formula in a conjuctive normal form (CNF) defines an unsatisfiable
                                                                     Wk         Wl
       system of linear inequalities F in a natural way. A clause i=1 xi ∨ i=1 ¬xi , is translated
                           Pk         Pl
       into the inequality i=1 xi + i=1 (1 − xi ) ≥ 1, and F is the set of translations of all clauses.
       We assume that F always contains the axioms xi ≥ 0 and −xi ≥ −1 for all variables xi , as
       we are interested in propositional proof systems for refuting unsatisfiable Boolean formulas.

       I Definition 1. A propositional proof system P is a non-deterministic polynomial time Turing
       machine (TM) deciding the language of unsatisfiable CNF formulas. Given an unsatisfiable
       CNF, the NP-certificate is called the proof or the refutation.

            The strength of proof systems is compared using the notion of polynomial simulation.

       I Definition 2. Let P1 and P2 be two proof systems. We say that P1 polynomially simulates
       P2 if for every unsatisfiable formula F, the shortest refutation of F in P1 is at most
       polynomially longer than the shortest refutation in P2 . P1 is strictly stronger than P2 if P1
       polynomially simulates P2 , but the converse does not hold. Finally, we say that P1 and P2
       are incomparable if neither can polynomially simulate the other.

            We now describe the proof system Stabbing Planes, our central object of study.

       I Definition 3. Let F be an unsatisfiable system of linear integral inequalities. A Stabbing
       Planes (SP) refutation of F is a threshold decision tree: a directed binary tree in which each
       edge is labelled with a linear integral inequality. If the right outgoing edge of a node is labelled
       with Ax ≥ b, then the left outgoing edge has to be labelled with its integer negation, Ax ≤ b−1.
       We refer to Ax (or the pair of inequalities Ax ≤ b − 1, Ax ≥ b) as the query corresponding to
       the node. The slab corresponding to the query is {x∗ ∈ Rn | b − 1 < Ax∗ < b}.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                            10:7


   Let the set of all paths from the root to a leaf in the tree be denoted by {p1 , . . . , p` }.
Each leaf i is labelled with a non-negative linear combination of inequalities in F with the
inequalities along the path pi that yields 0 ≥ 1.

    The size of a SP refutation is the number of bits needed to represent every inequality in
the refutation. The length of a SP refutation is the number of nodes in the threshold tree.
The size (length) of refuting a system of linear inequalities F in SP is the minimum size
(length) of any SP refutation of F. The rank or depth of a SP refutation P is the longest
root-to-leaf path in the threshold tree of P. The rank (depth) of refuting F in SP is the
minimum rank (depth) over all SP refutations of F.
    Refutations in SP have an intuitive geometric interpretation: each step of a refutation can
be viewed as nondeterministically removing a slab from the solution space and recursing on
the resulting polytopes on both sides of the slab. The aim is to recursively cover the solution
space with slabs until every feasible point within this polytope is removed. An example of
this can be seen in Figure 1 in the introduction. In particular, the polytope at any step of
the recursion is empty if and only if there exists a convex combination of the axioms and
inequalities labelling the corresponding root-to-leaf path in the refutation equivalent to 0 ≥ 1.
This is summarized in the following fact which follows directly from the Farkas’ lemma. The
“moreover” part of the following fact is an application of Carathéodory’s theorem, and will
be useful for technical reasons later in the paper. We refer the interested reader to [30] for
some background on polytope theory.

I Fact 4. Let F = {A1 x ≥ b1 , . . . , Am x ≥ bm } be a system of integer linear inequalities.
The polytope defined by F is empty if and only if there is a non-negative (rational) linear
combination of the inequalities of F which evaluates to 0 ≥ 1. Moreover, the non-negative
linear combination can be taken to be supported on ≤ n of the inequalities from F, where n
is the dimension of the space to which x belongs.

    It is straightforward to see that SP is a sound and complete proof system. Completeness
follows from a simple observation that SP polynomially simulates DPLL. To see that SP
is sound, let R be a SP refutation of some formula F. Observe that for any node in R
with outgoing edges labelled Ax ≥ b and Ax ≤ b − 1, any 0 − 1 assignment to the variables
α ∈ {0, 1}n must satisfy exactly one of the two inequalities. Therefore, if a Boolean solution
α ∈ {0, 1}n satisfies F, then for at least one of the leaves of R, one cannot derive 0 ≥ 1. This
follows by Fact 4 because the polytope formed by the inequalities labelling root-to-leaf path
is non-empty (α lies in this polytope) .
    Next we recall a well-known and extensively-studied proof system: Cutting Planes (CP).
For an introduction to Cutting Planes, we refer an interested reader to Chapter 19 in [21].

I Definition 5. Let F be an unsatisfiable system of linear inequalities. A Cutting Planes
(CP) refutation of F is a sequence of linear inequalities {L1 , . . . , L` } such that L` = 0 ≥ 1
and each Li is either an axiom ∈ F or is obtained from previous lines via one of the following
inference rules. Let α, β be positive integers.
                                      Ax ≥ a    Bx ≥ b                         αAx ≥ b
          Linear Combination:                                     Division:
                                                                               Ax ≥ αb
                                                                                    
                                    (αA + βB)x ≥ αa + βb

   We refer to ` as the length of the refutation. The length of refuting F in CP is the
minimum length of a CP refutation of F.

    The directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = (V, E) associated with a CP refutation {L1 , . . . , L` }
is defined as follows. We have V = {L1 , . . . , L` } and (u, v) ∈ E if and only if the line labelling
v was derived by an application of an inference rule involving the line labelling u. Without


                                                                                                         ITCS 2018
10:8   Stabbing Planes


       loss of generality, we may assume that there is only one vertex with out degree 0, which we
       call the root. The root of G is labelled with L` and the leaves are labelled with the axioms.
           The rank or depth of the refutation is the length of the longest root-to-leaf path in G.
       The rank of refuting an unsatisfiable system of linear inequalities F is the minimum rank of
       any refutation of F in the given proof system. Finally, tree-like CP is defined by restricting
       proofs to be such that the underlying graph G is a tree.
           It is not known if an arbitrary SP refutation can be transformed into a refutation with
       coefficients of polynomial bitsize. Therefore we currently must make the distinction between
       SP refutation size and length. Fortunately, all of our results hold in the best possible scenario;
       our upper bounds are low weight (polynomial-length); the simulations are length preserving,
       and our lower bounds hold for any weight.

        3     Motivating Example: SP Refutations of Tseitin Formulas
       Tseitin contradictions are among the most well-studied unsatisfiable formulas in proof
       complexity, and are the quintessential formulas that are believed to be hard for CP [21].
       Despite the fact that exponential lower bounds for CP are known for many natural families
       of formulas (including recent lower bounds for random O(log n)-CNF formulas), there are
       no nontrivial lower bounds known for the Tseitin contradictions, and for good reason: the
       only known lower bound method for CP reduces the problem of refuting a formula in CP
       to a monotone circuit problem, for which the corresponding monotone circuit problem for
       Tseitin contradictions is easy.
           In this section, we demonstrate the power of Stabbing Planes by showing that there exists
       a shallow quasi-polynomial size SP refutation of the Tseitin formulas. This, together with
       our simulation results from Section 4, show that SP is provably more powerful than CP in
       terms of depth, and strongly suggests that SP is strictly more powerful than CP.
           Tseitin contradictions are any unsatisfiable family of mod-2 equations subject to the
       constraint that every variable occurs in exactly two equations. An instance of Tseitin, denoted
       Tseitin(G, `) is defined by a connected undirected graph G = (V, E) and a node labelling
       ` ∈ {0, 1}V of odd total weight: v∈V `v = 1 mod 2. For each edge e ∈ E there is a variable
                                           P
                                                                     P
       xe in Tseitin(G, `), and for each vertex v ∈ V an equation e3v xe ≡ `v mod 2, stating that
       the sum of the variables xe incident with v is `v mod 2. The edge equations sum to zero
       mod 2 since every variable occurs exactly twice, but the vertex equations sum to one mod 2,
       since the node labelling is odd, and therefore the equations are unsatisfiable. When G has
       degree D, we can express Tseitin(G, `) as a D-CNF formula containing |V | · 2D−1 clauses.
           The obvious way to refute Tseitin(G, `) under an assignment x is to find a vertex w for
       which the corresponding vertex equation is falsified. This can be achieved by the following
       divide-and-conquer procedure, which maintains a set U ⊆ V such that w ∈ U . The process
       begins by setting U = V . Then, V is partitioned arbitrarily into two sets V1 , V2 of roughly
       the same size. Query xe for all edges e crossing the cut (V1 , V2 ), and suppose that the sum
                                                                                            P
       of all such xe is odd (the case when it is even is similar). We know that either v∈V1 `v or
       P
          v∈V2 `v is even: if the first sum is even then the Tseitin formula restricted to V1 contains a
       contradiction, and otherwise the formula restricted to V2 contains a contradiction. In either
       case, we can remove roughly half of the graph and recurse.
           By keeping track of a few more variables, we can repeat this procedure recursively until
       |U | = 1. Since we reduce the size of U by half each time, this procedure results in the
       recursion depth logarithmic in |V |. It turns out that this procedure can be realized in
       Stabbing Planes, where recursion depth roughly corresponds to the depth of the refutation.
       This results in a quasi-polynomial size refutation.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                          10:9


I Theorem 6. Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph, and let ` be a {0, 1} vertex labelling
with odd total weight. Then Tseitin(G, `) has an SP refutation of size nO(log n+D/ log n) and
rank O(D + log2 n), where n = |V | and D is the maximum degree in G.

Proof. If U ⊆ V is a set of vertices, then let E(U ) = {uv ∈ E | u, v ∈ U }, and Cut(U ) =

  uv ∈ E | u ∈ U, v ∈ U . Similarly, if U1 , U2 ⊆ V are disjoint then we let Cut(U1 , U2 ) =
{uv ∈ E | u ∈ U1 , v ∈ U2 }. We construct the SP refutation recursively. During the recursion
we maintain a set U of current vertices (initially U = V ). At each recursive step, we split U
into two halves U1 and U2 and query the total weight k of the edges crossing (U1 , U2 ) via SP
inequalities. Knowing k, a few additional queries allows us to determine which of U1 or U2
contains a contradiction, and we then recurse on the corresponding set of vertices.
    We construct a proof while maintaining the following invariant: for the current subset of
                                                                         P
vertices U ⊆ V , we have queried linear inequalities implying that e∈Cut(U ) xe = k for some
                                       P
0 ≤ k ≤ |Cut(U )| such that k 6≡ v∈U `v mod 2. Note that this invariant ensures that our
Tseitin instance restricted to the edges incident on U is unsatisfiable, since summing up all
                                         P                 P                   P
vertex constraints within U yields e∈Cut(U ) xe + e∈E(U ) 2xe ≡ k 6≡ v∈U `v (mod 2).
    Initially we have U = V and the invariant clearly holds. Now, let U be the current set
                                                   P                               P
of vertices. By the invariant we know that e∈Cut(U ) xe = k for some k 6≡ v∈U `v mod 2.
Partition U into two halves U1 and U2 arbitrarily, subject to |U1 | = b|U |/2c. We first
                                                                              P
determine the value of the edges going between U1 and U2 by querying e∈Cut(U1 ,U2 ) xe ≥ β
for β = 1, . . . , |Cut(U1 , U2 )|. To each leaf of this tree we attach a second binary search tree
                                                         P
for determining the value |Cut(U1 )| by querying e∈Cut(U1 ) xe ≥ γ for γ = 1, . . . , |Cut(U1 )|.
                                                                          P
After these queries, at each leaf of the “combined” tree we will have e∈Cut(U1 ,U2 ) xe = β and
P
   e∈Cut(U1 ) xe = γ for some βP     and γ. Furthermore, since |Cut(U1 )| + |Cut(U2 )| = |Cut(U )| +
2|Cut(U1 , U2 )|, we will have e∈Cut(U2 ) xe = δ, where δ + γ = k + 2β, 0 ≤ δ ≤ |Cut(U2 )|.
    For any leaf of this tree where δ > |Cut(U2 )|, we can derive a contradiction by summing the
                                                  P
axioms −xe ≥ −1 for all e ∈ Cut(U2 ) with e∈Cut(U2 ) xe ≥ δ. Otherwise, for the remaining
                                     P           P                               P
leaves observe that δ+γ ≡ k 6≡ v∈U1 `v + v∈U2 `v (mod 2). Now, if γ 6≡ v∈U1 `(v) mod 2,
                                           P
then recurse on U1 . Otherwise, δ 6≡ v∈U2 `(v) mod 2. Then recurse on U2 .
    Our recursion terminates when U contains a single vertex v. By the invariant, we
                  P
have derived e∈Cut(v) xe ≡ k 6≡ `(v) mod 2 for some 0 ≤ k ≤ |Cut({v})|. The axioms
of Tseitin(G, `) rule out Boolean assignments to the variables xe for e ∈ Cut({v}), which
contradict `(v); these axioms do not prohibit incorrect fractional assignments. Therefore,
to derive a contradiction, we still need to enforce that the variables xe for e ∈ Cut({v})
take {0, 1} values. We achieve this by querying all variables xe for e ∈ Cut({v}) via SP
inequalities xe ≥ 1, xe ≤ 0. This results in a complete binary tree of depth ≤ D. Clearly,
                                                                        P
0 ≥ 1 is immediately obtained at the leaves that disagree with e∈Cut({v}) xe = k. At the
                           P
leaves that agree with e∈Cut({v}) xe = k, the inequality 0 ≥ 1 immediately follows from the
assignment to the edges incident to v and one of the axioms of Tseitin.
    Finally, we analyze the size and rank of the constructed SP proof. In each recursive
step, we make O((nD)2 ) queries to determine weights of edges crossing the two cuts. Each
recursive step is computed by a pair of binary trees, each of depth at most log(nD). Our
recursion terminates in log n rounds because we halve the number of current vertices in each
step. Once the recursion terminates, we query the variables corresponding to edges incident
to the single remaining vertex – this contributes 2D factor to size and increases depth by at
most D. Overall, the SP proof has size nO(log n+D/ log n) and rank O(D + log2 n).                 J

I Corollary 7. SP is strictly stronger than CP with respect to proof rank.




                                                                                                       ITCS 2018
10:10   Stabbing Planes


        Proof. By Theorem 11, any Cutting Planes refutation of rank r can be converted into a SP
        refutation of rank O(r). Buresh-Oppenheim et al. proved Ω(n) lower bound on the rank
        of Cutting Planes of the Tseitin formulas on constant-degree expander graphs [7], while
        Theorem 6 shows that SP can refute such Tseitin formulas in rank O(log2 n).            J

         4     Simulation Theorems
        In this section, we prove simulation theorems relating the SP proof system to other similar
        proof systems in the literature. We begin by showing that SP is polynomially equivalent
        to the tree-like R(CP) system (introduced by Krajicek in [23]), which can be thought of as
        tree-like Resolution with clauses of inequalities and allowing CP rules. Since tree-like R(CP)
        simulates tree-like CP, the natural question is whether SP (and consequently R(CP)) can
        simulate general CP. We answer this question positively by providing two simulations. First
        of all, we observe that SP can depth-simulate CP. This simulation, while preserving depth of
        the proof, can lead to an exponential increase in the size. Via a different simulation we show
        that SP can size-simulate CP. This time around, while the simulation preserves the size of
        a CP refutation, it can significantly increase the depth. It is an interesting open question
        whether there is a simulation of CP by SP that can simultaneously preserve depth and size
        of CP refutations.
            To complete the picture, we note that general R(CP) can trivially simulate tree-like R(CP)
        (and consequently SP) and CP. We also show that tree-like CP refutations can be efficiently
        converted into balanced (logarithmic-depth) SP refutations – this shows that tree-like CP
        refutations, which cannot in general be balanced, can be balanced in SP.


                                                  R(CP)

                                           CP        SP = Tree-R(CP)

                                                 Tree-CP

            We then turn to the question of space-time simulations. Recall, that a proof system can
        be thought of as a non-deterministic Turing machine. The notion of space of CP refutations
        intuitively corresponds to the minimum size of the work tape of such a non-deterministic
        Turing machine that is required to carry out the computation. In this analogy, the notion of
        length of CP refutations corresponds to the running time of the given TM. We show that
        general CP refutations that use length ` and space s can be turned into depth O(s log `) SP
        refutations. Thus, sufficiently strong lower bounds on the depth of SP refutations lead to
        time-space tradeoffs for CP.

        4.1    Equivalence of SP with tree-like RCP
        We show the SP system is polynomially equivalent to the R(CP) proof system. R(CP) proof
        system is formally defined as follows.

        I Definition 8. The R(CP) proof system is a syntactic proof system defined as follows. The
        lines of the R(CP) system are disjunctions of integer linear inequalities Γ = L1 ∨ L2 ∨ · · · ∨ L` ,
        and the lines are equipped with the following deductive rules. Let Γ be an arbitrary disjunction
        of integer linear inequalities, let Ax ≥ b, Cx ≥ d be arbitrary integer linear inequalities, and
        let α, β be any positive integers.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                        10:11


                            (Ax ≥ b) ∨ Γ    (Cx ≥ d) ∨ Γ                  (αAx ≥ b) ∨ Γ
  Linear Combination:                                           Division:
                             (αA + βC)x ≥ (αb + βd) ∨ Γ                  (Ax ≥ db/αe) ∨ Γ
      Axiom Introduction:                                     Weakening:        Γ
                            (Ax ≥ b) ∨ (Ax ≤ b − 1)                       (Ax ≥ b) ∨ Γ
                (Ax ≥ b) ∨ Γ    (Ax ≤ b − 1) ∨ Γ                         (0 ≥ 1) ∨ Γ
         Cut:                                               Elimination:
                               Γ                                              Γ
An R(CP) proof is tree-like if the proof DAG is a tree.
The following two theorems state the polynomial equivalence between SP and R(CP). Due
to space considerations, we refer the reader to the full version [1] of this paper for the proofs
of the two theorems.
I Theorem 9. Let C be an unsatisfiable CNF, and let C1 , C2 , . . . , Cm be the representation
of C as an integer-linear system of inequalities. For any SP refutation of C with size s and
depth d there is a tree-like R(CP) refutation of C of size O(s(d2 + dm)) and width d + 1.
I Theorem 10. Let C be an unsatisfiable CNF, and let C1 , C2 , . . . , Cm be the representation
of C as an integer linear system of equations. For any tree-like R(CP) proof of the disjunction
¬C1 ∨ ¬C2 ∨ · · · ∨ ¬Cm with size s and depth d there is an SP refutation of C of size at most
2s and rank at most 2d.

4.2     SP simulations of Cutting Planes
SP simulates CP in two ways: via a depth-preserving simulation and via a size-preserving
simulation. It is an interesting open problem if both depth and size can be preserved
simultaneously during a simulation. Due to space requirements, we simply state the depth-
preserving simulation and leave its proof to the full version of the paper [1].
I Theorem 11. For every Cutting Planes refutation of rank d, there is a SP refutation of
the same tautology with rank at most 2d. Moreover, if the CP refutation is tree-like of size s
then the resulting SP refutation is of size O(s) and rank 2d.
   Next, we present the size-preserving simulation with full details.
I Theorem 12. SP polynomially simulates CP.
Proof. Let R = {A1 x ≥ a1 , A2 x ≥ a2 , . . . , Am x ≥ am } be a CP refutation of an unsatisfiable
set of integer linear inequalities F. We construct a SP refutation of F line by line, following
R. Our SP refutation is a tree where the right-most path is of length m+1 with edges labelled
A1 ≥ b1 , . . . , Am ≥ bm . The left child of node i ≤ m along this path is labelled with 0 ≥ 1,
which is derived as a non-negative linear combination of Aj x ≥ aj for j < i, Ai x ≤ ai − 1,
and F. The last node in the path is also labelled with 0 ≥ 1. Since Am x ≥ am ≡ 0 ≥ 1, the
last node is trivially labelled with 0 ≥ 1. Thus, we only need to show that the left child of
every node can be legally labelled with 0 ≥ 1. If Ai x ≥ ai is an axiom, we can derive 0 ≥ 1
by subtracting Ai x ≤ ai − 1 from Ai x ≥ ai ∈ F. If Ai x ≥ ai is a non-negative combination
of two previous inequalities, i.e., Ai x ≥ ai is αAj1 x + βAj2 x ≥ αaj1 + βaj2 for some j1 , j2 < i
and α, β ∈ Z≥0 , we can derive 0 ≥ 1 by subtracting Ai x ≤ ai − 1 from the non-negative
linear combination of Aj1 x ≥ aj1 and Aj2 x ≥ aj2 used to derive Ai x ≥ ai . Finally, suppose
that Ai x ≥ ai is obtained      an application of the division rule to Aj x ≥ aj for some j < i,
                            a by
                    A
i.e., Ai x ≥ ai is cj x ≥ cj where c ∈ N divides every entry in Aj . On the path to this node
in our SP refutation we queried Aj x ≥ aj . Dividing this inequality by c and      a subtracting
                                                                         a
Ai x ≤ ai − 1, we obtain 0 ≥ aj /c − (daj /ce − 1) . This gives us 0 ≥ cj + 1 − cj . Since the
right-hand side is strictly positive this can be normalized to give 0 ≥ 1.                       J



                                                                                                      ITCS 2018
10:12   Stabbing Planes


        4.3    CP and Balanced SP
        It is known that CP refutations cannot be balanced (i.e. size-s refutations being turned into
        size O(s) depth O(log s) refutation) in CP. Here, we show that CP proofs can be turned into
        balanced SP proofs. More specifically, we prove the following.
        I Theorem 13. Suppose there is a size s tree-like CP refutation of a set of linear integer
        inequalities F. Then there is a size s depth O(log s) SP refutation of F.
        Proof. The construction is recursive. Let T be the tree corresponding to P. If |T | = O(1),
        use one of the previous simulation theorems to create an SP refutation of P. Now, let v be a
        node in T such that the subtree Tv rooted at v satisfies |T |/3 ≤ |Tv | ≤ 2|T |/3, which must
        exist since the size measure is additive. Let Bx ≥ b be the line in P corresponding to v. Our
        SP simulation starts by querying Bx. If Bx ≥ b then we apply the recursive construction to
        T \ Tv , treating Bx ≥ b as a new axiom. Otherwise, if Bx ≤ b − 1 (which contradicts the the
        input set of inequalities F) we apply the recursive construction to Tv . The size is clearly
        preserved, and the depth of the proof becomes logarithmic, since we are reducing the size of
        the proof to be simulated by a constant factor on each branch of a query.                  J

           We can also show that bounded depth and space CP refutations yield balanced SP proofs.
        See full version [1] for the proof of the following theorem.
        I Theorem 14. Suppose that we have a length `, space s CP refutation of an unsatisfiable
        set of linear integral inequalities. Then there is a depth O(s log `) SP refutation of the same
        set of linear integral inequalities.

         5     Impossibility Results
        In this section, we prove near-optimal lower bounds on SP rank via reductions to random-
        ized and real communication complexity. We then tackle the harder problem of proving
        unrestricted superpolynomial size lower bounds for SP. Although we are unable to prove
        such lower bounds we explain why current approaches fail. Essentially all lower bounds
        for CP have been obtained by reducing to a communication complexity problem; in the
        case of tree-like CP, the reduction is to the communication complexity of a corresponding
        search problem. For more general dag-like CP, the reduction is to the size of “communication
        games” [13, 17] (communication games are a dag-like model of communication that gives an
        equivalence between communication size and monotone circuit size, analogous to the famous
        equivalence between communication depth and monotone formula size). Although tree-like
        CP proofs cannot be balanced in general, communication protocols (both deterministic and
        randomized) can be balanced, and thus tree-like CP lower bounds follow from communication
        complexity lower bounds. Similarly, we show that it is not possible to balance SP refutations,
        and thus we cannot in general obtain size lower bounds directly from rank lower bounds.
        Moreover, we show that SP refutations imply real communication protocols, and unlike
        ordinary communication protocols, we show that real protocols cannot in general be balanced.
        This rules out proving length lower bounds on SP refutations from (real) communication
        complexity lower bounds.

        5.1    SP Refutations Imply Communication Protocols
        Real communication protocols were introduced by Krajíc̆ek [24]. In this model, the players
        are allowed to communicate by sending real-valued functions of their inputs to a referee who
        announces their comparison.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                     10:13


I Definition 15. A real communication protocol is a full binary tree in which every non-leaf
node v is labeled with a pair of functions av : X → R, bv : Y → R, and the leaves are labelled
with elements in Z. Two players, Alice and Bob, receive inputs from X × Y, with Alice
receiving x ∈ X and Bob receiving y ∈ Y. Beginning at the root, the players traverse the tree
as follows: at each node, they send real values av (x) and bv (y) to a “referee” who returns
(to both of them) a bit indicating the result of the comparison av (x) ≥ bv (y); the players
proceed to the left child if av ≥ bv , and to the right child otherwise. Once they reach a leaf,
the protocol halts, and the players output the value in Z labelling the leaf; it computes a
function f : X × Y → Z in the natural way.

    The cost of a real protocol is the depth of the tree, or equivalently the maximum number
of rounds of communications with the referee over any input (x, y), and the size is the number
of nodes in the protocol. Similarly, the cost (size) of computing a function f is the smallest
cost (size) real protocol computing f .
    Krajíc̆ek showed that from a low-rank CP refutation of an unsatisfiable CNF, one can
obtain a real communication protocol for solving a related search problem [24]. We describe
this search problem next.

I Definition 16. Let F = C1 ∧ C2 ∧ · · · ∧ Cm be an unsatisfiable CNF and (X, Y ) be a
partition of the variables. The relation SearchX,Y (F) ⊆ {0, 1}X × {0, 1}Y × [m] consists
of all triples (x, y, i) such that the total assignment z = (x, y) to all of the variables of Ci
falsifies the clause i.

The search problem is the natural interpretation of a refutation in the setting of commu-
nication. Indeed, essentially every lower bound for CP has been proved by reducing to the
communication complexity of the search problem. In a similar manner, we show that SP
refutations can be turned into both randomized and real protocols for the search problem
which preserve the rank of the refutation.

I Lemma 17. Let F be an unsatisfiable CNF formula and (X, Y ) be any partition of the
variables. Any SP refutation of F of rank r implies a real communication protocol of cost
O(r + log n) and an O(r log n + log2 n) randomized bounded-error protocol for SearchX,Y (F).

    The protocol consists of traversing the SP tree until a leaf is reached (r rounds), then
finding a clause falsified at the leaf in O(log n) rounds: note that evaluating any linear
inequality can be done using a single bit of communication.
    For the second part of the lemma, Alice and Bob run the ε-error O(log m + log ε−1 )-bit
protocol of Nisan [26] for deciding an m-bit linear inequality. By the well-known result of
Muroga [25], any inequality on n Boolean variables only requires coefficients representable
by O(n log n) bits (recall that Alice and Bob’s input will always be a Boolean assignment
and so this suffices). Because there are at most r + log n inequalities evaluated along any
root-to-leaf path in the refutation, the protocol is repeated at most r + log n many times.
By a union bound, we require ε < c/(log n + r), where c is some constant bound on the error
that we allow. Therefore, every inequality can be computed in O(log n + log r) many bits to
compute, giving a O(r log n + log2 n) bounded-error randomized protocol for SearchX,Y (F).

5.2    Rank Lower Bounds For SP
To take advantage of Lemma 17, we need to find some candidate formulas on which to
prove rank lower bounds and then study the search problem obtained from applying this
transformation. We do so for both the Tseitin formulas and a variant of the pebbling



                                                                                                   ITCS 2018
10:14   Stabbing Planes


        contradictions, a reformulation of the classical black pebbling games as an unsatisfiable
        3-CNF formula, originally introduced by Ben-Sasson et al. [4, 3].
            The black pebbling game can be phrased as a contradictory 3-CNF as follows: Let G be
        a DAG with a set of source nodes S ⊆ V (G) (having fanin 0), a unique sink node t (with
        fanin 2 and fanout 0), and the remaining nodes each having fanin exactly 2. The pebbling
        contradictions PebG consists of the following n + 1 clauses over variables v ∈ V (G): sink
        axiom: a single clause ¬t; source axioms: a clause s for every source s ∈ S; pebbling axioms:
        a clause ¬u ∨ ¬v ∨ w for every w ∈ V \ S with immediate children u, v.
            Unfortunately, both the pebbling contradictions and the Tseitin formulas have short SP
        refutations. In particular, for any graph G, the polytope formed by the constraints of PebG
        is empty and therefore a nonnegative combination of the constraints yielding 0 ≥ 1 exists,
        this is a valid rank-1 SP refutation. For Tseitin, this follows from the poly-logarithmic rank
        upper bound in Theorem 6. We modify these formulas to make them harder to solve.
            A standard technique for amplifying the hardness of computing some function f : X n → Z
        is by lifting that function. This is done by obscuring the input variables by replacing them
        each by a small function g : A → X known as a gadget, which must be evaluated before
        learning the input to the original function. For an input α ∈ An , the function f lifted by
        gadget g is then (f ◦ g n )(α) = (g(α1 ), . . . , g(αn )). The intuition is that this lifted function
        f ◦ g n should be much harder than the original because the players must first evaluate the
        gadget g(αi ) to learn each bit of the actual input to the function f . Furthermore, intuition
        says that if the gadget is sufficiently difficult to compute, then the model will be reduced to
        using much more rudimentary methods to evaluate the lifted function.
            The standard hard-to-compute gadget is the pointer or index gadget, IND` : [`]×{0, 1}` →
        {0, 1}. For an input (x, y) ∈ [`] × {0, 1}` , x is a log `-bit string encoding a pointer into the
        `-bit string y ∈ {0, 1}` . The output of IND` (x, y) is y[x], the x-th bit in the string y. This
        is most often applied in communication complexity, where typically the variable partition
        between the players is that Alice is given x ∈ [`] and Bob is given y ∈ {0, 1}` . In any standard
        model of communication, for this partition of the variables, it is difficult to imagine any
        communication protocol which could compute the index gadget with significant advantage
        over the trivial protocol; sending every bit of Alice’s pointer x to Bob.
            Raz and McKenzie formalized this intuition, in what has become known as a lifting
        theorem [28, 15]. They show that deterministic communication protocols cannot compute any
        function f lifted by the index gadget significantly better than simply mimicking a decision
        tree computing f , and performing the trivial protocol for evaluating the index gadget every
        time a bit of the input to f is needed.
            Lifting theorems for real communication were originally proved by Bonet et al. [6] based
        on the techniques of Raz-McKenzie. Their theorem lifts lower bounds on the decision tree
        complexity of a function f to lower bounds on the cost of real communication protocols
        computing f ◦ INDn` . The decision tree complexity DT(f ) of a function f is simply the
        minimum depth need by any decision tree to compute f . We use a simplified lifting theorem
        for real communication by de Rezende et al. [11], which we state next.

        I Theorem 18. (de Rezende et al. [11]) Let f be a function with domain {0, 1}n and let
        ` = n4 . If there is a real communication protocol of cost c that solves f ◦ INDn` where Alice
        is given x ∈ [`]n and Bob is given y ∈ {0, 1}n` , then there is a decision tree solving f using
        O(c/ log `) queries.

           Our goal is now to is to combine this theorem with Lemma 17 in order to prove lower
        bounds on the rank of SP refutations of PebG ◦ INDn` . Syntactically speaking though,
P. Beame et al.                                                                                                   10:15


PebG ◦ INDn` is not a valid input to our proof system. Therefore, we must show that the
lifted function can indeed be phrased as a small CNF formula. The following encoding is due
to Beame et al. [2]:
     Let F = C1 ∨ . . . ∨ Cm be a CNF formula over variables x1 , . . . , xn . The CNF representing
F ◦ INDn` is defined on new sets of variables yi,j and zi,j for all i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [`]. This CNF
has the following set of clauses
     Pointer clauses: for each i ∈ [n], a clause yi,1 ∨ . . . ∨ yi,` .
     F-clauses: for each clause Ci ∈ F, where Ci = yi1 ∨ . . . ∨ yik ∨ ¬xik+1 ∨ . . . ∨ ¬xis and
     for every (j1 , . . . , jn ) ∈ [`]n , a clause
    (yi1 ,j1 → zi1 ,j1 )∨. . .∨(yik ,jk → zik ,jk )∨(yik+1 ,jk+1 → ¬zik+1 ,jk+1 )∨. . .∨(yis ,js → ¬zis ,js ).
We will abuse notation and use F ◦ INDn` to denote the function, as well as it’s CNF
formulation, and use context to differentiate between the two.
     A final subtlety that should be mentioned is that applying Theorem 18 to an SP refutation
of PebG ◦ INDn` yields a protocol for SearchX,Y (PebG ◦ INDn` ) which is not in the correct form
to apply Theorem 18 (SearchX,Y (PebG ◦ INDn` ) is a function of a lifted function, whereas
Theorem 18 can only be applied to lifted functions). Luckily, this is not a significant issue;
Huynh et al. [18] show that, for any unsatisfiable CNF F, any real communication protocol
for SearchX,Y (F ◦ INDn` ), where X = [`]n and Y = {0, 1}n` , implies a real communication
protocol for SearchX,Y (F) ◦ INDn` with the same parameters.
     It is now straightforward to obtain lower bounds on the rank of SP refutations. For
the lifted pebbling formulas, SP rank lower bounds follow from combining Lemma 17 and
Theorem 18 with a lower bound on the complexity of decision trees solving PebG proved by
de Rezende et al.[11].

I Theorem 19. There exists a graph G of indegree 2 on n vertices such that the unsatisfiable
                                                                                  √
CNF formula PebG ◦ INDn` , for ` = n4 , on n(` + log `) variables requires rank Ω( n log n) to
refute in SP.

Proof. de Rezende et al. [11] showed the existence of a graph G on n vertices withp  indegree 2
such that the decision tree complexity of outputting a falsified clause of PebG is Ω( n/ log n).
Applying Theorem 18 and combining this with the fact that shallow SP refutations give effi-
                                                                                      √
cient protocols for the associated search problem (Lemma 17), proves the desired Ω( n log n)
lower bound on the rank of SP refutations of PebG ◦ INDn` .                                  J

    Finally, a similar technique can be applied to obtain a lower bound on the rank of
SP refutations for a lifted variant of the Tseitin formulas. This follows from the lower
bound on the randomized communication complexity of the search problem for the Tseitin
formulas lifted by a small constant-size gadget, which was obtained by Göös and Pitassi
[14]. In particular, they use the versatile gadget, VER : Z4 × Z4 → {0, 1}, which is defines as
VER(x, y) = 1 ⇐⇒ x + y (mod 4) ∈ {2, 3}.

I Theorem 20. (Göös and Pitassi [14]) There exists a constant-degree graph G on n vertices
such that, if ` is any {0, 1} vertex labelling with odd total weight and (X, Y ) is any partition
of the variables, any bounded-error randomized communication protocol for
SearchX,Y (Tseitin(G, `) ◦ VERn ) on O(n) variables, requires Ω(n/ log n) bits of communica-
tion.

   Furthermore, Göös and Pitassi showed how, for any CNF formula F, the composed
function F ◦ VERn can be encoded as a CNF formula. For brevity, we refer the reader to
Göös and Pitassi [14] for the definition of encoding of F · VERn as a CNF formula, and recall
that if F is a CNF with m clauses and width w, then F ◦ VERn contains at most m · 24w



                                                                                                                 ITCS 2018
10:16   Stabbing Planes


        clauses. The width of every clause in the Tseitin formulas are bounded by maximal degree d
        in the underlying graph. Using this fact, we are able to obtain near-optimal lower bounds
        on the rank of SP refutations by combining Theorem 20 with Lemma 18 as in the proof of
        Theorem 19. This lower bound should be contrasted with the logarithmic-rank SP upper
        bound on Tseitin from Theorem 6.

        I Theorem 21. There a constant-degree graph G on n vertices such that if ` is any {0, 1}
        vertex labelling with odd total weight, the CNF formula Tseitin(G, `)◦VERn , on O(n) variables
        and clauses, requires SP refutations of rank Ω(n/ log2 n).

        5.3    SP Refutations Cannot Be Balanced
        Optimistically, one could hope that the length and rank of SP refutations may be closely
        related and therefore that we could leverage these rank bounds to obtain lower bounds on
        the length of SP refutations. We answer this question negatively, showing that there exists a
        contradictory CNF which admits short refutations, but for which these refutations must be
        almost maximally deep. That is, we show that SP refutations cannot be balanced; an SP
        refutation of length S does not imply one of rank O(log S). This shows that in SP the rank
        of refutations is a distinct complexity measure from the length.
            In order to obtain time-space tradeoffs, de Rezende et al. [11] proved Resolution upper
        bounds on the lifted pebbling contradictions. Combining this upper bound (which can be
        simulated efficiently in SP) with the lower bound from Theorem 19 exhibits a formula that
        requires small size, but near-maximal rank to refute in SP.

        I Theorem 22. SP refutations cannot be balanced.

        Proof. Suppose that a SP refutation of length S implied the existence of a SP refutation
        of the same formula of rank O(log S). Let G be the graph from Theorem 19 on n vertices,
        and let PebG be the pebbling contradictions defined on this graph. It follows immediately
        from Lemmas 7.2 and 7.3 from de Rezende et al. [11] that for any graph of indegree 2 on
        n vertices, that there is a Resolution refutation of PebG ◦ INDn` of length O(n`3 ). Since SP
        can p-simulate Resolution, this implies a poly(n) upper bound on the same formula in SP.
        Under the assumption that SP refutation can be balanced, this would imply a SP refutation
        of depth O(log n) of PebG ◦ INDn` , contradicting the lower bound from Corollary 19.        J

            Although it is a well-known fact that tree-like Cutting Planes refutations cannot be
        balanced, Impagliazzo et al. [20] show that the randomized communication protocols for
        the search problem obtained from CP refutations can be balanced. Using this fact, they
        show that a length S tree-like Cutting Planes proof implies a depth O(log S) protocol for the
        search problem. This implies that communication cost lower bounds for the search problem
        imply length lower bounds for tree-like Cutting Planes refutations.
            Optimistically one could hope that a similar approach could be applied to SP refutations.
        This is reinforced by the fact that the real communication protocols for the search problem
        obtained from SP refutations (Lemma 17) maintains the same topology as the refutation.
        That is, the cost and size of the resulting protocol are approximately equal to the rank and
        length of the proof (unfortunately, this is not the case for the randomized protocols obtained
        from SP refutations). Therefore, one might hope that even though SP cannot be balanced,
        the corresponding real communication protocols for the search problem can be balanced.
        Thus, lower bounds on the rank of real-communication protocols for the search problem
        would imply lower bounds on the size of SP proofs.
P. Beame et al.                                                                                               10:17


I Corollary 23. Any SP refutation of length S and rank r of an unsatisfiable formula F
implies a real communication protocol of size O(S · n) and cost O(r + log n) for SearchX,Y (F).
   This follows from observing that the protocol obtained in Lemma 17 also preserves the
topology (and therefore both the rank and the length) of the refutation.

5.4      Real Communication Protocols Cannot Be Balanced
Analogous to Theorem 22 (SP proofs cannot be balanced) in this section we will show that
real communication protocols cannot be balanced. This should be contrasted with other
standard models of communication such as randomized and deterministic, which can be
balanced. In particular, we exhibit a function which has a real communication protocol of
small size, but for which every real protocol must have high cost. Towards this end, we prove
lower bounds on the real communication complexity of the famous NPcc -complete problem
set disjointness function1
    The set disjointness function DISJn defined as follows: each player is given an n-bit
string, interpreted as indicator vectors for an underlying set of n elements, and they are
asked to determine whether their sets are disjoint. That is, the players aim to solve the
                           W
function DISJn (x, y) = i∈[n] (xi ∧ yi ). To our knowledge, the only known technique for
obtaining lower bounds on the real communication of any problem are via lifting theorems,
reducing the task of proving lower bounds on lifted functions to the decision tree complexity
of the un-lifted function. Although DISJn can be seen as a lifted function (the ORn function
lifted by the two-bit AND gadget), these real communication lifting theorems work only
for super-constant sized gadgets, and therefore cannot be applied directly to DISJn . We
circumvent this difficulty by exploiting the fact that DISJn is NPcc -complete. To do so, we
find a lifted function in NPcc to which our simulation theorems can be applied. Consider the
n-bit ORn function composed with the index gadget, OR ◦ INDn` , for some ` defined later.
I Lemma 24. ORn ◦ INDn` ∈ NPcc , for any ` ≤ 2polylog(n) .
Proof. First, observe that the index gadget IND` (xi , yi ), for a single bit i of the input to the
ORn function, can be computed by a brute force protocol in log ` bits of communication.
Alice simply sends to Bob the log ` bits of her input xi = xi,1 , . . . , xi,log ` . Bob is then able
to evaluate IND` (xi , yi ).
    Now, consider the following NPcc protocol for ORn ◦ INDn` : Alice and Bob are given
as a proof, a log n-bit string indicating the index i ∈ [n] of the ORn function where
IND` (xi , yi ) = 1. They then perform the brute force protocol to evaluate IND` (xi , yi ) and
verify that the outcome is indeed 1. In total, this requires log ` + log n + 1 = polylog(n) bits
of NPcc -communication.                                                                            J

   To obtain lower bounds on ORn ◦ INDn` , we appeal to the real communication simulation
theorem (Theorem 18), reducing communication lower bounds for ORn ◦ INDn` on the lifted
problem to the well-known linear decision tree lower bounds on the ORn function.
I Lemma 25. Let ` = n4 . The cost of any real communication protocol computing ORn ◦INDn`
is Ω(n log `).
Proof. Combining the Ω(n) lower bound on the decision tree complexity of computing the
ORn function with the simulation theorem of de Rezende et al. [11] proves the result. J

1
    Recall that the NPcc communication complexity of a function f is the minimum size of any monochromatic
    rectangle cover of the communication matrix of f .




                                                                                                             ITCS 2018
10:18   Stabbing Planes


        I Theorem 26. The cost of any real communication protocol for DISJn is Ω((n log n)1/5 ).

        Proof. Let ` = n4 . Consider the following reduction from OR ◦ INDn` to an instance of set
        disjointness. By Lemma 24, the NPcc -complexity of ORn ◦ INDn` is log ` + log n + 1. That
        is, there exists a cover of the 1s of the communication matrix of ORn ◦ INDn` with at most
        2n` rectangles. Enumerating the 1-rectangles gives us an instance of set disjointness: on
        input (x, y) to ORn ◦ INDn` , Alice constructs the 2n`-bit string which is the indicator vector
        Ix (x) of the set of 1 rectangles which x belongs to, similarly Bob constructs Iy (y) the same
        for y. Thus ORn ◦ INDn` (x, y) = 1 iff DISJ2n` (Ix (x), Iy (y)) = 1. Combining this with the
        lower bound from Lemma 25 gives a lower bound of Ω((n log `)1/5 ) on the cost of any real
        communication protocol computing DISJn .                                                     J

        I Corollary 27. Real communication protocols cannot be balanced.

        Proof. Observe that DISJn = ∨ni=1 (xi ∧ yi ) can be computed in a 2n + 1-node protocol by
        Alice and Bob comparing xi and 2 − yi for i = 1, . . . , n. Suppose by contradiction that one
        could balance real communication protocols. The size 2n + 1 protocol would therefore imply
        a cost log(2n + 1) real protocol for DISJn , contradicting the lower bound from Theorem
        26.                                                                                        J

         6     Conclusions
        This paper introduces and develops the Stabbing Planes proof system as a natural extension
        of DPLL and pseudoBoolean solvers to handle a more expressive set of queries. Although it
        is equivalent to a tree-like version of a system already in the literature, this new perspective
        turns out to be quite useful for proving upper bounds. This paper is only a preliminary
        exploration of the SP proof system and leaves open many interesting problems from both a
        theoretical as well as a practical perspective.
            As mentioned in the preliminaries, we do not have an analog to Cook et al. [8] for Stabbing
        Planes and so it is unknown whether for SP refutations, the length and size (number of bits)
        can be treated as the same measure. That is, is it possible to prove that any SP refutation
        of length l can be simulated by an SP planes refutation of size poly(l, n)?
            We have shown that that CP refutations of small rank can be simulated by SP refutation
        of small rank, and that CP refutations of small size can also be simulated by SP refutations
        of small size. Can we simulate both rank and size efficiently? That is, can any CP refutation
        of rank r and size s be simulated by a SP refutation of rank poly(r) and size poly(s)?
            Is it possible to prove superpolynomial lower bounds for SP? Krajíc̆ek [23] gave exponential
        lower bounds on the length of R(CP) refutations when both the width of the clauses, and
        the size of the coeficients appearing in the inequalities are sufficiently bounded. This was
        later improved by Kojevnikov [22] to remove the restriction on the size of the coefficients
        for tree-like R(CP). In particular, to obtain any lower bound at all, the width of the clauses
        appearing in the R(CP) refutations must be bounded by o(n/ log n). From Theorem 9, a size
        S and rank D SP refutation implies an R(CP) proof of size O(S) and width O(D). Therefore,
        this result is also a size lower bound for bounded-depth SP. Unfortunately, it appears that
        these techniques are fundamentally limited to be applicable only to SP refutations with low
        depth, and so new techniques seem needed to overcome this barrier.
            As mentioned in the introduction, we feel that SP has potential, in combination with state-
        of-the-art algorithms for SAT and ILP, for improved performance on some hard instances,
        and problems such as maxSAT and counting satisfying assignments. The upper bound on the
        Tseitin example illustrates the kind of reasoning that SP is capable of: arbitrarily splitting the
P. Beame et al.                                                                                   10:19


solution space into sub-problems based on some measure of progress. It would be interesting
to build a SP-based solver, or to add SP-like branching to a solver such as CPLEX.
    It has been a long-standing conjecture that CP does not have short refutations of the
Tseitin formulas, as CP is unable to count mod2. On the other hand, Theorem 17 gives a
quasi-polynomial upper bound on the Tseitin formulas in SP. Therefore, a natural approach
to separating SP and CP is through proving CP lower bounds for Tseitin formulas.


     References
 1   Paul Beame, Noah Fleming, Russell Impagliazzo, Antonina Kolokolova, Denis Pankratov,
     Toniann Pitassi, and Robert Robere. Stabbing planes. CoRR, abs/1710.03219, 2017. arXiv:
     1710.03219.
 2   Paul Beame, Trinh Huynh, and Toniann Pitassi. Hardness amplification in proof complexity.
     In STOC’10, pages 87–96, 2010.
 3   Eli Ben-Sasson, Russell Impagliazzo, and Avi Wigderson. Near optimal separation of tree-
     like and general resolution. Combinatorica, 24(4):585–603, 2004.
 4   Eli Ben-Sasson and Avi Wigderson. Short proofs are narrow - resolution made simple. J.
     ACM, 48(2):149–169, 2001.
 5   Daniel Le Berre. Handling Pseudo-Boolean constraints in a CDCL solver: a practical
     survey. In Dagstuhl Seminar 15171: Theory and Practice of SAT Solving, April 2015.
 6   Maria Luisa Bonet, Juan Luis Esteban, Nicola Galesi, and Jan Johannsen. On the relative
     complexity of resolution refinements and cutting planes proof systems. SIAM J. Comput.,
     30(5):1462–1484, 2000.
 7   Joshua Buresh-Oppenheim, Nicola Galesi, Shlomo Hoory, Avner Magen, and Toniann
     Pitassi. Rank bounds and integrality gaps for cutting planes procedures. Theory of Com-
     puting, 2(4):65–90, 2006.
 8   William Cook, Collette Coullard, and György Turán. On the complexity of cutting-plane
     proofs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 18(1):25–38, 1987.
 9   Martin Davis, George Logemann, and Donald Loveland. A machine program for theorem-
     proving. Commun. ACM, 5(7):394–397, jul 1962.
10   Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. A computing procedure for quantification theory. J.
     ACM, 7(3):201–215, 1960.
11   Susanna F. de Rezende, Jakob Nordstrom, and Marc Vinyals. How limited interaction
     hinders real communication (and what it means for proof and circuit complexity). In
     FOCS’16, pages 295–304, 2016.
12   Yuval Filmus, Pavel Hrubes, and Massimo Lauria. Semantic versus syntactic cutting planes.
     In STACS’16, pages 35:1–35:13, 2016.
13   Noah Fleming, Denis Pankratov, Toniann Pitassi, and Robert Robere. Random cnfs are
     hard for cutting planes. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC),
     24:45, 2017.
14   Mika Göös and Toniann Pitassi. Communication lower bounds via critical block sensitivity.
     In STOC’14, pages 847–856, 2014.
15   Mika Göös, Toniann Pitassi, and Thomas Watson. Deterministic communication vs. parti-
     tion number. In FOCS’15, pages 1077–1088, 2015.
16   Pavel Hrubes and Pavel Pudlák. A note on monotone real circuits. Electronic Colloquium
     on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 24:48, 2017.
17   Pavel Hrubeš and Pavel Pudlák. Random formulas, monotone circuits, and interpolation.
     Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 24:42, 2017.




                                                                                                 ITCS 2018
10:20   Stabbing Planes


        18   Trinh Huynh and Jakob Nordstrom. On the virtue of succinct proofs: Amplifying commu-
             nication complexity hardness to time-space trade-offs in proof complexity. In STOC ’12,
             pages 233–248, 2012.
        19   IBM ILOG.        The CPLEX optimizer.         URL: https://www-01.ibm.com/software/
             commerce/optimization/cplex-optimizer/.
        20   Russell Impagliazzo, Toniann Pitassi, and Alasdair Urquhart. Upper and lower bounds for
             tree-like cutting planes proofs. In LICS ’94, pages 220–228, 1994.
        21   Stasys Jukna. Boolean function complexity : advances and frontiers. Algorithms and
             combinatorics. Springer, 2012.
        22   Arist Kojevnikov. Improved lower bounds for tree-like resolution over linear inequalities.
             In SAT’07, pages 70–79, 2007.
        23   Jan Krajícek. Discretely Ordered Modules as a First-Order Extension of the Cutting Planes
             Proof System. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 63(4):1582–1596, 1998.
        24   Jan Krajícek. Interpolation by a Game. Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 44:450–458, 1998.
        25   Saburo Muroga. Threshold logic and its applications. Wiley-Interscience, 1972.
        26   Noam Nisan. The communication complexity of threshold gates. In In Proceedings of
             “Combinatorics, Paul Erdos is Eighty, pages 301–315, 1994.
        27   Pavel Pudlák. Lower bounds for resolution and cutting plane proofs and monotone compu-
             tations. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 62(3):981–998, 1997.
        28   Ran Raz and Pierre McKenzie. Separation of the monotone NC hierarchy. Combinatorica,
             19(3):403–435, 1999.
        29   Olivier Roussel and Vasco M Manquinho. Pseudo-Boolean and Cardinality Constraints. In
             Handbook of satisfiability, pages 695–733. IOS Press, 2009.
        30   Günter M. Ziegler. Lectures on Polytopes. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
