Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and
Approximation
Igor Carboni Oliveira
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
igor.carboni.oliveira@cs.ox.ac.uk

Rahul Santhanam
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.
rahul.santhanam@cs.ox.ac.uk

       Abstract
We continue the study of pseudo-deterministic algorithms initiated by Gat and Goldwasser [7]. A
pseudo-deterministic algorithm is a probabilistic algorithm which produces a fixed output with
high probability. We explore pseudo-determinism in the settings of learning and approximation.
Our goal is to simulate known randomized algorithms in these settings by pseudo-deterministic
algorithms in a generic fashion – a goal we succinctly term pseudo-derandomization.
Learning. In the setting of learning with membership queries, we first show that randomized
learning algorithms can be derandomized (resp. pseudo-derandomized) under the standard hard-
ness assumption that E (resp. BPE) requires large Boolean circuits. Thus, despite the fact that
learning is an algorithmic task that requires interaction with an oracle, standard hardness as-
sumptions suffice to (pseudo-)derandomize it. We also unconditionally pseudo-derandomize any
quasi-polynomial time learning algorithm for polynomial size circuits on infinitely many input
lengths in sub-exponential time.
    Next, we establish a generic connection between learning and derandomization in the reverse
direction, by showing that deterministic (resp. pseudo-deterministic) learning algorithms for a
concept class C imply hitting sets against C that are computable deterministically (resp. pseudo-
deterministically). In particular, this suggests a new approach to constructing hitting set gener-
ators against AC 0 [p] circuits by giving a deterministic learning algorithm for AC 0 [p].
Approximation. Turning to approximation, we unconditionally pseudo-derandomize any poly-
time randomized approximation scheme for integer-valued functions infinitely often in subexpo-
nential time over any samplable distribution on inputs. As a corollary, we get that the (0, 1)-
Permanent has a fully pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme running in sub-exponential
time infinitely often over any samplable distribution on inputs.
   Finally, we investigate the notion of approximate canonization of Boolean circuits. We
use a connection between pseudodeterministic learning and approximate canonization to show
that if BPE does not have sub-exponential size circuits infinitely often, then there is a pseudo-
deterministic approximate canonizer for AC 0 [p] computable in quasi-polynomial time.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Pseudorandomness and derandom-
ization

Keywords and phrases derandomization, learning, approximation, boolean circuits

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.APPROX-RANDOM.2018.55

Related Version A full version of the paper is available at https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/
report/2018/122/.

Funding This work was supported by the European Research Council under the European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC Grant No. 615075.

Acknowledgements We thank Chris Brzuska for bringing [3] to our attention, Roei Tell for
helpful discussions, and the reviewers for comments that improved the presentation.
            © Igor Carboni Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques
(APPROX/RANDOM 2018).
Editors: Eric Blais, Klaus Jansen, José D. P. Rolim, and David Steurer; Article No. 55; pp. 55:1–55:19
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
55:2   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


        1     Introduction

       1.1    Context and Motivation
       Randomness is a powerful algorithmic resource, used widely in tasks such as cryptography,
       distributed computing, learning, sampling and approximation. Although it often makes
       algorithmic tasks more efficient, randomness comes with issues. It introduces uncertainty –
       running a randomized algorithm multiple times, we cannot always expect to get the same
       answer. Moreover, randomized algorithms assume access to a source of independent and
       unbiased random bits, and this assumption is not always justified in the physical world.
            Ideally, we would like to perform any efficient randomized task almost as efficiently
       without using randomness at all, or while using as little randomness as possible. This is the
       goal of derandomization, which has been widely studied in complexity theory. While generic
       derandomization is possible in many settings under widely believed circuit lower bound
       hypotheses, it also implies circuit lower bounds that are believed to be hard to establish
       (cf. [17, 21, 37]). Thus, while many specific randomized tasks can be derandomized, provable
       generic derandomization seems out of reach with our current state of knowledge.
            A few years ago, Gat and Goldwasser [7] introduced the notion of pseudo-deterministic
       algorithms, motivated by applications in cryptography and distributed computing. A pseudo-
       deterministic algorithm is one that, on a given input, produces a fixed output with very high
       probability. Thus, a pseudo-deterministic algorithm is one that looks deterministic to an
       outside observer who is computationally bounded – even if such an observer were to run the
       algorithm multiple times, she is likely to always get the same answer.
            Pseudo-deterministic algorithms have a very desirable feature possessed by deterministic
       algorithms, viz. little to no uncertainty in the output. Thus it is of interest to convert
       randomized algorithms to equivalent pseudo-deterministic ones – we term such a conversion
       “pseudo-derandomization”.
            There are several interesting examples of pseudo-derandomization known, including
       finding primitive roots [13] and quadratic non-residues (cf. [7]) in prime fields, finding
       variable settings for polynomial identity testing [7], and finding perfect matchings in bipartite
       graphs in parallel [9]. These pseudo-derandomization results exploit specific properties of the
       known randomized algorithms for these problems. The authors introduced a generic pseudo-
       derandomization approach for search problems in [29], and used it to give a sub-exponential
       pseudo-deterministic construction of primes infinitely often. This generic approach has been
       explored further by [16] and [10].
            One limitation of the generic approach of [29] is that it seems to work only for search
       problems whose underlying relation is decidable in P or in BPP. In particular, the approach
       requires the ability to test in P or in BPP whether a given sequence of random choices
       made by a randomized algorithm is “good” or not. There are several important settings of
       randomized tasks where such a test is not available. We consider two such settings in this
       paper: learning and approximation.


       1.2    Pseudoderandomization and learning
       Our learning model is that of learning with membership queries, where the accuracy of
       the output hypothesis is measured with respect to the uniform distribution. A pseudo-
       deterministic learning algorithm in this model is a randomized algorithm that, when given
       access to a predetermined oracle, makes a fixed set of queries and outputs a fixed output
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                                  55:3


hypothesis with high probability.1 (The pseudo-deterministic learning model is formalized in
the natural way in Section A.2.)
    This setting falls outside the “search problem” paradigm for a couple of different reasons:
first, the algorithmic task is not self-contained but requires interaction with an oracle, and
second, the test of whether an output hypothesis is good is not precise but approximate, and
again requires interaction with the oracle.2
    Pseudo-determinism is naturally a desirable property for learning algorithms. Indeed,
consider a setting where Alice and Bob run the same learning program independently on the
same data but wish to co-ordinate their predictions. Pseudo-determinism of the learning
algorithm enables them to co-ordinate their predictions perfectly with high probability. In an
alternative scenario, suppose Alice runs the learning algorithm to generate a hypothesis, and
the hypothesis gets corrupted. Alice can recover the original hypothesis with high probability
just by running the learning algorithm again.
    The main question we ask is: can learning algorithms be derandomized or at least
pseudo-derandomized in a generic fashion? Our first result is the observation that standard
pseudo-random generators suffice to derandomize learning. This is somewhat surprising
because standard pseudo-random generators are designed for self-contained algorithmic tasks,
while learning requires interaction with an unknown oracle.
    Recall that we consider randomized algorithms that learn under the uniform distribution
and have membership-query access to the unknown function.

I Theorem 1 (Conditional derandomization and pseudo-derandomization of learning).
Let C ⊆ P/poly be an arbitrary circuit class, and suppose C(s(n)) can be learned to any
constant accuracy by a randomized algorithm running in time t(n) ≥ n.
   If E = DTIME[2O(n) ] requires circuits of size 2Ω(n) on all large input lengths, then there
   exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that C can be deterministically learned to any constant
   accuracy in time at most O(t(n)c ).
   If BPE = BPTIME[2O(n) ] requires circuits of size 2Ω(n) on all large input lengths, then
   there exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that C(s) can be pseudo-deterministically learned to
   any constant accuracy in time at most O(t(n)c ).

    The proof of conditional derandomization in Theorem 1 works as follows. Under the
assumption that E requires exponential-size Boolean circuits almost everywhere, it is a
standard consequence from [26, 18, 34] that there is a pseudo-random generator G computable
in time poly(t(n)) with seed length O(log(t(n)) secure against circuits of size t(n)3 . We
simulate the randomized learning algorithm using each output of the generator G as random
sequence in turn to obtain hypothesis circuits D1 . . . Dpoly(t(n)) , and then output the majority
of these circuits as our hypothesis. To argue that this works, we show that if the simulation
fails to output a correct hypothesis, there is a distinguisher for the PRG G, contrary to our
assumption. The key idea is that a distinguisher can be constructed in t(n)3 size by replacing
the oracle in the simulation of the learning algorithm by a circuit from the class C for which
the simulation fails. The proof of conditional pseudo-derandomization works similarly, but
we need to use an additional idea from [29]. Details are in Section 2.3


1
  We stress that we allow adaptive learning algorithms, and that the “canonical” set of inputs queried by
  the learner can depend on the target function. We do not require the order of the queries to be fixed.
2
  Also observe that the usual way of testing a learning hypothesis by drawing a set of random examples
  is not pseudo-deterministic.
3
  For simplicity, we have restricted the statement of Theorem 1 to constant-accuracy learners. As explained
  in Section 2, from a randomized ε-accuracy learner one can get a deterministic O(ε)-accuracy learner
  by using sufficiently strong generators (see Lemma 6).



                                                                                                              APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:4   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


           We get some interesting corollaries from Theorem 1. Under standard hardness assumptions,
       both Jackson’s polynomial-time learning algorithm for DNFs with membership queries [19] and
       the recent algorithm of [4] for AC 0 [p] can be derandomized. Note that the randomized learner
       of [24] for AC 0 has already been derandomized unconditionally by Sitharam [32].4 Sitharam’s
       deterministic learner exploits specific properties of AC 0 circuits, while we are interested here
       in generic methods to derandomize and pseudo-derandomize learning algorithms.
           Theorem 1 is conditional, but it can be used to establish an unconditional result for
       pseudo-derandomizing learning. This is in contrast to generic derandomization, which can
       only be done conditionally given our current knowledge of circuit lower bounds.

       I Theorem 2 (Unconditional pseudo-derandomization of learning).
       If P/poly can be learned to any constant accuracy by a randomized algorithm running in
       quasi-polynomial time, then for each γ > 0, P/poly can be pseudo-deterministically learned
                                             γ
       to any constant accuracy in time O(2n ) for infinitely many input lengths n.

           The proof of Theorem 2 proceeds in two steps. In the first step, we use a result of [28] to
       get circuit lower bounds for BPE from a non-trivial randomized learning for P/poly. In the
       second step, we apply a variant of Theorem 1 to derive an infinitely-often subexponential-time
       pseudo-deterministic learner using the circuit lower bounds for BPE.
           The assumption in Theorem 2 is very strong; indeed, under standard cryptographic
       assumptions, P/poly does not have non-trivial learning algorithms. However, the proof
       technique of Theorem 2 works in the more general setting of self-learners, where a self-learner
       is a learning algorithm for a circuit class C that produces a hypothesis in C and moreover
       can itself be implemented in C. Theorem 2 is just the cleanest instantiation of this proof
       technique, since any learner for P/poly is automatically a self-learner. (Self-learning is a
       phenomenon that might be of independent interest, and we refer to Section 3 for further
       discussion of this concept.) The more general version of Theorem 2 presented in Section 3
       shows that the same result holds for any self-learnable class that contains T C 0 and is closed
       under composition. (For the interested reader, we mention that threshold gates are necessary
       to perform hardness amplification, a technical ingredient in our proof.)
           Theorem 1 applies pseudo-random generators to the setting of learning. Our next result
       goes in the opposite direction, showing that derandomizing or pseudo-derandomizing learning
       algorithms has interesting consequences in the theory of pseudo-randomness. We say that a
       circuit is γ-dense if it accepts at least a γ-fraction of strings in {0, 1}n .

       I Theorem 3 (Hitting sets from deterministic and pseudo-deterministic learning).
       Let C = {Cn } be an arbitrary circuit class, and assume that for every ε > 0, C-circuits of
       size s(n) can be deterministically learned to accuracy ε in time T (n) ≥ n.
           Then, for every γ > 0, there exists a hitting set generator Gn : {0, 1}log T (n) → {0, 1}n
       computable in time O(T (n)) against the class of γ-dense circuits in Cn (s(n)). Similarly, if C
       is pseudodeterministically learnable, there exist pseudodeterministic hitting set generators
       against Cn (s(n)) with the same parameters.

           The proof of Theorem 3 is along the lines of the argument used to prove that a deterministic
       black-box PIT algorithm implies a hitting set. Suppose that there exists a deterministic
       learner. We run the deterministic learner with oracle the identically zero function, and output
       the set of queries it makes as our candidate hitting set. If the set of queries is not a hitting


       4
           See also [33] for related results in the context of learnability using a linear combination of parity
           functions.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                         55:5


set, then there must be a somewhat dense function f computable in C for which all the
queries answer 0, just as they do for the identically zero function. But by the correctness of
the learning algorithm, this would mean that f can be well-approximated by the identically
zero function, which contradicts the assumption that it is somewhat dense. The consequence
for pseudo-deterministic learners is shown by appropriately adapting this argument.
    An interesting application of Theorem 3 is to the question of whether small hitting sets
exist for AC 0 [p] circuits. Despite much effort, no hitting sets even of sub-exponential size
are known for such circuits (we refer to [5] for related results and discussion). Theorem
3 suggests an approach to this question via learning. Carmosino et al. [4] recently gave a
quasi-polynomial time randomized learning algorithm for AC 0 [p] – if this algorithm could
be made deterministic, we would immediately get quasi-polynomial size hitting sets for
AC 0 [p] in quasi-polynomial time! In particular, that would imply that randomized poly-size
AC 0 [p] circuits with one-sided error can be simulated by deterministic quasi-poly size circuits.
Even a pseudo-derandomization of the [4] algorithm would be interesting, as this would give
somewhat efficient pseudo-deterministic hitting sets against AC 0 [p], which is also unknown.
    Theorem 3 also has consequences for non-uniform circuit lower bounds that can be derived
from learning algorithms. It is known that non-trivial learning algorithms (i.e., those running
in time 2n /nω(1) ) for a circuit class C yield lower bounds against C (cf. [23, 28, 6, 15, 36]).
However, different algorithms provide different types of lower bounds. For a deterministic
learner, one obtains a function in E that is hard almost everywhere [23], while for randomized
learners, the hard function lives in BPE and is only hard infinitely often [28]. Interestingly, it
is possible to use Theorem 3 to get something stronger from non-trivial pseudo-deterministic
(randomized) learning algorithms: they can be used to define a function in BPE that is hard
almost-everywhere for C.

1.3    Pseudoderandomization and approximation
We next turn our attention to a different setting, the setting of approximation. We are
interested in integer-valued functions, i.e., functions from strings to non-negative integers,
that have efficient randomized approximation schemes. The question is whether the existence
of a good randomized approximation scheme generically implies the existence of a somewhat
efficient pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme. (Pseudo-deterministic approximation
schemes are formalized in the natural way in Section A.3.)
    Note that this setting too does not conform to the “search problem” paradigm. Given a
value w, it might be hard to test if the value is close to the correct value, since the correct
value might be very hard to compute. Indeed, in our results, we make no assumptions about
the complexity of exact computation of the integer-valued function.
    Our main result here is a generic pseudo-derandomization of randomized approximation
schemes; however, this pseudo-derandomization is only guaranteed to work on infinitely many
input lengths with high probability over any poly-time samplable distribution of inputs.

I Theorem 4 (Unconditional pseudo-derandomization of approximation). Let f : {0, 1}∗ → N
be any function with a polynomial-time randomized approximation scheme. Then for each
polynomial-time samplable sequence D of distributions and for each constant δ > 0, f has a
pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme for infinitely many n over D running in time
     δ
O(2n ).

    The main idea in the proof of Theorem 4 is to exploit the uniform hardness-randomness
tradeoffs used in the generic pseudo-derandomization results of [29], but adapted to this new
setting. The crucial point is: how do we test efficiently that a value w is a good approximation



                                                                                                     APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:6   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


       to the correct value? We test this simply by running the randomized approximation scheme
       to produce a value w0 and checking if w is close to w0 . This is not a deterministic polynomial-
       time test or indeed a bounded-error probabilistic polynomial-time test; however, we can show
       that it is good enough for our purposes.
           As a corollary of this result and [20], we get unconditionally that the (0, 1)-Permanent has
       a pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme running in sub-exponential time on infinitely
       many input lengths over any poly-time samplable distribution on inputs.
           Finally, we consider a notion of approximate canonization of circuits. Canonization is a
       natural notion for an equivalence relation, where for each element of the set we compute a
       representative member of its equivalence class. Needless to say, canonization and canonical
       forms are fundamental notions with a variety of applications both in mathematics and
       computer science. We are interested in the natural equivalence relation between circuits: two
       circuits are equivalent if they compute the same function.
           It is not hard to prove that efficient canonization is impossible for even weak circuit
       classes such as DNFs, under standard complexity assumptions. Therefore we relax the notion
       of canonization. We still require the output of the canonizer to be the same for any two
       equivalent circuits, but this output need not be a circuit equivalent to the original circuit,
       instead it is allowed to be close to the original circuit over the uniform distribution on
       inputs.5
           Inspired by an observation in [1], we show that efficient deterministic (resp. pseudo-
       deterministic) learning implies efficient deterministic (resp. pseudo-deterministic) approximate
       canonization. (We refer to Section A.3 for a precise definition of approximate canonization.)
       Using Theorem 1 and the learning algorithm in [4], we get quasi-polynomial time pseudo-
       deterministic approximate canonization for AC 0 [p] circuits under a standard circuit lower
       bound assumption for BPE.

       I Theorem 5 (Approximate canonization for AC 0 [p], Informal).
                                                                      Ω(1)
       Let p ≥ 2 be a fixed prime. If BPE requires circuits of size 2n almost everywhere, then
       AC 0 [p] circuits can be approximately canonized in pseudo-deterministic quasi-polynomial
       time.

           We leave as an open problem obtaining an unconditional version of this theorem. An-
       other interesting research direction is the investigation of connections between approximate
       canonization and other meta-computational problems. In this sense, we mention that [3]
       provides evidence that expressive circuit classes do not admit approximate canonization. (In
       fact, even more relaxed notions of approximate canonization are conditionally ruled out by
       the results from [3], and we refer to their work for further details.)


       1.4      Organization
       We formally define our models and state some auxiliary results and definitions in Appendix A.
       Due to page constraints, the remaining of the paper discusses pseudo-deterministic learning
       only. Section 2 contains the proof of Theorem 1 and related results. A more general form
       of Theorem 2 is established in Section 3. For the proof of the other results and additional
       discussion, we refer to the full version of our paper.


       5
           A form of approximate obfuscation is also investigated in [1], but their definition requires a much
           stronger correctness guarantee.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                       55:7


Algorithm A
Input: 1n and oracle access to an unknown function f ∈ Cd (s(n)).
                                   def
1. Computes a multi-set Sm = {Gm (a) | a ∈ {0, 1}`(m) } of m-bit strings (with multiplicities),
   where Gm is the pseudorandom generator with parameters as in the statement of the
   lemma.
2. For each w ∈ Sm , simulates Dn with oracle access to f and with its random input set to
              def
   w. Let hw = Dnf (w) be the hypothesis output by the learning circuit under f and w.
3. Outputs the description of a circuit C ef that on an input x ∈ {0, 1}n computes the
   majority function over the multi-set {hw (x) | w ∈ Sm }.



    2      Pseudo-derandomization for randomized learning algorithms
In this section we consider the derandomization and pseudoderandomization of learning
algorithms via pseudorandom generators and pseudodeterministic pseudorandom generators,
respectively. For simplicity, we will mostly focus on self-learnable circuit classes, but our
results can be extended to more general settings, as explained later in this section.

2.1        Derandomizing from a pseudorandom generator
We start with a technical lemma showing that standard pseudorandom generators can be
used to derandomize learning algorithms.
I Lemma 6 (PRG-based derandomization of learning algorithms). Let C be a circuit class
closed under composition. Let s, s0 : N → N be functions, where s0 (n) ≥ n. Further, let
ε, δ > 0 be real-valued parameters satisfying δ ≤ ε ≤ 1/100 and possibly depending on n.
Finally, assume that for each n ≥ 1 the depth-d class Cd (s(n)) can be (ε, δ)-learned by a
(randomized) oracle Cd0 (s0 (n))-circuit.
    There are constants e = O(d · d0 ) and k ≥ 1 for which the following holds. If there is
a family of quick pseudorandom generators Gm : {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m that ε-fool depth-e
size-m C-circuits, for

        m = O(s(n) · s0 (n) + s0 (n)k ),

then Cd (s(n)) can be deterministically learned to accuracy ε0 = 8ε in time at most 2O(`(m)) ·
poly(s0 (n)).6
Proof. Let {Dn }n≥1 be the corresponding (uniform) sequence of learning circuits with fixed
parameters ε and δ. We claim that the deterministic algorithm A learns every function
f ∈ Cd (s(n)) to accuracy ε0 in time at most 2O(`(m)) · poly(s0 (n)).

    Clearly, under our assumptions A is a deterministic algorithm that runs in time at most
2O(`(m)) · poly(s0 (n)). Suppose now that A fails to learn some function f ? ∈ Cd [s(n)]. In
other words, the corresponding output hypothesis C   ef ? is not ε0 -close to f ? . We use this
information to construct a randomized C-circuit B of size at most m and depth at most e
that distinguishes the output of Gm from random with advantage at least ε. We then fix the
randomness of B using a standard argument in order to obtain a deterministic distinguisher.
This contradicts the pseudorandomness of Gm , completing the proof of the lemma.


6
    For unbounded-depth classes, the circuit depth parameters can be omitted from the statement.




                                                                                                   APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:8   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


       Algorithm B
       Input: z ∈ {0, 1}m and r ∈ {0, 1}n .
       1. Let Cf ? be a Cd (s(n))-circuit that computes f ? . B uses a prefix of z as the randomness
                                                             ?
          of Dn , and simulates the oracle computation Dnf (z) with Cf ? replacing its oracle gates.
       2. Suppose hz is the output hypothesis. B outputs 1 if and only if hz (r) = Cf ? (r).



            In the description of B presented next, z is a candidate string (either produced from the
       generator, or uniformly random), and r is a fixed string sampled according to r ∼ Un , a
       random variable representing the randomness of the distinguisher.
            Since Cf ? has depth ≤ d and size ≤ s(n), and Dn is an oracle circuit of depth ≤ d0 and
       size ≤ s0 (n), Step 1 can be implemented by a C-circuit of depth at most d · d0 and of size
       at most s(n) · s0 (n). By definition, the output hypothesis of Dn is restricted to circuits in
       Cd0 (s0 (n)), and hz is an effective description of a C-circuit. Consequently, the evaluation
       hz (r) in Step 2 can be computed by a C-circuit of depth O(d0 ) and size poly(s0 (n)). It follows
       that Step 2 can be implemented by a C-circuit of depth no more than O(d0 + d) and of size
       no more than O(s(n) + poly(s0 (n))). Overall, we get that B is a (randomized) C-circuit of
       depth at most e and of size at most m, where these parameters are as in the statement of
       the lemma.
            We argue in what follows that

                 Pr       [B(x, r) = 1] −        Pr         [B(Gm (y), r) = 1] > ε.                  (1)
             x∼Um ,r∼Un                     y∼U`(m) ,r∼Un

                                                                                              def
       Observe that this implies in particular that for some fixed choice of r ∈ {0, 1}n , Br = B(·, r)
       is a deterministic C-circuit of no larger complexity that distinguishes Um and Gm (U`(m) )
       with advantage at least ε, which completes the proof.
            Consider the leftmost probability in Equation 1. Since Dn learns every f ∈ Cd (s(n)) to
       accuracy ε and with confidence parameter δ and Cf ? ≡ f ? , with probability at least 1 − δ
       over x, Step 2 of circuit B computes a hypothesis hx that is ε-close to f ? . For each fixed
       x ∈ {0, 1}m that produces an ε-close hx , in Step 2 circuit B accepts the input pair (x, r)
       with probability at least 1 − ε over the choice of r ∼ r. Consequently, using that δ ≤ ε, the
       leftmost probability in Equation 1 is at least (1 − δ)(1 − ε) ≥ 1 − 2ε.
            It remains to upper bound the rightmost probability. Because A fails to learn f ? to
       accuracy ε0 , there is a set T ⊆ {0, 1}n of measure at least ε0 such that on every x ∈ T ,
       Cef ? (x) 6= f ? (x). Consequently, for x ∈ T at least half of the values hw (x) generated in
       Step 3 of A’s description do not agree with f ? (x). It follows that over the choice of y and
       r, B(Gm (y), r) rejects with probability at least ε0 /2 = 4ε. Consequently, the rightmost
       probability ≤ 1 − 4ε.
            It follows from these estimates that the distinguishing probability in Equation 1 is strictly
       larger than ε, from which the result follows.                                                   J

           It is important in the preceding argument for the distribution employed in the derandom-
       ization to be pseudorandom against non-uniform C-circuits.7 First, this allows us to disregard
       the complexity of uniformly generating Dn in the proof that B is an appropriate distinguisher.
       Most importantly, we have no control over the “bad” function f ? where the derandomization


       7
           Distributions that are pseudorandom against uniform algorithms were crucially employed in the
           pseudodeterministic construction of primes from [29].
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                        55:9


might fail, and consequently Cf ? appears as a non-uniform advice in the proof of Lemma 6.
Finally, r is also fixed non-uniformly when derandomizing the distinguisher.

2.2         Pseudoderandomization of learning algorithms
Similarly to Lemma 6, we now show that self-learning classes admit pseudodeterministic
learners under the existence of suitable pseudodeterministic pseudorandom generators.
I Lemma 7 (Pseudoderandomization via pseudodeterministic PRGs). Let C be a circuit class
closed under composition. Let s, s0 : N → N be functions, where s0 (n) ≥ n. Further, let
ε, δ, µ > 0 be real-valued parameters satisfying δ ≤ ε ≤ 1/100 and possibly depending on n.
Finally, assume that for each n ≥ 1 the depth-d class Cd (s(n)) can be (ε, δ)-learned by a
(randomized) oracle Cd0 (s0 (n))-circuit.
     There are constants e = O(d · d0 ) and k ≥ 1 for which the following holds. If there is a
family of quick µ-pseudodeterministic pseudorandom generators Gm : {0, 1}t(m) ×{0, 1}`(m) →
{0, 1}m that ε-fool depth-e size-m C-circuits, for

   m = O(s(n) · s0 (n) + s0 (n)k ),

then Cd (s(n)) can be (8ε, µ, µ)-pseudodeterministically learned in randomized time at most
2O(`(m)) · poly(s0 (n)).
Proof. We proceed as in the proof of Lemma 6, except that the corresponding derandomized
algorithm A is replaced here by a pseudoderandomized algorithm A0 . This procedure uses its
random input y ∈ {0, 1}t(m) to define a candidate (deterministic) pseudorandom generator
      def
Gym = Gm (y, ·) : {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m . By assumption, it succeeds with probability at least
1 − µ, and whenever this happens, A0 outputs a hypothesis hy that is ε0 -close to f , the
unknown function, where ε0 = 8ε is as in Lemma 6. Consequently, A0 is a (ε0 , µ)-learner for
the class. Furthermore, with probability at least 1 − µ, A0 constructs the same pseudorandom
generator. Since the rest of its computation is deterministic, the corresponding learner will
make a fixed set Qf of queries, and generate a fixed output hypothesis hf . This shows
that A0 is µ-pseudodeterministic. As the running time of A and A0 are the same up to
low order terms, it follows that Cd (s(n)) can be (8ε, µ, µ)-pseudodeterministically learned in
randomized time at most 2O(`(m)) · poly(s0 (n)).                                             J

I Remark. As we alluded to before, Lemmas 6 and 7 hold in more generality provided
that we have sufficiently strong pseudorandom generators. In particular, it is sufficient
to have a generator that fools a circuit class closed under composition that is expressive
enough to simulate circuits in the concept class, the learning circuit, and its hypothesis class.
Consequently, existing learning algorithms can be derandomized under hardness assumptions.
I Theorem 8 (Conditional learning derandomization). Let C ⊆ P/poly be an arbitrary circuit
class, and suppose C(s(n)) can be learned to any constant accuracy by a randomized algorithm
running in time t(n) ≥ n. If E = DTIME[2O(n) ] requires circuits of size 2Ω(n) on all large
input lengths, then there exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that C(s) can be deterministically
learned to any constant accuracy in time at most O(t(n)c ).
Proof. Observe that a learning algorithm running in time t(n) can be implemented by oracle
circuits of size at most poly(t(n)). The result is then a direct consequence of Lemma 6 and
the hardness vs. randomness paradigm (Theorem 17).                                        J

  As a concrete example, Theorem 8 and Jackson’s polynomial time learning algorithm for
DNFs [19] immediately imply the following result.



                                                                                                    APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:10   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


        I Corollary 9. If E = DTIME[2O(n) ] requires circuits of size 2Ω(n) on all large input lengths,
        then polynomial size DNFs can be learned to constant accuracy in deterministic polynomial
        time.

            The same approach provides pseudoderandomization via Lemma 7 using that a hard
        truth-table can be pseudodeterministically constructed from a weaker lower bound assumption.

        I Theorem 10 (Conditional learning pseudoderandomization). Let C ⊆ P/poly be an arbitrary
        circuit class, and suppose C(s(n)) can be learned to any constant accuracy by a random-
        ized algorithm running in time t(n) ≥ n. If BPE = BPTIME[2n ] requires circuits of size
        2Ω(n) on all large input lengths, then there exists a constant c ≥ 1 such that C(s) can be
        pseudodeterministically learned to any constant accuracy in time at most O(t(n)c ).

        Proof. Note that, under this lower bound assumption, there exists a randomized algorithm
        that on input 1` , runs in time at most 2O(`) and outputs with high probability the description
        of a fixed function f` : {0, 1}` → {0, 1} that requires circuits of size 2Ω(`) . In other words,
        exponentially hard boolean functions can be pseudo-deterministically constructed in time
        polynomial in the size of their truth tables. The result now follows from the learning
        assumption, Theorem 17, and Lemma 7.                                                          J

           For instance, thanks to the quasi-polynomial time randomized learning algorithm for
        AC 0 [p] from [4], we get the following conditional result.

        I Corollary 11. If there is γ > 0 and a language in BPE = BPTIME[2n ] that requires circuits
                    γ
        of size ≥ 2n on all large input lengths, then AC 0 [p] circuits can be learned to any constant
        accuracy in pseudodeterministic quasi-polynomial time.

        Proof. Simply observe that this lower bound is enough to get quasi-polynomial time (pseudo-
        deterministic) derandomizations using the hardness versus randomness paradigm (Theorem
        17). The result follows as in the proof of Theorem 10 using the learning algorithm from [4]. J


         3     Pseudodeterministic learners from randomized learners

        Recall that AC 0 circuits can be deterministically learned in quasi-polynomial time [33], and
        that AC 0 [p] circuits are known to be learnable in randomized quasi-polynomial time [4].
        In this section, we prove a general result showing that, for strong enough self-learnable
        circuit classes, any randomized learner running in quasi-polynomial time admits a non-trivial
        pseudoderandomization.
            As opposed to the results discussed in Section 2, the next theorem is unconditional and
        does not assume the existence of pseudorandom generators. Theorem 2 is a particular case
        of this result.

        I Theorem 12 (Pseudodeterministic learners from randomized self-learners). Let C be a circuit
        class that contains T C 0 and is closed under compositions. Suppose that for every δ, ε > 0,
        C(poly) can be (ε, δ)-learned by (uniform) C-circuits of quasi-polynomial size. Then, for
        every γ > 0 and c ≥ 1, C(poly) can be µ-pseudodeterministically learned to accuracy ≤ n−c
                                                                               γ
        on infinitely many input lengths by an algorithm running in time O(2n ), where µ = 2−n .

        Proof. First, the assumption implies by a padding argument that for every ε > 0 and k ≥ 1,
        there exists k 0 ≥ 1 such that C(exp((log n)k )) can be learned to accuracy ε by a uniform
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      55:11


                     (k)                                            0
family D(k) = {Dn }n≥1 of C-circuits of size at most exp((log n)k ).8 We recall the following
result from [23], which for convenience we state here as follows.

I Lemma 13. There is a PSPACE-complete language L computable in linear space and a
constant b ≥ 1 such that the following holds. If C(s(n)) is learnable to error and accuracy
≤ n−b in time at most t(n) ≥ n, then either
  (i) L ∈
        / C(s(n)); or
 (ii) L ∈ BPTIME[poly(t(n))].

   By amplifying the success probability, we can assume that each family D(k) learns with
confidence parameter δ ≤ n−b , and by the result of [2], we can assume without loss of
generality that the accuracy parameter is also ≤ n−b . This implies via Lemma 13 that either
there exists no constant a ≥ 1 such that L ∈ C(exp((log n)a )), or for some a0 ≥ 1, we have
                          0
L ∈ BPTIME[exp((log n)a )]. In the former case, since L is computable in linear space, we get
that BPE * C[exp((log n)O(1) )]. On the other hand, in the latter scenario, as DSPACE[s0 (n)]
can diagonalize against circuits of size s0 (n)Ω(1) (cf. [28, Corollary 39]), this fact together
with a standard padding argument implies that BPE * C[exp((log n)O(1) )].
   Let f ∈ BPE be a function that cannot be computed by quasi-polynomial size circuits
from C on infinitely many input lengths. We claim that the following result holds.

I Lemma 14. Under our assumptions, there exists a function f 0 ∈ BPTIME[2O(n) ] such
that for every constant β ≥ 1, on infinitely many input lengths n, any C-circuit of size
≤ exp((log n)β ) can compute fn0 with advantage at most exp((log n)−β ).

    Indeed, since T C 0 ⊆ C, efficient worst-case to average-case reductions can be used to
amplify the hardness of f (cf. [11, 14, 8]). In a bit more detail, a reduction of this form is
well-known to hold for functions f ∈ E = DTIME[2O(n) ]. In order to amplify a function f in
BPE, it is enough to observe that the entire truth-table of f can be computed in randomized
time 2O(n) , except with negligible probability. Since the worst-case to average-case reduction
acts on truth-tables, it defines with high probability a fixed function f 0 obtained from f .
    Let f 0 = {fn0 }n≥1 be given by Lemma 14, and E be a randomized algorithm running
in time 2O(n) that prints the truth-table of fn0 with probability at least 1 − 2−n . We use
E together with the Nisan-Wigderson generator [26] to pseudodeterministically compute a
generator against C. (While their result is stated with respect to general boolean circuits, it
is well-known and easy to check that their construction works for any circuit class containing
T C 0 .)

I Theorem 15 (Corollary of Theorem 1 from [26]). Let m ≤ t(m) ≤ 2m , and suppose there is
h ∈ DTIME[2O(m) ] such that, on infinitely many input lengths, every C-circuit Dm of size
≤ t(m) satisfies Prx [Dm (x) 6= hm (x)] ≥ 1/m. Then there exists a constant λ > 0 and a
                                                     λ
quick pseudorandom generator G : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}t(m ) that t(mλ )-fools C(t(mλ ))-circuits
on infinitely many input lengths.

     Using Theorem 15, it is possible to prove the following result.

I Lemma 16. For every constants c ≥ 1, k ≥ 1, and γ > 0, there exists a function
G : {0, 1}∗ × {0, 1}`(n) → {0, 1}n that is a quick µ-pseudodeterministic generator that η-fools
C-circuits of size ≤ exp((log n)k ) on infinitely many input lengths, where µ = 2−n , η = n−c ,
and `(n) = nγ .


8
    See for instance the proof of Lemma 7 in [28].




                                                                                                   APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:12   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


           Lemma 16 is established by a standard application of the Nisan-Wigerson generator to
        the family f 0 , adapted to the pseudo-deterministic setting in the natural way.
           Finally, using that C is closed under composition, the existence of such generators
        immediately imply the statement of the theorem via an application of Lemma 7.        J

            Ideally, we would like to obtain a pseudodeterministic learner of comparable running time.
        However, this does not seem to be possible with these techniques. Consider for instance the
        more extreme case of designing a sub-exponential time pseudodeterministic learner from
        a sub-exponential time randomized learner. The main difficulty is that the lower bounds
        obtained from such a learner are not strong enough to derandomize an algorithm that runs
        in sub-exponential time.
            Our techniques also require a strong assumption on the circuit class, namely, that it is
        closed under composition and able to compute threshold functions. Since there is evidence
        that circuit classes containing T C 0 cannot be learned [25], it would be extremely interesting
        to obtain an analogue of Theorem 12 under weaker assumptions. In particular, one might be
        able to apply such a result to pseudoderandomize existing algorithms, such as [4].

        Two remarks on the self-learnability of weak classes. These results further motivate
        the study of self-learning circuit classes, a direction that some might find of independent
        philosophical interest. In other words,

        When is a circuit class C learnable by algorithms that are no more powerful than C-circuits?

        For very weak classes, this is probably impossible, given the very weak resources available
        to the learning algorithm, and the fact that a self-learner is in particular a proper learner.
        However, when C becomes stronger, as in the extreme case where C = P/poly, if learning
        algorithms exist then they are automatically proper learners.
            It is possible to show that MAJ ◦ AC 0 circuits are self-learnable by a uniform family of
        sub-exponential size circuits. This follows for instance from the results of [12], since the
        learning algorithm is based on the estimation of fourier coefficients of bounded size, and the
        corresponding parity computations can be simulated by randomized oracle AC 0 circuits that
        output a sub-exponential size hypothesis in MAJ ◦ AC 0 .9 Therefore, self-learnability is a
        phenomenon that is present even in constant-depth classes.
            On the other hand, we do not know if AC 0 is self-learnable by quasi-polynomial size AC 0
        circuits.10 A natural approach here is to try to implement the LMN algorithm [24] using AC 0
        circuits, perhaps by replacing a threshold gate for an approximate majority, which is known to
        be computable in this class (see e.g. [35]). However, as we briefly explain next, this and other
        similar approaches cannot work. A self-learning algorithm of quasi-polynomial complexity
        for the class AC 0 is required to output a hypothesis that is itself a quasi-polynomial size
        AC 0 circuit. However, the approach in [24] is also able to learn functions that cannot be
        approximated by such circuits. This is an immediate consequence of [31, Theorem 3] using the
        connection between the influence of a boolean function and fourier concentration (cf. [27]).


        9
           For the interested reader, we stress that during this implementation the empirical estimate of each
           fourier coefficient is not computed by the circuit, since AC 0 circuits cannot count. The bits obtained
           from products of the form χS (x) · f (x) are hard-coded directly into the final hypothesis, which can
           make use of a single threshold gate to compute the sign function.
        10
           Note that, if this were the case, our techniques from Section 2 would provide an alternative, conceptually
           simpler proof of a result of [32] showing that such circuits can be learned in deterministic quasi-polynomial
           time.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                     55:13


     References
 1   Boaz Barak, Oded Goldreich, Russell Impagliazzo, Steven Rudich, Amit Sahai, Salil P.
     Vadhan, and Ke Yang. On the (im)possibility of obfuscating programs. Journal of the
     ACM, 59(2):6:1–6:48, 2012.
 2   Dan Boneh and Richard J. Lipton. Amplification of weak learning under the uniform
     distribution. In Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 347–351,
     1993.
 3   Zvika Brakerski, Christina Brzuska, and Nils Fleischhacker. On statistically secure obfus-
     cation with approximate correctness. In International Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO),
     pages 551–578, 2016.
 4   Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova.
     Learning algorithms from natural proofs. In Conference on Computational Complexity
     (CCC), pages 10:1–10:24, 2016.
 5   Bill Fefferman, Ronen Shaltiel, Christopher Umans, and Emanuele Viola. On beating the
     hybrid argument. Theory of Computing, 9:809–843, 2013.
 6   Lance Fortnow and Adam R. Klivans. Efficient learning algorithms yield circuit lower
     bounds. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 75(1):27–36, 2009. doi:10.1016/j.
     jcss.2008.07.006.
 7   Eran Gat and Shafi Goldwasser. Probabilistic search algorithms with unique answers
     and their cryptographic applications. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity
     (ECCC), 18:136, 2011.
 8   Oded Goldreich, Noam Nisan, and Avi Wigderson. On Yao’s XOR lemma. In Stud-
     ies in Complexity and Cryptography, pages 273–301. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-642-22670-0\_23.
 9   Shafi Goldwasser and Ofer Grossman. Bipartite perfect matching in pseudo-deterministic
     NC. In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP),
     pages 87:1–87:13, 2017.
10   Shafi Goldwasser, Ofer Grossman, and Dhiraj Holden. Pseudo-deterministic proofs. Elec-
     tronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 24:105, 2017.
11   Shafi Goldwasser, Dan Gutfreund, Alexander Healy, Tali Kaufman, and Guy N. Rothblum.
     Verifying and decoding in constant depth. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
     pages 440–449, 2007.
12   Parikshit Gopalan and Rocco A. Servedio. Learning and lower bounds for AC0 with
     threshold gates. In International Workshop on Approximation, Randomization, and Com-
     binatorial Optimization (RANDOM-APPROX), pages 588–601, 2010.
13   Ofer Grossman. Finding primitive roots pseudo-deterministically. Electronic Colloquium
     on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 22:207, 2015.
14   Dan Gutfreund and Guy N. Rothblum. The complexity of local list decoding. In In-
     ternational Workshop on Approximation, Randomization and Combinatorial Optimization
     (RANDOM-APPROX), pages 455–468, 2008.
15   Ryan C. Harkins and John M. Hitchcock. Exact learning algorithms, betting games, and
     circuit lower bounds. Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 5(4):18:1–18:11, 2013.
     doi:10.1145/2539126.2539130.
16   Dhiraj Holden. A note on unconditional subexponential-time pseudo-deterministic al-
     gorithms for BPP search problems. arXiv, 2017. arXiv:1707.05808.
17   Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Avi Wigderson. In search of an easy wit-
     ness: exponential time vs. probabilistic polynomial time. Journal of Computer and System
     Sciences, 65(4):672–694, 2002. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(02)00024-7.




                                                                                                  APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:14   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


        18   Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: De-
             randomizing the XOR lemma. In Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
             220–229, 1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258590.
        19   Jeffrey C. Jackson. An efficient membership-query algorithm for learning DNF with respect
             to the uniform distribution. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 55(3):414–440,
             1997.
        20   Mark Jerrum, Alistair Sinclair, and Eric Vigoda. A polynomial-time approximation al-
             gorithm for the permanent of a matrix with nonnegative entries. Journal of the ACM,
             51(4):671–697, 2004.
        21   Valentine Kabanets and Russell Impagliazzo. Derandomizing polynomial identity tests
             means proving circuit lower bounds. Computational Complexity, 13(1-2):1–46, 2004. doi:
             10.1007/s00037-004-0182-6.
        22   Michael Kearns and Umesh Vazirani. An Introduction to Computational Learning Theory.
             MIT Press, 1994.
        23   Adam Klivans, Pravesh Kothari, and Igor C. Oliveira. Constructing hard functions using
             learning algorithms. In Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 86–97,
             2013.
        24   Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. Constant depth circuits, fourier trans-
             form, and learnability. Journal of the ACM, 40(3):607–620, 1993.
        25   Moni Naor and Omer Reingold. Number-theoretic constructions of efficient pseudo-random
             functions. Journal of the ACM, 51(2):231–262, 2004.
        26   Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. Journal of Computer and
             System Sciences, 49(2):149–167, 1994.
        27   Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean Functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
        28   Igor C. Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Conspiracies between learning algorithms, circuit
             lower bounds, and pseudorandomness. In Computational Complexity Conference (CCC),
             pages 18:1–18:49, 2017.
        29   Igor C. Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam. Pseudodeterministic constructions in subexponen-
             tial time. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 665–677, 2017.
        30   Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. Journal of Computer and
             System Sciences, 55(1):24–35, 1997.
        31   Benjamin Rossman, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. An average-case depth hierarchy
             theorem for boolean circuits. CoRR, abs/1504.03398, 2015.
        32   Meera Sitharam. Pseudorandom generators and learning algorithms for AC0 . Computa-
             tional Complexity, 5(3/4):248–266, 1995.
        33   Meera Sitharam and Timothy Straney. Derandomized learning of boolean functions. In
             International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), pages 100–115, 1997.
        34   Christopher Umans. Pseudo-random generators for all hardnesses. Journal of Computer
             and System Sciences, 67(2):419–440, 2003.
        35   Emanuele Viola. Randomness buys depth for approximate counting. Computational Com-
             plexity, 23(3):479–508, 2014.
        36   Ilya Volkovich. On learning, lower bounds and (un)keeping promises. In International
             Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), pages 1027–1038, 2014.
             doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43948-7_85.
        37   Ryan Williams. Improving exhaustive search implies superpolynomial lower bounds. SIAM
             Journal on Computing, 42(3):1218–1244, 2013. doi:10.1137/10080703X.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                       55:15


 A      Learning, Approximation, and Auxiliary Results
Let Fn be the set of all boolean functions f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} on n input variables, and
     S
F = n≥1 Fn be the set of all boolean functions. We use boldface letters such as w and x
to denote random variables. We say that boolean functions f and g from Fn are ε-close if
Prx∼Un [f (x) 6= g(x)] ≤ ε, where Un denotes the uniform distribution over {0, 1}n . We often
view a string in {0, 1}∗ that represents a boolean circuit D as if it were the actual circuit D,
or the function that it computes.

A.1     Randomness, pseudorandomness and pseudodeterminism
We will require the notion of polynomial-time samplability of a sequence of distributions. Let
D = {Dn } be a sequence of distributions, where each Dn is supported on {0, 1}n . We say
that D is polynomial-time samplable if there is a probabilistic polynomial-time algorithm B
such that for each n ∈ N and each y ∈ {0, 1}∗ , PrB [B(1n ) = y] = Pr[y ∈ Dn ].
   We also require notions of pseudorandomness, introduced next.

Pseudorandom generators and hitting set generators. Let Dm be a probability distri-
bution supported over {0, 1}m . We say that Dm is (η, s)-pseudorandom for a circuit class
C ⊆ Fm if for each size-s circuit g ∈ C(s),

       Pr [g(x) = 1] − Pr [g(y) = 1] < η.
      x∼Um              y∼Dm

In other words, the circuit g is η-fooled by Dm . This definition extends to an ensemble
D = {Dm }m≥1 of distributions, by requiring the condition above to hold for every m ≥ 1.
Moreover, we say that a function Gm : {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m is an η-pseudorandom generator
for a class C if the induced distribution Gm (U`(m) ) is (η, m)-pseudorandom for C. Equivalently,
the induced distribution η-fools every size-m C-circuit over m-input variables. The function
`(m) computes the seed length of the generator Gm .
    We also consider the weaker notion of hitting sets. We say that a set Hm ⊆ {0, 1}m is
an (η, s)-hitting set for C if for each size-s circuit g ∈ C(s) such that Prx∼Um [g(x) = 1] ≥ η,
we have g −1 (1) ∩ Hn 6= ∅. This definition extends to ensembles of sets in the natural
way. Similarly, a function Hm : {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m is an η-hitting set for C if the induced
set Hm ({0, 1}`(m) ) ⊆ {0, 1}m is an (η, m)-hitting set for C. (Note that the support of a
pseudorandom distribution is a hitting set with the same parameter η.)
    We say that a pseudorandom generator or a hitting set generator is quick if it can be
computed in time 2O(`(m)) , where `(m) is the corresponding seed length.
    The following result will be useful.
I Theorem 17 ([34]). Given a function f : {0, 1}log ` → {0, 1} of circuit complexity at least
s, it is possible to construct a pseudorandom generator G : {0, 1}O(log `) → {0, 1}m that
(1/m)-fools size m circuits, where m = sΩ(1) . Moreover, G can be computed in time `O(1)
given the description of the truth table of f .

Pseudodeterministic pseudorandommness. We will make use of pseudorandom distribu-
tions Dm and hitting sets Hm that are constructed pseudodeterministically. For our purposes,
we define the relevant concepts as follows. Let Gm : {0, 1}t(m) × {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m . We
say that Gm is a µ-pseudodeterministic (η, m)-pseudorandom generator for C if there is an
(η, m)-pseudorandom generator G?m : {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m for C such that
      Pr [G(a, ·) ≡ G?m (·)] ≥ 1 − µ,
     a∼Ut




                                                                                                    APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:16   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


        where the “≡” symbol represents identity among functions. A µ-pseudodeterministic hitting
        set generator Hm : {0, 1}t(m) × {0, 1}`(m) → {0, 1}m is defined analogously. Analogously, we
        say that a pseudodeterministic pseudorandom or hitting set generator is quick if it can be
        computed in time 2O(`(m)) , where `(m) is the seed length.
            Note that the pseudodeterministic parameter µ of a quick pseudorandom or hitting set
        generator can be boosted by standard techniques. Indeed, since quick generators can tolerate
        a running time overhead of 2O(`(n)) , one can always design a new generator that uses a larger
        random string, samples independent copies of the initial pseudodeterministic generator, and
        behaves as the most common generator among the induced generators provided by these
        samples.

        A.2        Learning
        Learning algorithms. We consider randomized learning algorithms under the uniform
        distribution that can make membership queries to the unknown function. We formalize such
        algorithms next.
            Fix a class of functions C ⊆ F, often referred to as the concept class. For convenience,
        we write C = {Cn }n≥1 , where Cn ⊆ Fn . A randomized algorithm A (ε, δ)-learns a class C if
        for every n ≥ 1 and for each f ∈ Cn , when given oracle access to f and access to inputs 1n ,
        ε > 0 (accuracy), and δ > 0 (confidence), A outputs the description of a boolean circuit D
        such that

              Pr[D = Af (1n , ε, δ, w) is ε-close to f ] ≥ 1 − δ.
               w

        Here w ∈ {0, 1}∗ is a uniformly random boolean string representing the randomness of A,
        and D = Af (1n , w, ε, δ) is a random variable denoting the (representation of the) circuit
        output by A over these inputs and with oracle access to f . For convenience, we might omit
        some input parameters when discussing the computation of A.11
            While many of our results hold in a more general setting, for simplicity we will focus on
        the learnability of classes of boolean circuits. Therefore, Cn will always denote a class of the
        form C(s(n)), where C ∈ {AC 0 , AC 0 [p], T C 0 , etc.}, and s(n) is an upper bound on circuit size
        complexity. When there is no risk of confusion, we might write Cd to restrict the class to
        circuits of depth at most d. The worst-case running time of the learning algorithm A over
        the choice of f ∈ C(s(n)) and of its internal random string w is measured by the function
        tA (n, s, 1/ε, 1/δ).

        Pseudodeterministic learning. A randomized algorithm A (ε, δ, γ)-pseudodeterministically
        learns a class C = {Cn } if A (ε, δ)-learns this class, and moreover for every n ≥ 1 and f ∈ Cn
        there is a fixed set of queries Qf ⊆ {0, 1}n and a fixed string Df representing a boolean
        circuit such that

              Pr[Af (1n , w) queries f exactly over Qf and Af (1n , w) = Df ] ≥ 1 − γ.
               w

        In other words, with high probability the learner makes the same set of queries and outputs
        the same boolean circuit (representation) as its hypothesis. We say in this case that A is a
        γ-pseudodeterministic learning algorithm.


        11
             It is well-known that the confidence parameter δ can be made arbitrarily small (cf.[22]). It is also known
             how to boost the accuracy parameter ε if the concept class satisfies a certain closure property (see e.g.
             [2]).
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                                   55:17


   We would like to stress that it makes sense to consider variants of this notion where only
the set of queries is pseudodeterministic (query-pseudodet. learner), or where only the output
hypothesis is pseudodeterministic (hypothesis-pseudodet. learner). For instance, if A is a
pseudodeterministic learner, running several independent copies of A and outputting the
most common hypothesis will boost the initial hypothesis-pseudodeterminism parameter,
but the resulting learner will be no longer query-pseudodeterministic.

The circuit complexity of learning algorithms. It is crucial in our investigations to consider
a notion of complexity for learning algorithms that is more refined than running time. We
measure instead the circuit complexity of learning algorithms. In other words, we specify
a learning algorithm by a sequence {Dn }n≥1 of multi-output oracle circuits Dn that have
access to w, ε, and δ, and whose oracle queries are answered according to the unknown
function f ∈ Cn . (In particular, the main input string of the oracle circuit is the random
string, and in many cases we will fix ε and δ in advance.) The output bits of Dn encode a
circuit describing the output hypothesis.12
    In the case of learning circuits that are less powerful than general circuits (such as AC 0 ,
    0
T C , etc.), we further restrict the output hypothesis of the learner. We say that a class C is
learnable by D-circuits if the sequence {Dn } consists of circuits from D, and moreover the
output string is an effective encoding of a D-circuit. The meaning of effective description is
that it should be possible for D-circuits to interpret the output string as the description of a
D-circuit, and to efficiently evaluate computations given this description. We will not be
explicit about such encodings, and simply note that they exist for the typical circuit classes
investigated in our work.13
    For definiteness, we briefly discuss a notion of uniformity for such sequence of learning
circuits. In learning upper bounds, we assume that the sequence can be generated from 1n by
a deterministic algorithm that runs in time polynomial in the size of the circuits. We will
not discuss circuit lower bounds for learning in this paper, but in such a context it is also
natural to consider non-uniform sequences of learning circuits (see e.g. [28, Section 4]).
    We say that a circuit class C is self-learnable if it can be learned by a sequence of C-circuits,
typically of quasi-polynomial size. This is an informal working definition, since for instance
we do not specify the dependence on the parameters ε and δ. We will leave such details to the
formal statement of our results, where we will often assume that these learning parameters are
                                                                                         k0
sufficiently small constants, and allow the class Cd (nk ) to be learned by Cd0 (n(log n) )-circuits
(multi-output and with oracle gates).
    We assume that functions related to algorithmic parameters such as time bounds, circuit
size, learning accuracy, etc. are sufficiently constructive, in the sense that they do not affect
the asymptotic complexity of our reductions whenever an algorithm needs to compute one of
these functions.

A.3     Approximation
Approximation schemes. We define notions of approximation for computing integer-valued
functions. An integer-valued function is a function from strings to non-negative integers,


12
   In the case of deterministic learning circuits, we remark that each Dn has access to the constant input
   bits 0 and 1, and one can think of its “input string” as the first batch of answers provided by the oracle
   queries.
13
   For bounded-depth circuit classes, we tolerate a constant-factor depth blow-up during the evaluation if
   this is necessary from the choice of encoding.




                                                                                                                APPROX/RANDOM 2018
55:18   Pseudo-Derandomizing Learning and Approximation


        i.e., from {0, 1}∗ to N. We say that an integer-valued function f has a polynomial-time
        randomized approximation scheme (PRAS) if for each rational number  > 0 there is a
        probabilistic polynomial-time machine M , which given any string x as input, outputs an
        integer M (x) (which might depend on the random choices of M ) such that with probability
        1 − 2−Ω(|x|) over the random choices of M , we have that (1 − )f (x) ≤ M (x) ≤ (1 + )f (x).
        We say that f has an fully polynomial-time randomized approximation scheme (FPRAS)
        if there is a probabilistic machine M , which given a string x and a rational number 
        (in some prespecified format) as input, runs in time poly(|x|, 1/) and outputs a number
        M (x) such that with probability 1 − 2−Ω(|x|) over the random choices of M , we have that
        (1 − )f (x) ≤ M (x) ≤ (1 + )f (x).
             An example of an integer-valued function is the permanent of a (0, 1)-matrix, when the
        matrix is represented as a bitstring. By the celebrated result of Jerrum, Sinclair and Vigoda
        [20], this integer-valued function has an FPRAS.
             We will be interested in converting randomized approximation schemes to pseudo-
        deterministic ones, where with high probability the algorithm outputs a fixed number
        that is a good approximation to the correct value. Given a time function T : N → N, we say
        that an integer-valued function f has a pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme (PDAS)
        running in time T if for each rational number  > 0 there is a function g : {0, 1}∗ → N and a
        probabilistic machine M , which given a string x as input, runs in time T (|x|) and outputs
        g(x) with probability 1−2−Ω(|x|) , and moreover we have that (1−)f (x) ≤ g(x) ≤ (1+)f (x).
        A PDAS running in polynomial time is called a PPDAS. We say that an integer-valued
        function f has a fully pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme (FPDAS) running in time
        T if there is a function g : {0, 1}∗ × Q+ → N and a probabilistic machine M , which given
        a string x and a rational number  (in some prespecified format) as input, runs in time
        T (|x|, 1/) and outputs g(x, ) with probability 1 − 2−Ω(|x|) , and moreover we have that
        (1 − )f (x) ≤ g(x, ) ≤ (1 + )f (x). An FPDAS running in polynomial time is called a
        PFPDAS.
             Note that a deterministic approximation scheme running in time T is a special case of a
        PDAS running in time T where the machine M uses no randomness, and similarly a fully
        deterministic approximation scheme running in time T is a special case of an FPDAS running
        in time T where the machine M uses no randomness.
             We also need more relaxed notions of pseudo-deterministic approximation schemes
        which are not guaranteed to work for all inputs. An infinitely-often pseudo-deterministic
        approximation scheme (i.o.PDAS) is only guaranteed to be pseudo-deterministic and output
        a correct approximation for infinitely many input lengths (rather than all of them). The
        notion of infinitely-often fully pseudo-deterministic approximation scheme (i.o.FPDAS) is
        defined analogously.
             Finally, given a samplable distribution D = {Dn }, an i.o.PDAS over D is only guaranteed
        to be pseudo-deterministic and output a correct approximation with probability 1 − 1/nω(1)
        over inputs sampled according to Dn , for infinitely many n. Again, the notion of i.o.FPDAS
        over D is defined analogously.


        Canonization and approximate canonization. Next we define notions of canonization and
        approximate canonization for circuit classes. Let C be a circuit class and s : N → N be
        a size function. Given a time function T : N → N, we say that C(s(n)) has deterministic
        (resp. pseudo-deterministic) canonization in time T if there is a deterministic (resp. 1/3-
        pseudo-deterministic) Turing machine M such that (i) M operates in time T (n) when given
        as input any circuit C in C(s(n)), (ii) for any circuit C in C(s(n)), M (C) is a Boolean circuit
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                                   55:19


on n variables that is equivalent to C, i.e., computes the same Boolean function as C, and
(iii) for any two equivalent circuits C and C 0 in C(s(n)), M (C) = M (C 0 ). Note that a
pseudo-deterministic canonization algorithm is allowed to output an arbitrary circuit with
probability at most 1/3.
     We relax the notion of canonization by requiring the output to only be approximately
equivalent to the input. Given a parameter  > 0, we say that C(s(n)) has deterministic
(resp. pseudo-deterministic) -approximate canonization in time T if there is a deterministic
(resp. 1/3-pseudo-deterministic) Turing machine M such that (i) M operates in time T (n)
when given as input any circuit C in C(s(n)), (ii) for any circuit C in C(s(n)), M (C) is a
Boolean circuit on n variables that is an -approximation to C, i.e., disagrees with C on at
most an -fraction of inputs of length n, and (iii) for any two equivalent circuits C and C 0 in
C(s(n)), M (C) = M (C 0 ).
     Finally, we stress that in the definition of canonization and approximate canonization
it is important that the size bound s(n) is fixed before the formalization of the problem.
Indeed, by using an alternative definition that simply postulates that on an arbitrary circuit
C from the class C the machine M must output (say) in polynomial time on the description
length of C an equivalent canonical circuit M (C), one can easily use M to define a natural
property useful against C (in the sense of [30]).14 However, as far as we know, there might be
circuit classes that admit approximate canonization in the original sense introduced above,
but do not admit natural properties. The first definition is therefore preferred.




14
     Given a truth-table f , construct an exponential size C-circuit C for f . Since M is a canonizer and has
     to run in polynomial time on every circuit D equivalent to C, one can infer from its output on C the
     approximate C-circuit complexity of f .




                                                                                                                APPROX/RANDOM 2018
