Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex
Analysis: Towards Composable Safe Zones
Minos Garofalakis1 and Vasilis Samoladas2

1    Technical University of Crete, Chania, Greece
     minos@softnet.tuc.gr
2    Technical University of Crete, Chania, Greece
     vsam@softnet.tuc.gr



      Abstract
Continuous tracking of complex data analytics queries over high-speed distributed streams is
becoming increasingly important. Query tracking can be reduced to continuous monitoring of a
condition over the global stream. Communication-efficient monitoring relies on locally processing
stream data at the sites where it is generated, by deriving site-local conditions which collectively
guarantee the global condition. Recently proposed geometric techniques offer a generic approach
for splitting an arbitrary global condition into local geometric monitoring constraints (known
as “Safe Zones”); still, their application to various problem domains has so far been based on
heuristics and lacking a principled, compositional methodology. In this paper, we present the
first known formal results on the difficult problem of effective Safe Zone (SZ) design for complex
query monitoring over distributed streams. Exploiting tools from convex analysis, our approach
relies on an algebraic representation of SZs which allows us to: (1) Formally define the notion
of a “good” SZ for distributed monitoring problems; and, most importantly, (2) Tackle and
solve the important problem of systematically composing SZs for monitored conditions expressed
as Boolean formulas over simpler conditions (for which SZs are known); furthermore, we prove
that, under broad assumptions, the composed SZ is good if the component SZs are good. Our
results are, therefore, a first step towards a principled compositional solution to SZ design for
distributed query monitoring. Finally, we discuss a number of important applications for our SZ
design algorithms, also demonstrating how earlier geometric techniques can be seen as special
cases of our framework.

1998 ACM Subject Classification H.2.m [Database Management] Miscellaneous, C.2.4 [Compu-
ter-Communication Networks] Distributed Systems

Keywords and phrases Distributed Data Streams, Geometric Method

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICDT.2017.14


 1      Introduction
As we are moving from network-centric computing into the era of Internet of Things, large-
scale event monitoring applications become ever more important. Such applications rely
on continuous monitoring queries over the union of local, high-speed data streams. The
scale of these applications, as well as power or bandwidth limitations, often impose critical
communication contraints that prohibit the centralization of streaming data. Instead, the
applications must rely on novel algorithmic paradigms for processing local streams of data in
situ (i.e., locally at the sites where the data is observed). This obviously raises the problem
of effectively decomposing the global monitoring query into “safe” local queries that can be
tracked independently at each site while guaranteeing correctness for the global monitoring
            © Minos Garofalakis and Vasilis Samoladas;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
20th International Conference on Database Theory (ICDT 2017).
Editors: Michael Benedikt and Giorgio Orsi; Article No. 14; pp. 14:1–14:18
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
14:2   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


       operation. Such a decomposition enables truly distributed, push-based monitoring, where
       sites track their local queries and communicate (e.g., with a “coordinator” site) only when
       some local query constraints are violated. Still, the problem of effectively decomposing
       a complex (e.g., non-linear) query over the global distributed stream into such safe local
       constraints can be far from straightforward.

       Problem Setup and the Geometric Method. In an abstract setting, our system architecture
       comprises a collection of k physically-distributed sites, where each site p ∈ {1, . . . , k} observes
       updates to the state of its local stream which is represented as a dynamic, high-dimensional
       vector X (p) ∈ Rm . (Note that this is the standard model for general data streams used in the
       streaming algorithms literature, e.g., [26, 12].) The state of the global, distributed stream X
       is a convex combination of the local states; that is, X = p ap X (p) , with ap ≥ 0, p ap = 1.
                                                                   P                              P

       Arbitrary linear combinations, e.g., summation of local frequency distribution vectors, can
       be captured by simply multiplying the local vectors by constant factors. In applications,
       these states often comprise of one or more frequency distributions of streams, or (linear)
       sketches thereof.
           Let F (X) denote a global query function, e.g., the norm or entropy of a dynamic global
       distribution, or the inner-product (i.e., equi-join size) of two underlying distributed streams
       X1 , X2 (note that in this case, X = X1 ⊕ X2 , the concatenation of X1 , X2 ). A natural
       global monitoring condition is a threshold query F (X) < T (or, > T ), where T is some
       constant. Threshold queries can naturally express more complex monitoring tasks, including
       approximate function monitoring [13].
           A general approach to tracking threshold queries over distributed streams was pioneered
       by Sharfman et al.’s Geometric Method [32, 21]. For arbitrary F (), it is generally impossible
       to relate the locally-observed values of F (X (p) ) to the global value F (X); thus, their key
       idea is to employ geometric arguments to monitor the domain (rather than the range) of the
       monitored function F (). More formally, given the threshold query F (X) < T , define the
       set A , {x ∈ Rm |F (x) < T } ⊆ Rm as the query’s admissible region. Clearly, the condition
       F (X) < T is equivalent to the condition X ∈ A, and this geometric condition in Rm is the
       one being monitored — action needs to be taken only when X leaves A.
           A key concept in geometric monitoring is that of a Safe Zone (SZ), which is defined
       as a convex subset of the admissible region; that is, a SZ is a convex set Z such that
       Z ⊆ A [21]. Let X (p) (t0 ) be the state of site p at some initial synchronization time t0 , and
       let X 0 = p ap X (p) (t0 ) = X(t0 ). As updates arrive at any site p, the site maintains its
                  P

       local drift vector u(p) (t) = X (p) (t) − X (p) (t0 ) + X 0 . It is trivial to show that, at any time t,
       the convex combination of the local drift vectors is exactly the state of the global stream at
       time t; that is, p ap u(p) (t) = X(t) [32]. Thus, as long as at every site p, we have u(p) ∈ Z,
                        P

       by convexity of Z we also have X ∈ Z and, therefore, X ∈ A.

       The Safe Zone Design Problem. The Geometric Method has been extended and success-
       fully applied to various monitoring problems in a number of recent papers [5, 15, 13, 20,
       23, 27, 29]. A survey of this body of work reveals that a crucial, and non-trivial aspect of
       the technique is the issue of Safe Zone Design: Given a particular admissible region A, and
       the initial global state X(t0 ) ∈ A, define a “good” (convex) safe zone Z ⊆ A. As a simple
       example depicted in Fig. 1, if A is defined by constraint kXk ≥ T , a good SZ Z can be
       defined by the constraint X · X(t0 ) ≥ T kX(t0 )k.
           For complex queries, safe zone design is often analytically challenging, and general
       methodologies are quite helpful. Simple solutions can be obtained using the original “covering
       spheres” method of Sharfman et al. [32], but the quality of the safe zones and the performance
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                               14:3




                                                             X(t0 )


                                                O




    Figure 1 The admissible region (hatched) for kXk ≥ T and a good safe zone (grayed).


obtained can be far from satisfactory. A more recent work [23] introduces the “convex
decomposition” method, which addresses some of the problems of “covering spheres” and
provides effective solutions for several problems, but the method is lacking a systematic
foundation.
    The aforementioned methods, although valuable, suffer from two important drawbacks.
First, they do not provide any systematic guidance for designing safe zones of provable
quality, making the evaluation of a SZ design a purely experimental task. Second, and more
important, they do not provide for composable designs. To clarify our (envisioned) concept
of a composable SZ, we draw an analogy to the well-known chain rule for the differential
operator: D f (g(x)) = Df (g(x))Dg(x). Ideally, we would wish for a “safe zone” transform,
that, similar to D, would provide safe zones for complex queries by combining safe zones for
simpler queries.


Our Results. In this paper, we present the first compositional method for SZ design, where
the composed safe zones inherit quality features from their components. We apply our
method to the important problem of inner-product queries (tracking the inner product of
two vectors), both exactly and approximately, via AMS sketches.
    We formally define the notion of a good SZ Z ⊆ A, for an admissible region A and a
reference point E ∈ A (E is usually the initial system state X(t0 )). A good SZ has two
“largeness” properties; the maximum distance property states that the distance of E ∈ Z from
the boundary of Z is equal to the distance of E from the boundary of A. The maximality
property states that there does not exist a proper superset of Z which is also a safe zone for
A. (Note that the SZ defined above for kXk ≥ T clearly satisfies both properties.)
    Our compositional method is primarily applicable to query functions with separable sub-
components. The global state vector X is taken to be the concatenation of n (not necessarily
equidimensional) subvectors: X = X 1 ⊕ X 2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ X n . For given safe zones on query func-
tions fi (X i ), we study the design of safe zones for a query function F (f1 (X 1 ), . . . , fn (X n )).
Our compositional approach relies on expressing the constraint on F as a conjunction of
separable disjunctions. In particular, we present design methods for two important cases of
aggregate functions F :
Boolean Functions: Here, fi are boolean-valued functions, F : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is a boolean
    function, and we monitor the condition “F is true”. Given good safe zones for subproblems
    fi (X i ), our method can compose a good safe zone for the overall condition.
    An important application for this type of query is threshold monitoring for the median
    (or, other order statistics); a query of the form median{g1 (X 1 ), . . . , gn (X n )} ≤ T is
    equivalent to the case where each fi (X i ) equals the boolean value of condition gi (X i ) ≤ T ,
    and F is the majority function. Such order statistics queries arise often in monitoring
    robust estimators, distributed voting schemes, and so on.


                                                                                                            ICDT 2017
14:4   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


       Separable Sums: Here, fi are real-valued functions and F is summation; that is, we are
            interested in the condition f1 (X 1 ) + · · · + fn (X n ) ≤ T . It is easy to show (e.g., by
            negating the above condition) that the above condition can be written equivalently as a
            conjunction of separable disjunctions:
                                             n
                                             _
               ∀(τ1 , . . . , τn ) ∈ ΣnT :         fj (X j ) ≤ τj ,                                             (1)
                                             j=1

            where ΣnT = {(τ1 , . . . , τn ) ∈ Rn | τ1 + · · · + τn = T }.
            For this more complicated problem, our method’s scope is more limited; it can compose
            a safe zone with the maximum distance property, provided maximum-distance safe zones
            for queries of the form fi (X i ) ≤ τ are known, but maximality is harder to obtain in
            general.

       A Motivating Example. The problem of estimating the inner product of two vectors is
       of fundamental importance for distributed stream processing. This problem abstracts the
       situation where the vectors capture the (dynamic) frequency distribution of values in two
       distinct data streams, and we wish to monitor the degree of correlation in the two streams.
       (Note that this is also equivalent to tracking the size of the equi-join of the two streams [1].)
           The global state comprises of a pair of vectors (X 1 , X 2 ), whose inner product, X 1 · X 2 ,
       we wish to track. Often, the dimension of the raw streaming vectors can be too large for exact
       tracking to be realistic, since we can only afford to maintain a synopsis/summary of the
       streaming data. This problem has been addressed via the use of AGMS sketch synopses [2, 1].
       Succinctly, the AGMS sketch of the frequency vector X i , i = 1, 2 is a sequence of d l-
       dimensional vectors X̂ i = (x̂i,1 , . . . , x̂i,d ), with x̂i,j ∈ Rl . Then, as shown by Alon et al. √   [1],
       the inner product X 1 · X 2 can be approximated, with an accuracy of  = kX̂ 1 kkX̂ 2 k/ l,
       with probability at least 1 − O(1/2d ), by F (X̂ 1 , X̂ 2 ) = median{ x̂1,1 · x̂2,1 , . . . , x̂1,d · x̂2,d }.
           In a distributed stream setting, the problem has been addressed in [8, 13]. Both of the
       above papers rely on a safe zone approach, but these safe zones have not been proven to
       be either maximum-distance, or maximal. None of these, or any other known techniques,
       provide guarantees on communication cost. Using our techniques, we design good safe zones
       for both exact and approximate tracking (via AGMS sketches) of the inner product. For
       exact tracking, the inner product query can be rewritten as a separable sum and the designed
       safe zone is good (maximum-distance and maximal). Furthermore, the designed safe zone is
       composed into a design of a good safe zone for approximate tracking (which is just tracking
       the median of d inner products).

        2      Safe Zone Design
       In this section, we introduce some basic notation and definitions, and give the initial
       mathematical formulation of safe zone representation and composition. Throughout the
       paper, we use the notation of vector calculus; boldface letters stand for vectors. All vector
       spaces in this paper are Euclidean. We use the letter V to denote a vector space Rd , equipped
       with the standard inner product. Vector inner product is written as xy and self-product is
       written as squaring, therefore x2 = kxk2 . We also use x ⊕ y to denote the so-called direct
       sum of two vectors, that is, the vector resulting from the concatenation of x and y.
          In addition, given a Boolean predicate φ : V → {0, 1}, we write {φ} = {X ∈ V | φ(X)}.
          We will need some simple topological concepts. Assume some vector space V = Rd .
       Let Ball(c, ρ) denote the open ball centered at c with radius ρ, i.e., Ball(c, ρ) = {x ∈
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                         14:5


V | kx − ck < ρ}. Given a set of points A ⊆ V and x ∈ A, we say that x is interior to A
(denoted x ∈ int A) iff there exists some  > 0, so that Ball(x, ) ⊆ A. A point x ∈ V is
exterior to A (denoted x ∈ ext A) iff it is interior to the complement of A, A = V − A. A
point x ∈ V which is neither exterior nor interior to A is a boundary point for A (denoted
x ∈ bd A). Set A is open iff it only contains interior points; that is, A = int A. Dually, set
A is closed iff its complement A is open; in this case, A = int A ∪ bd A.
    For completeness, we also state a few basic facts about convex sets. A set Z ⊆ V is
convex iff ∀x, y ∈ Z, ∀t ∈ [0, 1], (1 − t)x + ty ∈ Z. Alternatively, Z is convex iff it is closed
under convex combinations of its elements. An important property of convex sets is that the
intersection of any collection of convex sets is convex.
    A (closed) halfspace h is a supporting halfspace of convex set Z, iff (a) h ⊇ Z, and (b) the
boundaries of h and Z intersect in at least one point p. We say that h supports Z at p. At
every boundary point p ∈ bd Z, there is at least one halfspace h supporting Z at p. Where
there is exactly one, p is called smooth and h is called tangent. A well-known theorem states
that any convex set Z is the intersection of its supporting halfspaces. In this paper, we shall
employ a stronger, but much less known theorem:

I Theorem 1 (Rockafellar [28], Thm. 18.8). A closed convex set Z ⊆ V is the intersection
of the closed halfspaces tangent to it.

    A function f : V → R is convex iff, for every x, y ∈ V and λ ∈ [0, 1], it is f (λx+(1−λ)y) ≤
λf (x) + (1 − λ)f (y). A function f is concave iff −f is convex. We will be interested primarily
in concave functions. A function f is both concave and convex, iff it is affine, that is,
f (x) = wx + a, for some w ∈ V and a ∈ R.


2.1    Safe Zone Specification
Consider a monitored query on V , which corresponds to an admissible region A ⊆ V . The
problem of determining a good safe zone Z requires additional information; some reference
must be made by the user, as to the preferred locus of the safe zone, among mutually
exclusive alternatives. Motivated by previous work, we adopt the concept of a reference point
E ∈ int A, which our safe zone must include.
    Therefore, the safe zone design problem can be stated as follows: given admissible region
A ⊆ V and reference point E ∈ int A, select a safe zone Z ⊆ A such that Z is convex and
E ∈ int Z. Towards a compositional approach, we assume that our admissible region A is
expressible as a set-algebraic combination (involving intersection and union) of subsets of V .
    Now, consider a family of sets Ai ⊆ V , i ∈ I, where A = ∩i∈I Ai , with E ∈ int Ai for all
i ∈ I, and let Zi ⊆ Ai be safe zones. Towards a compositional approach, it is natural to
consider Z = ∩i∈I Zi as a candidate safe zone for admissible region A = ∩i∈I Ai . Indeed, Z
is convex and contains E.
    Similarly, if A = ∪i∈I Ai , with E ∈ int Ai for some i ∈ I (note that E need not belong to
all Ai ), it is natural to consider ∪i∈I Zi as a candidate safe zone for A. Unfortunately, this
is not valid, as ∪i Zi is not convex in general. Therefore, we need to restrict to a convex
subset Z ⊆ ∪i∈I Zi , that contains E; moreover, Z should inherit good qualities of zones Zi .
To overcome the difficulties of handling unions, our method focuses on the special case of
decomposition into a separable union. In this case, V = Rd is the product space V1 × · · · × Vn
of a collection Vi = Rdi , i = 1, . . . , n of vector spaces (with
                                                                   P
                                                                     di = d), and each x ∈ V is the
direct sum of xi ∈ Vi , where each xi is the projection of x on Vi . For Ai ⊆ Vi , the separable
        Wn                                                    Wn
union i=1 Ai is simply the set {x1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ xn ∈ V | i=1 xi ∈ Ai }. Equivalently, for n = 2,



                                                                                                      ICDT 2017
14:6   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis

                                                                  Vn
       A1 ∨ A2 = (A1 × V2 ) ∪ (V1 × A2 ). Separable intersection i=1 Ai , defined similarly, is just
       the Cartesian product A1 × · · · × An .
                                                               Wn
           Given safe zones Zi ⊆ Ai ⊆ Vi , the separable union i=1 Zi is not a convex set. However,
       it will be shown subsequently that properly selected subsets of the separable union do inherit
       the good qualities of the safe zones Zi .


       2.2    Safe Zone Representation and Composition
       In our method, a convex set is represented as the level set of a concave function.

       I Definition 2 (Level set). Let f : V → R be any function. The level set L(f ) of f is the set
       L(f ) = {x ∈ V | f (x) ≥ 0} = {f (x) ≥ 0}.

       When f is concave, L(f ) is convex. We wish to avoid the degenerate cases where L(f )
       is empty, or the whole space, or has empty interior. This is equivalent to the following
       requirement:

       I Definition 3 (Safe Zone function). A safe zone function is a concave function f : V → R,
       which attains both a positive and a negative value over V .

       Safe zone functions are positive in the interior of L(f ), negative on the exterior and vanish
       on the boundary. An important property of L(f ) is monotonicity with respect to pointwise
       dominance. Given functions f, g : V → R, f is dominated by g (denoted by f ≤ g) iff
       ∀x ∈ V, f (x) ≤ g(x). Clearly, f ≤ g directly implies L(f ) ⊆ L(g).
           We are interested in the compositions of safe zones for intersections and unions of safe zones.
       We introduce two operations that construct the composite safe zone function from component
       safe zone functions. The first operation, used to capture the intersection of safe zones, is
       the pointwise-infimum of a (possibly infinite) family of safe zone functions. Given family
                                                                                             T
       of safe zone functions ζi : V → R, i ∈ I, let ζ(x) = inf i∈I ζi (x). Then, L(ζ) = i∈I L(ζi ).
       The second operation is weighted sum with non-negative weights, sometimes called conical
       combination. It is used to construct a convex subset of the union of a finite family of safe
       zones.

       I Theorem 4. For safe zone functions ζi : V → R, i = 1, . . . , n, and reals ai ≥ 0, not all
       zero, let
                   n
                   X
          ζ(X) =          ai ζi (X).                                                                  (2)
                    i=1

                                       Tn                     Sn
       Then, L(ζ) is convex and         i=1 L(ζi ) ⊆ L(ζ) ⊆    i=1 L(ζi ).

                    Tn                                                       Sn
       Proof. It is i=1 L(ζi ) ⊆ L(inf i ai ζi (X)) and L(supi ai ζi (X)) ⊆ i=1 L(ζi ) (with equality
       holding when all ai > 0). Since n inf i ai ζi (X) ≤ ζ(X) ≤ n supi ai ζi (X), the theorem follows
       directly from these formulas and monotonicity of L.                                           J


       The above theorem specializes to separable union straightforwardly. If ζi : Vi → R are
                                                       Pn
       safe zone functions, then ζ(x1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ xn ) =  i=1 ai ζi (xi ) is a safe zone function and
                            Wn
       ×ni=1 L(ζi ) ⊆ L(ζ) ⊆ i=1 L(ζi ).
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                             14:7


2.3     Functional Analysis For Safe Zone Functions
Having defined the two fundamental operations on safe zone functions, in the following
sections we proceed to study the conditions under which these operations maintain the
qualities of composed safe zones. We end this section with some foundational facts from
convex analysis.
    All safe zone functions over V are continuous and differentiable almost everywhere in V
                                                                                ∂ζ            ∂ζ
(that is, everywhere, except for a set of measure 0). The gradient ∇ζ(x) = ( ∂x   1
                                                                                    , . . . , ∂x d
                                                                                                   ) is
the multi-dimensional analog of the derivative. At any point x, where ζ is differentiable, this
derivative is a vector vx , pointing to the direction of maximum increase of ζ, and its norm
kvx k is proportional to the rate of change.
    Let a safe zone function ζ be differentiable at point x0 . The affine function h(x) =
∇ζ(x0 )(x − x0 ) + ζ(x0 ) is called the tangent of ζ at x0 . By virtue of concavity, ζ ≤ h.
    In general, every safe zone function ζ is the pointwise infimum of some (non-unique)
family H of affine functions. This is denoted by ζ = inf H. In particular, ζ is the pointwise
infimum of all its tangents.
    Given a collection ζi , i ∈ I, of safe zone functions, and corresponding families of affine
functions Hi , such that ζi = inf Hi , the following two properties are very important in the
rest of this paper:
                                      S
1. For arbitrary I, inf i∈I ζi = inf( i∈I Hi ), and
                                              P                 P                  P
2. For I finite, and ai ≥ 0, not all 0, it is i∈I ai ζi = inf( i∈I ai Hi ), where i∈I ai Hi is
                                 P
    the set of affine functions { i∈I ai hi | hi ∈ Hi , i ∈ I}.


 3     Maximum Distance
Given an admissible region A ⊆ V and reference point E ∈ int A, several safe zones containing
E can be constructed. Given two such safe zones, Z and Z 0 , one can argue that one is
“better” than the other, by assuming isotropy; that is, all directions around the reference
point are equally desirable. This assumption correlates with a monitoring situation where
each coordinate of the state vector behaves (or is assumed to behave) as an IID random
walk. Under this assumption, we have the following criterion:

I Criterion 5. Safe zone Z is “better” than safe zone Z 0 if dist(E, Z) ≥ dist(E, Z 0 ).

    With respect to criterion 5, any safe zone containing a ball that touches the admissible
region’s boundary is best possible.

I Definition 6 (Maximum distance). Let A be an admissible region and E ∈ int A. A safe
zone Z ⊆ A has maximum distance in A with respect to E, iff dist(E, Z) = dist(E, A).

3.1     Preservation Of Maximum Distance Under Composition
The intersection operation always preserves the maximum distance of its operands. Given
                                                                                       T
safe zones Zi ⊆ Ai , and E ∈ int Ai , for each i, if all Zi are maximum distance, then i∈I Zi
is also maximum distance. As a matter of fact, if D = dist(E, A) = inf i∈I dist(E, Ai ), it is
sufficient and necessary to have dist(E, Zi ) ≥ D. Consequently, the pointwise-inf operation
on any family of safe zone functions preserves the maximum distance property of its operands.
    The situation with separable union is much more involved. It is not sufficient for the safe
zones of the operands to be maximum distance; the actual safe zone functions that describe
these safe zones must carry sufficient distance information, so that some conical combination



                                                                                                          ICDT 2017
14:8   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis




                                                                          λ=2

                                                                 (1, 1)




                                                                          λ=1




            Figure 2 Example of the safe zone of union {x1 ≥ 0} ∨ {x2 ≥ 0}, derived by with suboptimal
       functions. The safe zone for λ = 1, whose boundary is the solid black line, is good for reference point
       (1, 1). The safe zone for λ = 2, whose boundary is the dashed blue line, is neither maximum-distance
       nor maximal.


       can yield a maximum-distance subset of the union. This is best illustrated by example. With
       reference to Fig. 2, consider the case in R2 , where Z1 = L(f (x1 )) and Z2 = L(f (x2 )), with
                   (
                    x/λ if x ≥ 0
           f (x) =                                                                                 (3)
                    λx     if x < 0

       where λ ≥ 1 (so that f is concave). Note that, independently of the value of λ, Zi = {xi ≥ 0}.
       The union Z1 ∨Z2 is not convex, but maximal convex subsets are all halfspaces whose boundary
       supports the positive quadrant (Z1 × Z2 ). Yet, none of the sets L(a1 f (x1 ) + a2 f (x2 )) have
       maximum distance for any reference point in Z1 × Z2 , unless λ = 1. In fact, as λ grows, safe
       zones L(a1 f (x1 ) + a2 f (x2 )) shrink towards Z1 ∩ Z2 , which is their lower bound.
           The intuitive reason of the failure in this example is that, the shape of the region generated
       by Eq. (2) depends crucially on the values of f outside of L(f ).
           To ameliorate this situation, we introduce a class of safe zone functions which contain
       sufficient distance information.

       I Definition 7 (Affine Distance Function (ADF)). An affine function h : V → R with
       h(x) = wx + a is an ADF iff k∇hk = kwk = 1.

       Every closed halfspace of V is equal to L(h) for a unique ADF h. For each x ∈ V , h(x) is
       the signed distance of x from the boundary of L(h), non-negative if x ∈ L(h) and negative if
       x 6∈ L(h).

       I Definition 8 (Eikonal function). A safe zone function ζ is eikonal iff it is the pointwise-
       infimum of a collection of ADFs.

           A useful alternative characterization of eikonal functions is the following:

       I Theorem 9 (Eikonal characterization). Let ζ : V → R be concave, and almost everywhere
       differentiable. Then, ζ is eikonal, if and only if, k∇ζk = 1 at every point where it is
       differentiable.

       (Due to space constraints, this and other ommitted proofs will appear in the full version of
       the paper.)
          The equation k∇ζk = 1 is known as the (Euclidean) eikonal differential equation. As a
       consequence of this equation, it can be shown, using the mean-value theorem of analysis,
       that every eikonal function ζ is non-expansive: |ζ(x) − ζ(y)| ≤ kx − yk.
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                     14:9


Signed Distance Functions. One important member in the family of eikonal functions is
the Signed Distance Function (SDF) of a convex set Z.
            (
              dist(x, Z)   if x ∈ Z,
   δZ (x) =                                                                      (4)
              − dist(x, Z) if x ∈ Z.

The SDF of a convex set is concave. Also, since L(δZ ) = Z, the SDF is positive in the
interior of Z, negative on the exterior, and vanishes on the boundary; therefore, it is a safe
zone function. Naturally, every ADF h is the SDF of L(h). However, this is not the case for
every eikonal function ζ.
    Let Z = L(ζ) and let δZ be the SDF of L(Z). Then, δZ ≤ ζ. In fact, for every x ∈ L(f ),
ζ(x) = δZ (x). But, ζ may strictly dominate δZ outside L(ζ).
    The family of eikonal functions is well-behaved under our composition operators. The
pointwise-infimum of any family of eikonal functions is also eikonal. For the case of separable
union, we have the following:

I Theorem 10. Let ζi : Vi → R be eikonal functions, ai ≥ 0, and ζ(x1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ xn ) =
Pn                                        Pn    2
  i=1 ai ζi (xi ). Then, ζ is eikonal iff  i=1 ai = 1.
                                                       Pk          2   Pk
Proof. Since ∇ζi ∈ Vi are orthogonal, k∇ζk2 =           i=1 ai ∇ζi    =       2
                                                                         i=1 ai k∇ζi k
                                                                                       2
                                                                                         =
Pk     2
  i=1 ai .                                                                               J

                                     pP ζ of eikonal functions can always be scaled to an
Thus, any separable conical combination
                                             2
eikonal function, by dividing it by       i ai , which of course does not affect the described
safe zone L(ζ).
                                                                                       Wn
     We now turn our attention to separable union. Let admissible region A = i=1 Ai
and let E = E1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ E n be the reference point. Consider eikonal functions ζi such that
                          Wn
L(ζi ) ⊆ Ai , and let Z = i=1 L(ζi ). What is the radius D of the largest ball centered at
E, that can be attained by a conical combination of ζi ? Clearly, D ≤ dZ = dist(E, Z). In
general, it is dZ ≤ dA = dist(E, A). The following theorem specifies the conditions under
which maximum distance can be achieved.
                            Wn
I Theorem 11. Let A = i=1 Ai , where Ai ⊆ Vi , and E = E1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ E n ∈ int A. Let
                                                                       Wn
ζi : Vi → R be eikonal functions, such that L(ζi ) ⊆ Ai , and let Z =P i=1 L(ζi ). Then:
                                                                        n
                                      P                                     ai ζ(E i )
1. For any conical combination ζ =       ai ζi , it is dist(E, L(ζ)) = pi=1
                                                                         Pn 2 = D.
                                                                                  ai
                                                                            i=1

2. It is D ≤ dist(E, Z) = dZ , with equality holding iff, for some λ > 0,
            (
              λζi (E i ) if ζi (E i ) > 0,
       ai =
              0          otherwise,

3. It is dZ ≤ dA = dist(E, A), with equality holding iff, for every i such that E i ∈ int Ai ,
   L(ζi ) has maximum distance in Ai w.r.t. E i .

 4     Maximality
During distributed monitoring using a safe zone Z ⊆ A, condition X ∈ Z may be violated,
while X ∈ A. We call such local violations, false violations. Typically, the performance of
distributed monitoring depends crucially on minimizing false violations. Therefore,

I Criterion 12. Safe zone Z is “better” that safe zone Z 0 if Z ⊇ Z 0



                                                                                                  ICDT 2017
14:10   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


        This criterion is a rather obviously desirable; providing a larger safe zone will tend, other
        things being equal, to reduce false violation.
            With respect to criterion 12, the best possible for a safe zone is to be a ⊆-wise maximal
        convex subset of the admissible region A.

        I Definition 13 (Maximality). Let A be the admissible region. A safe zone Z is maximal
        in A (with respect to set containment), if and only if, no convex subset of A is a proper
        superset of Z.

           We now develop a convenient characterization of maximality.

        I Definition 14 (Flats of an affine family). Given a family H of affine functions on V , let
        ΦH : H → 2V be

           ΦH (h) = {p ∈ V | h(p) = 0 and ∀h0 ∈ H, h0 6= h =⇒ h0 (p) > 0}                          (5)

        Set ΦH (h) is the flat of h in H.

        Fix some affine family H and let ζ = inf H and Z = L(ζ). Let h ∈ H be an affine function
        with non-empty flat Φ(h). Each p ∈ Φ(h) is a boundary point of Z, since ζ(p) = 0. Also,
        p is smooth, since ζ is differentiable at p (with ∇ζ(p) = ∇h). Therefore, h is a tangent
        halfspace to Z.
            Some examples of flats; a ball has a flat for each point on its boundary. A planar triangle
        has three flats, each corresponding to a side minus the corners (which are not smooth). A
        cylinder in 3-d has two 2-d flats, its top and bottom (minus the edges) and infinite 1-d flats
        which are segments from top to bottom (minus the endpoints). Finally, the positive quadrant
        in R2 has two flats, the rays (0, +∞) × {0} and {0} × (0, +∞).

        I Definition 15 (Non-redundant affine family). A family H of affine functions is non-redundant
        iff, for every h ∈ H, ΦH (h) 6= ∅.

        According to the above, a non-redundant affine family H contains only tangent halfspaces
        (represented as affine functions) of Z = L(inf H). However, not all tangents of Z need be
        contained in H. As an example, consider the planar unit disk Z = {x21 + x22 ≤ 1}; although
        there is a tangent at every point of the unit circle, only a countable family of tangent
        halfspaces (say, those whose slope is rational) is enough to define it!

        I Definition 16 (Witness). For admissible region A ⊆ V and an affine family H, so that
        L(inf H) ⊆ A, a point p ∈ bd A is a witness iff, for some h ∈ H, p ∈ ΦH (h).

        I Theorem 17 (Witnessed maximality criterion). For admissible region A ⊆ V and affine
        family H, so that Z = L(inf H) ⊆ A, if every flat of H contains a witness, then Z is maximal
        in A.

            Witnessed maximality is sufficient for maximality, but not necessary. As an example,
        consider the 2-d case where Z = {y ≤ 0} and A = {y ≤ 1/|x| ∨ x = 0}. Then, Z is maximal
        in A, but there is no witness to the unique tangent halfspace that is the whole of Z.
            The witnessed maximality criterion is handy, because it relates maximality of a set Z to
        a requirement on each flat of a description of Z. It is possible, but cumbersome, to extend
        the concept of a witness, so that a sufficient and necessary condition for maximality can be
        obtained. Because of space constraints, this extension will be presented in the full paper.
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                         14:11


4.1    Preservation Of Maximality Under Composition
In contrast to maximum distance, intersection does not preserve maximality in general.
This is quite well-known; in fact, loss of maximality under intersection is the reason for
the unsatisfactory behavior of previous safe zone design approaches, such as the Covering
Spheres method.
    Fortunately, under suitable conditions to be explored below, separable union does preserve
maximality; given maximal safe zones L(ζi ) ⊆ Ai , it is possible to select a maximal convex
           W                                   W
subset of L(ζi ) which is also maximal in Ai . However, as in the case for maximum
distance, the safe zone functions ζi must a special requirement, non-redundancy.

I Definition 18 (Non-redundant safe zone function). A safe zone function ζ is non-redundant
iff ζ is the pointwise infimum of a non-redundant affine family; else it is redundant.

    Intuitively, a non-redundant safe zone function ζ for Z = L(ζ) is one which is (pointwise)
maximal, among all safe zone functions g with L(g) = Z; that is, if L(f ) = L(g) and f < g
(that is, f ≤ g and at some x0 , f (x0 ) < g(x0 )), then f is redundant.
    An important observation pertains to eikonal non-redundant functions. Given any convex
set Z, the family F of eikonal functions f with L(f ) = Z is known to contain a ≤-wise
least element, the SDF of Z. It can be shown that it also contains a unique ≤-wise greatest
element ηZ , which is the (unique) non-redundant function in F. Importantly, when Z is
smooth (all points of its boundary are smooth), then ηZ = δZ .
    We now proceed to the main result of this section, which determines maximality of
safe zones for an admissible region composed as an intersection of unions. To describe the
intersection of unions, we use an antichain on [n] = {1, . . . , n}, i.e., a non-empty collection
C of subsets of [n], such that no element of C is a subset of another. A single separable
union is specified C = {[n]}. A (separable) intersection on the other hand is specified as
C = {1}, . . . , {n} .

I Theorem 19. Let ζi : Vi → R, i = 1, . . . , n be non-redundant safe zone functions, and C
                                        P
an antichain on [n]. Let ζ = inf Γ∈C i∈Γ ai (Γ)ζi , where ai (Γ) > 0. Then,
1. ζ is non-redundant, and
2. if, for Ai ⊆ Vi , each L(ζi ) is witnessed maximal in Ai , then L(ζ) is witnessed maximal in
         T     W
   A = Γ∈C i∈Γ Ai .


 5     Safe Zones For Boolean Functions
We now apply our method to the class of (separable) boolean query functions. Let
F : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} be any boolean function and let fi : Vi → {0, 1} be predicates
on Vi respectively. We are interested in a safe zone for admissible region A = {X ∈
V | F (f1 (X 1 ), . . . , fn (X n ))}, containing the reference point E = E 1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ E n , with
E ∈ int A.
    We assume that F is given to us as a conjunction of clauses, where each clause is a
disjunction of literals bi , bi , for i = 1, . . . , n. A clause Γ can be represented as a subset of
{1, . . . , n} × {+, −}, where pair (j, s) ∈ Γ means that the clause contains bj if s = +, or bj if
s = −.
                  (+)                         (−)              (+)
    Letting, Ai        = {fi (X i )} and Ai          = Vi − Ai , the admissible region A can be
                          T      W         (s)
decomposed as A = Γ∈F (i,s)∈Γ Ai . By the observations for maximum distance, we are
allowed to reduce F to a (stronger) boolean function F̃ . In particular, for each i = 1, . . . , n,
                                                                                   (−)
we eliminate at least one of the literals bi , bi from all clauses: if E i 6∈ int Ai , we eliminate



                                                                                                       ICDT 2017
14:12   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


                                           (+)
        literal bi , and if E i 6∈ int Ai we eliminate bi . This justified is because, by Thm. 11, a
        maximum-distance safe zone for each clause would eliminate the corresponding components.
        Once F̃ is obtained, it can be further reduced by expressing it as a conjunction of its prime
        implicates, so that no clause is weaker than another. This last step is needed in order to
        apply Thm. 19.
            Then, given safe zone functions ζi for the remaining admissible regions on Vi , the safe
        zone function
                                         P
                                          (i,s)∈Γ ζi (E i )ζi (X i )
            ζ(X 1 ⊕ . . . ⊕ X n ) = inf qP                                                         (6)
                                    Γ∈F̃                  2
                                                (i,s)∈Γ ζi (E i )


        defines a safe zone for A. Furthermore, if, for all i, ζi are eikonal and L(ζi ) are maximum
        distance, then L(ζ) is maximum distance and ζ is eikonal. With respect to maximality, by
        virtue of Thm. 19, if all ζi are non-redundant, and L(ζi ) are (witnessed) maximal in Ai , then
        L(ζ) is also (witnessed) maximal in A.

        5.1     Monitoring Quantiles
        Consider the query function Qk (g1 (X 1 ), . . . , gn (X n )), where Qk : Rn → R returns the k-th
        least value among its arguments. These queries arise in monitoring robust statistics of
        (functions of) the state, such as the median or the inter-quartile range.
            Condition Qk () ≤ T can be written as a boolean function Fk (f1 (X 1 ), . . . , fn (X n )), where
        fi (X i ) is the boolean value of “gi (X i ) ≤ T ” and Fk is true iff k or more of its inputs are
        true. With respect to Fk , the safe zone design of this section yields a safe zone function ζ,
        given safe zone functions ζi for each constraint gi (X i ) ≤ T .
            A practical point is related to the computational cost of checking membership in L(ζ),
        which, if done straightforwardly, requires time O(2n ). For counting queries, it is possible
        to test condition ζ(X) ≥ 0 in time O(n). To see this, note that the set of clauses of
        Fk (b1 , . . . , bn ) is the set of all n − k + 1-subsets of {b1 , . . . , bn } (since, if every n − k + 1-subset
        of literals contains a true literal, there are at most n − k false literals overall, and therefore
        at least k true literals). Therefore, to check ζ(X) ≥ 0, it is sufficient to compute the sum S
        of the least n − k + 1 elements of {ζi (E i )ζi (X i ) | i = 1, . . . , n}, as it is ζ(X) ≥ 0 iff S ≥ 0.

         6      Safe Zones For Separable Sums
                                                                        Pn
        Separable sum queries refer to conditions of the form i=1 fi (X i ) ≤ T , where fi are arbitrary
        real functions. As shown in Eq. 1, this condition can be written as a universal quantification
        (which relates to conjunction) of a family of finite disjunctions. Therefore, at least in principle,
        our composition operators can be used to derive a safe zone formula. In this section, we
        demonstrate that this approach can go well beyond the principle, into an analytic method of
        safe zone design.
            The approach is straightforward; as shown in Eq. 1, the separable sum threshold condition
                                     Wn
        is rewritten as ∀τ ∈ ΣnT , i=1 fi (X i ) ≤ τi . Let the reference point be E = E 1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ E n .
        The booleanized condition decomposes as the intersection of a family Aτ ⊆ V , for τ ∈ ΣnT ,
        of admissible regions, each corresponding to a disjunctive clause. In order to write a safe
        zone function for each clause, we need to have a parametrized family of safe zone functions
        for conditions fi (X i ) ≤ τi . Let ζi (X i ; τi ), i = 1, . . . , n denote such a parameterized family.
                                                                                Pn
        Then, a safe zone for Aτ can be given by function ζτ (X) = i=1 ai (τ )ζi (X i ; τi ), for suitably
        selected ai (τ ). Finally, the overall safe zone function is ζ(X) = inf τ ∈ΣnT ζτ (X).
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                               14:13

                                                                        Pn
   As a first example, we solve a trivial problem; the linear constraint i=1 wi xi = wx ≤ T .
                                    n
Booleanization gives ∀τ ∈ ΣnT : i=1 wi xi ≤ τi . Each constraint wi xi ≤ τi has a good safe
                                  W

zone described by the eikonal and non-redundant affine function ζi (xi ; τi ) = (τi − wi xi )/|wi |.
Therefore, we have an overall expression of
                                    n
                                    X               τi − wi xi
    ζ(x) = infn ζτ (x) = infn             ai (τ )              .
            τ ∈ΣT           τ ∈ΣT
                                    i=1
                                                       |wi |

Although any choice for ai (τ ) will yield a legal safe zone, to obtain a good solution, we need
to select ai (τ ) more carefully. But, notice that if we select ai (τ ) = |wi |/kwk, we obtain
            −wx
ζτ (x) = Tkwk    , which is independent of τ . Therefore, the inf operator becomes redundant.
It is easy to see that the solution obtained is best possible; it is less clear whether there is a
systematic strategy for selecting ai (τ ), for more complex problems. Below we introduce two
such systematic strategies.


6.1     Dominating Index
It turns out that the previous example exhibits a dominating index. Assume that every
ζi (xi ; τi ) is eikonal and maximum distance. Define function
            v
            u n
            uX                       2
    ∆(τ ) = t   max ζi (E i ; τi ), 0 = dist(E, Aτ )
                i=1


where the second equality is a consequence of Thm. 11. Assume that ∆ minimizes at a unique
index τ ∗ , where, naturally, ∆(τ ∗ ) is dist(E, A). We can select ai (τ ∗ ) as per Thm. 11, that
is, ai (τ ∗ ) = ζi (E i ; τi∗ )/∆(τ ∗ ), and obtain ζτ ∗ . Now, if it so happens that L(ζτ ∗ ) ⊆ A, then,
we say that τ ∗ is a dominating index: we can select ζ = ζτ ∗ , eliminating the inf operation.
The overall safe zone L(ζ) is obviously maximum distance. Also, if L(ζτ ∗ ) is maximal in
Aτ ∗ , L(ζ) (i.e., L(ζτ ∗ )) is maximal in A ⊆ Aτ .


6.2     Alignment
Independently of the existence of a dominating index, alignment is a simple strategy for
                                                          Pn
selecting weights ai (τ ), when the query F (X) = i=1 fi (X i ) is differentiable.
     Fix some clause τ . Assume that each ζi (X i ; τ ) is witnessed maximal; for simplicity,
assume that it is also eikonal. Now, consider a point X̆ = X̆ 1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ X̆ n , such that, for every
i, fi (X̆ i ) = τi and ζi (X̆ i ; τi ) = 0. That is, each X̆ i is a maximality witness for ζi (X i ; τi ).
By smoothness of fi , its gradient g i = ∇fi (X̆i ) will be parallel to the gradient ∇ζi (X̆ i ; τi )
at this witness point. Then, we can choose ai (τ ) so as to align (make parallel) the gradients
                                                                              Pn
of F and ζτ at X̆, which is achieved by ai (τ ) = kg i k. Note also that i=1 g 2i = k∇F (X̆)k2 ,
thus, a choice of ai = kg i k/k∇F (X̆)k yields normalized weights.
     This justifies the suitability of the choice ai = |wi |/kwk for every clause τ in the previous
example. Also, with respect to the previous section, it is easy to see that at the minimizer
τ ∗ of ∆(τ ), since X̆ is a nearest neighbor of E on the boundary of A, by smoothness of F ,
kg i k will be proportional to ζi (E i ; τi∗ ).
     Like dominating index, this method is limited to query functions that exhibit symmetry;
if there are several witness points X̆, each giving a different value for ai , then it is not clear
what is the best choice.



                                                                                                             ICDT 2017
14:14   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


                                          y                                     y

                                      (u∗ , v ∗ )

                                                                                            (kξk, kψk)
                                              (kξk, kψk) x                                          x




             Figure 3 Safe zones (grayed) for x2 − y 2 ≥ T , when T ≤ 0 (left) and T > 0 (right). The
        admissible regions are hatched. On the left, the safe zone is a single cone u∗ x − v ∗ |y| ≥ T , where
        (u∗ , v ∗ ) is the dominating index. On the right, the safe zone is defined by the intersection of all
        cones ux − v|y| ≥ T (three such cones are shown).


        6.3    Safe Zones For Inner Product
        We turn to the non-trivial problem of designing a good safe zone for the inner product of two
        vectors. Previous solutions [14, 23, 22] strove for the same qualities, but were suboptimal in
        terms of maximum distance [23] or maximality [14, 22].
             The problem is defined by condition XY ≥ t. Instead of decomposing this problem
        on a per-dimension
                        √      basis, we apply √ the polarization identity, by the change of variables
        x = (X + Y )/ 2, and y = (X − Y )/ 2. It is easy to see that x2 − y 2 = 2XY and that the
        change of variables is a rotation, that is, it preserves all distances. Therefore, we focus on the
        (slightly more general) problem of monitoring x2 − y 2 ≥ T , with x ∈ Rn and y ∈ Rm . We
        shall design a safe zone for this problem, for reference point E = ξ ⊕ ψ, where ξ 2 − ψ 2 > T .
             First note that, when ξ is 0 (which implies that T < 0), the constraint kyk ≤ −T defines
        a good (maximum-distance and maximal) safe zone for the original problem. Therefore, we
        assume kξk 6= 0 and we denote ξ̂ = ξ/kξk.
             We treat this problem as a separable sum of two functions, f1 (x) = x2 and f2 (y) = −y 2 ,
        of which f1 is convex and f2 is concave (thus, −f 2 is convex). The condition f1 + f2 ≥ T
        can be booleanized as

            ∀u, v ≥ 0 : u2 − v 2 = T :          x2 ≥ u2 ∨ y 2 ≤ v 2 ,

        where we have applied a convenient change of variables to the index tuple (τ1 , τ2 ) = (u2 , −v 2 ).
            The problem x2 ≥ u2 is solved optimally by the affine eikonal function ζ1 (x; u) = xξ̂ − u.
        Similarly, the problem y 2 ≤ v 2 is solved optimally by the eikonal, non-redundant solution
        ζ2 (y; v) = v − kyk. Putting everything together, we obtain formula

         ζ(x ⊕ y) =      inf       ζu,v (x ⊕ y)      where    ζu,v (x ⊕ y) = α(u, v)(xξ̂−u)+β(u, v)(v−kyk).
                      u2 −v 2 =T

            By alignment, we select (unnormalized) α(u, v) = u and β(u, v) = v, and get

            ζu,v (x ⊕ y) = uxξ̂ − vkyk − T.

        which is tangent to the boundary of the admissible region at every point uξ̂ ⊕ v ŷ, where
        kŷk = 1.
            Instead of continuing the treatment of the problem directly, we will examine the case
        n = m = 1; that is, the equivalent planar problem with reference point e = (kξk, kψk). This
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                        14:15


problem (and its solution) is depicted in Fig. 3. In fact, treating the 2-d problem is equivalent
to treating the problem in any dimension, by the change of variables x = xξ̂ and y = kyk.

Case T ≤ 0. When T ≤ 0, the problem admits a dominating index, (u∗ , v ∗ ), which is found
   by minimizing ∆(u, v) over the index set.
Case T > 0. In this case there ispno dominating index. The safe zone is the right lobe of the
   hyperbola, that is Z = {x ≥ y 2 + T }. This set is smooth everywhere on its boundary,
   therefore its SDF δZ (x, y) is non-redundant.
     Overall, we have the following:
I Theorem 20. Given constraint x2 − y 2 ≥ T and reference point ξ ⊕ ψ in any dimension,
a good safe zone is given by ζ(x ⊕ y) = ζ2 (xξ̂, kyk), where ζ2 is the safe zone for the planar
constraint x2 − y 2 ≥ T with reference point   √ (kξk, kψk). More precisely,
1. if T ≤ 0, ζ2 (x, y) = (u∗ x − v ∗ |y| − T )/ u∗2 + v ∗2p, and
2. if T > 0, ζ2 (x, y) is the SDF of convex set {x ≥ y 2 + T }.
Both ζ and ζ2 are eikonal and non-redundant, and define maximum-distance and witnessed
maximal safe zones.

Computation cost for monitoring the inner product. Computing the safe zone function
for l-dimensional vectors, takes time O(l), in order to compute xξ̂ and kyk. Then, computing
the actual value can be done in time O(1). When the vectors between successive computations
of the safe zone function change in only O(1) coordinates (which is quite standard in stream
monitoring, when a stream update changes O(1) locations of the state vector), it is possible
simply update cached previous values of xξ̂ and kyk and reduce the cost to O(1).

Safe zones for AGMS sketches. As discussed, monitoring the inner product of two streams
by AGMS sketches, involves monitoring√ the median of d inner products, of dimension
                                                                             d
                                                                                      l each.
The result’s accuracy is within O(1/ l), with probability at least 1 − O(1/2 ). For practical
purposes, d will be of the order of 10, but l of the order of 1000.
    Combining our safe zones for inner product with the safe zone for the median, we obtain
the first provably good safe zone for AGMS sketches. The computational cost of testing
membership in the safe zone is important, as it is likely to be performed for every stream
update. Using the FastAGMS sketch of [10], each stream update changes only 1 counter in
each of the d vectors of a sketch. Therefore, the change to each monitored inner product can
be computed in O(1) time. The median’s safe zone requires O(d) time for testing membership.
In conclusion, our safe zones can be used for membership testing with only O(d) cost per
update.

 7      Related Work
The problem of tracking distributed streams through in situ constraints has attracted
significant attention in recent years. Still, most existing work has focused on purpose-
built solutions for specific query classes; these include, for instance, the simpler cases of
thresholding linear functions [19, 18, 24]. top-k monitoring [4, 25], ratio threshold queries [16],
and tracking polynomials of simple scalar variables [30]. All these techniques typically rely
on some form of locally-installed “adaptive filters” – that is, bounds around the value of
distributed variables that can grow or shrink over time (e.g., based on variability), while
guaranteeing a global bound on the overall uncertainty. Similar local filtering ideas are also
employed by Huang et al. [17] to monitor the eigenvalues of a network traffic matrix through



                                                                                                      ICDT 2017
14:16   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


        perturbation analysis, and by Wolf et al. [33] to threshold the norm of the average vector in
        a distributed system. Cormode and Garofalakis [7, 8] introduce the use of sketch synopses [9]
        for effectively summarizing local data streams, and propose sketch-based schemes for the
        communication-efficient, approximate monitoring of join aggregates over distributed streams.
        Finally, Cormode et al. [11] give a theoretical study of the distributed function monitoring
        problem focusing, in particular, on providing communication lower bounds for the case of
        various Lp -norm functions, assuming a “cash-register” (i.e., insert only) streaming model.
        Lower bounds for distributed norm monitoring are also given by Arackaparambil et al. [3],
        who demonstrate that, for general “turnstile” streams (i.e., allowing both inserts and deletes),
        the worst-case communication lower bounds are linear in the size of the stream. 1
             The Geometric Method of Sharfman et al. [31, 32] introduced the first generic approach for
        efficiently thresholding a general function/query over distributed data. Their solution relies on
        a function-agnostic, geometric “covering spheres” technique for breaking the global condition
        into safe local constraints. Extensions of the basic method as well as the more general notion of
        convex Safe Zones (SZs) are discussed in a later paper [21], and a broad range of applications
        have been explored, including distributed outlier detection [6], prediction-based distributed
        stream monitoring [15], sketch-based monitoring of norms and range aggregates [13], and
        distributed skyline tracking [27].
             As demonstrated in our recent work [23], the safe zones (implicitly) defined by the
        “covering spheres” method are often far from optimal, and geometric convexity arguments
        (based on decomposing the problem into convex pieces) can give provably better results in
        certain important cases. Still, the methodology and results in [23] are heuristic, refer to
        specific classes of monitoring functions, and do not offer any hard quality guarantees for
        the resulting safe zones; furthermore, they do not consider the important problem of safe
        zone composition. Instead, our work is based on a novel functional representation of safe
        zones which allows us to effectively deal with general Boolean safe zone composition with
        provable quality guarantees. Our Boolean formalism is, in fact, much more powerful, and can
        easily express the methodology of [23] as a special case. The very recent work of Lazerson et
        al. [22] proposes another broad method based on defining “convex bounds” for the monitored
        function F () using functional approximation techniques (assuming F () is differentiable).
        However, no optimality properties are formally shown for the resulting SZs, and the problem
        of effective SZ composition is not addressed. The worst-case communication complexity of
        geometric techniques for distributed monitoring has not been studied, but empirical studies
        demonstrate significant communication gains in real problems and query workloads.


            8    Conclusions
        In this paper, we have presented the first formal framework for the compositional design
        of convex Safe Zones (SZs), for problems with separable constraints. To this end, we have
        introduced a functional safe zone representation that conserves, under Boolean composition,
        the quality guarantees of their component constraints. We have also applied our new
        framework to general function monitoring scenarios of practical interest.
            Important problems remain open for future research, mainly relating the quality of safe
        zones to actual guarantees on the communication cost of monitoring, and extending our
        compositional approach beyond boolean, to other types of composite queries.


        1
             The problem of communication lower bounds for general functions under the cash-register model
            remains open.
M. Garofalakis and V. Samoladas                                                                   14:17


     References
 1   Noga Alon, Phillip B. Gibbons, Yossi Matias, and Mario Szegedy. “Tracking Join and
     Self-Join Sizes in Limited Storage”. In Proc. of the 18th ACM Symposium on Principles of
     Database Systems, Philadeplphia, Pennsylvania, May 1999.
 2   Noga Alon, Yossi Matias, and Mario Szegedy. “The Space Complexity of Approximating
     the Frequency Moments”. In Proc. of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of
     Computing, pages 20–29, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, May 1996.
 3   Chrisil Arackaparambil, Joshua Brody, and Amit Chakrabarti. Functional monitoring
     without monotonicity. In ICALP (1), 2009. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-02927-1_10.
 4   B. Babcock and C. Olston. Distributed top-k monitoring. In SIGMOD’03: Proceedings of
     the 2003 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, New York, NY,
     USA, 2003. ACM. doi:10.1145/872757.872764.
 5   Sabbas Burdakis and Antonios Deligiannakis. “Detecting Outliers in Sensor Networks Using
     the Geometric Approach”. In Proc. of the 28th Intl. Conference on Data Engineering, April
     2012.
 6   Sabbas Burdakis and Antonios Deligiannakis. Detecting outliers in sensor networks using
     the geometric approach. In ICDE, 2012. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2012.85.
 7   Graham Cormode and Minos Garofalakis. “Sketching Streams Through the Net: Distrib-
     uted Approximate Query Tracking”. In Proc. of the 31st Intl. Conference on Very Large
     Data Bases, Trondheim, Norway, September 2005.
 8   Graham Cormode and Minos Garofalakis. “Approximate Continuous Querying over Dis-
     tributed Streams”. ACM Transactions on Database Systems, 33(2), June 2008.
 9   Graham Cormode, Minos Garofalakis, Peter J. Haas, and Chris Jermaine. “Synopses for
     Massive Data: Samples, Histograms, Wavelets, Sketches”. Foundations and Trends in
     Databases, 4(1-3), 2012.
10   Graham Cormode and Minos N. Garofalakis. Sketching streams through the net: Distrib-
     uted approximate query tracking. In VLDB, 2005.
11   Graham Cormode, S. Muthukrishnan, and Ke Yi. Algorithms for distributed functional
     monitoring. In SODA, 2008. doi:10.1145/1347082.1347200.
12   Minos Garofalakis, Johannes Gehrke, and Rajeev Rastogi. “Data-Stream Management –
     Processing High-Speed Data Streams”. Springer-Verlag New York (Data-Centric Systems
     and Applications Series), 2016.
13   Minos Garofalakis, Daniel Keren, and Vasilis Samoladas. “Sketch-based Geometric Monit-
     oring of Distributed Stream Queries”. In Proc. of the 39th Intl. Conference on Very Large
     Data Bases, Trento, Italy, August 2013.
14   Minos N. Garofalakis, Daniel Keren, and Vasilis Samoladas. Sketch-based geometric mon-
     itoring of distributed stream queries. PVLDB, 2013.
15   Nikos Giatrakos, Antonios Deligiannakis, Minos Garofalakis, Izchak Sharfman, and Assaf
     Schuster. “Prediction-based Geometric Monitoring of Distributed Data Streams”. In Proc.
     of the 2012 ACM SIGMOD Intl. Conference on Management of Data, Scottsdale, Arizona,
     May 2012.
16   Rajeev Gupta, Krithi Ramamritham, and Mukesh K. Mohania. “Ratio threshold queries
     over distributed data sources”. In Proc. of the 39th Intl. Conference on Very Large Data
     Bases, Trento, Italy, August 2013.
17   Ling Huang, XuanLong Nguyen, Minos N. Garofalakis, Joseph M. Hellerstein, Michael I.
     Jordan, Anthony D. Joseph, and Nina Taft. Communication-efficient online detection of
     network-wide anomalies. In INFOCOM, 2007. doi:10.1109/INFCOM.2007.24.
18   Srinivas R. Kashyap, Jeyashankher Ramamirtham, Rajeev Rastogi, and Pushpraj Shukla.
     Efficient constraint monitoring using adaptive thresholds. In ICDE, pages 526–535, 2008.
     doi:10.1109/ICDE.2008.4497461.




                                                                                                 ICDT 2017
14:18   Distributed Query Monitoring through Convex Analysis


        19   Ram Keralapura, Graham Cormode, and Jeyashankher Ramamirtham. Communication-
             efficient distributed monitoring of thresholded counts. In SIGMOD, 2006. doi:10.1145/
             1142473.1142507.
        20   Daniel Keren, Guy Sagy, Amir Abboud, David Ben-David, Assaf Schuster, Izchak Shar-
             fman, and Antonios Deligiannakis. “Geometric Monitoring of Heterogeneous Streams”.
             IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 26(8), August 2014.
        21   Daniel Keren, Izchak Sharfman, Assaf Schuster, and Avishay Livne. Shape sensitive geomet-
             ric monitoring. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 24(8), 2012. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2011.102.
        22   Arnon Lazerson, Daniel Keren, and Assaf Schuster. Lightweight monitoring of distributed
             streams. In Proc. of the 22Nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
             Discovery and Data Mining, KDD’16, pages 1685–1694, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.
             doi:10.1145/2939672.2939820.
        23   Arnon Lazerson, Izchak Sharfman, Daniel Keren, Assaf Schuster, Minos Garofalakis, and
             Vasilis Samoladas. “Monitoring Distributed Streams using Convex Decompositions”. In
             Proc. of the 41st Intl. Conference on Very Large Data Bases, August 2015.
        24   Shicong Meng, Ting Wang, and Ling Liu. Monitoring continuous state violation in data-
             centers: Exploring the time dimension. In ICDE, pages 968–979, 2010. doi:10.1109/ICDE.
             2010.5447923.
        25   Sebastian Michel, Peter Triantafillou, and Gerhard Weikum. Klee: a framework for distrib-
             uted top-k query algorithms. In VLDB’05. VLDB Endowment, 2005.
        26   S. Muthukrishnan. “Data Streams: Algorithms and Applications”. Foundations and Trends
             in Theoretical Computer Science, 1(2), 2005.
        27   Odysseas Papapetrou and Minos Garofalakis. “Continuous Fragmented Skylines over Dis-
             tributed Streams”. In Proc. of the 30th Intl. Conference on Data Engineering, Chicago,
             Illinois, April 2014.
        28   R. T. Rockafellar. Convex Analysis. Princeton University Press, 1970.
        29   G. Sagy, D. Keren, I. Sharfman, and A. Schuster. “Distributed Threshold Querying of
             General Functions by a Difference of Monotonic Representation”. In Proc. of the 36th Intl.
             Conference on Very Large Data Bases, August 2010.
        30   Shetal Shah and Krithi Ramamritham. Handling non-linear polynomial queries over dy-
             namic data. In ICDE, 2008. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2008.4497513.
        31   Izchak Sharfman, Assaf Schuster, and Daniel Keren. “A geometric approach to monitoring
             threshold functions over distributed data streams”. In SIGMOD, 2006. doi:10.1145/
             1142473.1142508.
        32   Izchak Sharfman, Assaf Schuster, and Daniel Keren. “A geometric approach to monitoring
             threshold functions over distributed data streams”. ACM Trans. Database Syst., 32(4),
             2007. doi:10.1145/1292609.1292613.
        33   Ran Wolff, Kanishka Bhaduri, and Hillol Kargupta. A generic local algorithm for mining
             data streams in large distributed systems. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and Data Eng., 21(4),
             2009. doi:10.1109/TKDE.2008.169.
