Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms,
Circuit Lower Bounds, and Pseudorandomness∗
Igor C. Oliveira1 and Rahul Santhanam2

1      Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University in Prague, Prague,
       Czech Republic
       igor.oliveira@karlin.mff.cuni.cz
2      Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
       rahul.santhanam@cs.ox.ac.uk



        Abstract
We prove several results giving new and stronger connections between learning theory, circuit
complexity and pseudorandomness. Let C be any typical class of Boolean circuits, and C[s(n)]
denote n-variable C-circuits of size ≤ s(n). We show:

Learning Speedups. If C[poly(n)] admits a randomized weak learning algorithm under the
uniform distribution with membership queries that runs in time 2n /nω(1) , then for every k ≥ 1
                                                                          ε
and ε > 0 the class C[nk ] can be learned to high accuracy in time O(2n ). There is ε > 0 such that
   nε                            n   ω(1)                                                          O(1)
C[2 ] can be learned in time 2 /n         if and only if C[poly(n)] can be learned in time 2(log n)     .
Equivalences between Learning Models. We use learning speedups to obtain equivalences
between various randomized learning and compression models, including sub-exponential time
learning with membership queries, sub-exponential time learning with membership and equival-
ence queries, probabilistic function compression and probabilistic average-case function compres-
sion.
A Dichotomy between Learnability and Pseudorandomness. In the non-uniform setting,
there is non-trivial learning for C[poly(n)] if and only if there are no exponentially secure pseu-
dorandom functions computable in C[poly(n)].
Lower Bounds from Nontrivial Learning. If for each k ≥ 1, (depth-d)-C[nk ] admits a ran-
domized weak learning algorithm with membership queries under the uniform distribution that
runs in time 2n /nω(1) , then for each k ≥ 1, BPE * (depth-d)-C[nk ]. If for some ε > 0 there are
                                      ε
P-natural proofs useful against C[2n ], then ZPEXP * C[poly(n)].
Karp-Lipton Theorems for Probabilistic Classes. If there is a k > 0 such that BPE ⊆
i.o.Circuit[nk ], then BPEXP ⊆ i.o.EXP/O(log n). If ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ], then ZPEXP ⊆
i.o.ESUBEXP.
Hardness Results for MCSP. All functions in non-uniform NC1 reduce to the Minimum
Circuit Size Problem via truth-table reductions computable by TC0 circuits. In particular, if
MCSP ∈ TC0 then NC1 = TC0 .

1998 ACM Subject Classification F. Theory of Computation

Keywords and phrases Boolean circuits, learning theory, pseudorandomness

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2017.18


∗
    The first author received support from CNPq grant 200252/2015-1. The second author was supported by
    the European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
    2013)/ERC Grant No. 615075. Part of this work was done during a visit of the first author to Oxford
    supported by the second author’s ERC grant.
           © Igor C. Oliveira and Rahul Santhanam;
           licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
32nd Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2017).
Editor: Ryan O’Donnell; Article No. 18; pp. 18:1–18:49
                  Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                  Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
18:2   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        1     Introduction

       Which classes of functions can be efficiently learned? Answering this question has been a
       major research direction in computational learning theory since the seminal work of Valiant
       [68] formalizing efficient learnability.
           For concreteness, consider the model of learning with membership queries under the
       uniform distribution. In this model, the learner is given oracle access to a target Boolean
       function and aims to produce, with high probability, a hypothesis that approximates the
       target function well on the uniform distribution. Say that a circuit class C is learnable in
       time T if there is a learner running in time T such that for each function f ∈ C, when given
       oracle access to f the learner outputs the description of a Boolean function h approximating
       f well under the uniform distribution. The hypothesis h is not required to be from the same
       class C of functions. (This and other learning models that appear in our work are defined in
       Section 2.)
           Various positive and conditional negative results are known for natural circuit classes
       in this model, and here we highlight only a few. Polynomial-time algorithms are known
       for polynomial-size DNF formulas [34]. Quasi-polynomial time algorithms are known for
       polynomial-size constant-depth circuits with AND, OR and NOT gates [46] (i.e., AC0
       circuits), and in a recent breakthrough [19], for polynomial-size constant-depth circuits
       which in addition contain MOD[p] gates, where p is a fixed prime (AC0 [p] circuits). In
       terms of hardness, it is known that under certain cryptographic assumptions, the class of
       polynomial-size constant-depth circuits with threshold gates (TC0 circuits) is not learnable
       in sub-exponential time [50]. (We refer to Section 2 for a review of the inclusions between
       standard circuit classes.)
           However, even under strong hardness assumptions, it is still unclear how powerful a circuit
       class needs to be before learning becomes utterly infeasible. For instance, whether non-trivial
       learning algorithms exist for classes beyond AC0 [p] remains a major open problem.
           Inspired by [19], we show that a general and surprising speedup phenomenon holds
       unconditionally for learnability of strong enough circuit classes around the border of currently
       known learning algorithms. Say that a class is non-trivially learnable if it is learnable in time
       ≤ 2n /nw(1) , where n is the number of inputs to a circuit in the class, and furthermore the
       learner is only required to output a hypothesis that is an approximation for the unknown
       function with inverse polynomial advantage. We show that for “typical” circuit classes such as
       constant-depth circuits with Mod[m] gates where m is an arbitrary but fixed composite (ACC0
       circuits), constant-depth threshold circuits, formulas and general Boolean circuits, non-trivial
                                                                           o(1)
       learnability in fact implies high-accuracy learnability in time 2n , i.e., in sub-exponential
       time.

       I Lemma 1 (Speedup Lemma, Informal Version). Let C be a typical circuit class. Polynomial-
       size circuits from C are non-trivially learnable if and only if polynomial-size circuits from
       C are (strongly) learnable in sub-exponential time. Subexponential-size circuits from C are
       non-trivially learnable if and only if polynomial-size circuits from C are (strongly) learnable
       in quasi-polynomial time.

           Note that the class of all Boolean functions is learnable in time ≤ 2n /nΩ(1) with ≥ 1/n
       advantage simply by querying the function oracle on 2n /nO(1) inputs, and outputting the
       best constant in {0, 1} for the remaining (unqueried) positions of the truth-table. Our notion
       of non-trivial learning corresponds to merely beating this trivial brute-force algorithm – this
       is sufficient to obtain much more dramatic speedups for learnability of typical circuit classes.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                                  18:3


                                  Satisfiability Algorithms vs. Learning Algorithms

                                                         (Running Time)
    Exponential Time Regime




                                 “Nontrivial”   2n /nω(1)

                               SETH is false    2cn , c < 1                                  Equivalent
                                                                                        [Speedup Phenomenon]
                               ETH is false     2o(n)
                                                     ε
                              NP ⊆ SUBEXP       2n




                                  P = NP        poly(n)


                                Complexity of CNF-SAT               Complexity of Learning C[poly]


    Figure 1 A speedup phenomenon in computational learning theory for typical circuit classes
for learning under the uniform distribution with membership queries. The speedup procedure
simultaneously boosts accuracy and running time.




     In order to provide more intuition for this result, we compare the learning scenario to
another widely investigated algorithmic framework. Consider the problem of checking if
a circuit from a fixed circuit class is satisfiable, a natural generalization of the CNF-SAT
problem. Recall that ACC0 circuits are circuits of constant depth with AND, OR, NOT, and
modulo gates. There are non-trivial satisfiability algorithms for ACC0 circuits of size up to
   ε
2n , where ε > 0 depends on the depth and modulo gates [73]. On the other hand, if such
circuits admitted a non-trivial learning algorithm, it follows from the Speedup Lemma that
polynomial size ACC0 circuits can be learned in quasi-polynomial time (see Figure 1).

    The Speedup Lemma suggests new approaches both to designing learning algorithms and
to proving hardness of learning results. To design a quasi-polynomial time learning algorithm
for polynomial-size circuits from a typical circuit class, it suffices to obtain a minimal
improvement over the trivial brute-force algorithm for sub-exponential size circuits from the
same class. Conversely, to conclude that the brute-force learning algorithm is essentially
optimal for a typical class of polynomial-size circuits, it suffices to use an assumption under
which subexponential-time learning is impossible.

    We use the Speedup Lemma to show various structural results about learning. These
include equivalences between several previously defined learning models, a dichotomy between
sub-exponential time learnability and the existence of pseudo-random function generators in
the non-uniform setting, and implications from non-trivial learning to circuit lower bounds.

    The techniques we explore have other consequences for complexity theory, such as Karp-
Lipton style results for bounded-error exponential time, and results showing hardness of the
Minimum Circuit Size Problem for a standard complexity class. In general, our results both
exploit and strengthen the rich web of connections between learning, pseudo-randomness
and circuit lower bounds, which promises to have further implications for our understanding
of these fundamental notions. We now describe these contributions in more detail.



                                                                                                               CCC 2017
18:4   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


       1.1      Summary of Results
       We state below informal versions of our main results. We put these results in perspective
       and compare them to previous work in Section 1.2.

       Equivalences for Learning Models. The Speedup Lemma shows that learnability of poly-
       nomial size circuits for typical circuit classes is not sensitive to the distinction between
       randomized sub-exponential time algorithms and randomized non-trivial algorithms. We use
       the Speedup Lemma to further show that for such classes, learnability for a range of previ-
       ously defined learning models is equivalent. These include the worst-case and average-case
       versions of function compression as defined by Chen et al. [20] (see also [64]), and randomized
       learning with membership and equivalence queries [10].1 The equivalence between function
       compression and learning in particular implies that accessing the entire truth table of a
       function represented by the circuit from the class confers no advantage in principle over
       having limited access to the truth table.

       I Theorem 2 (Equivalences for Learning Models, Informal Version). The following are equivalent
       for polynomial-size circuits from a typical circuit class C:
       (1) Sub-exponential time learning with membership queries.
       (2) Sub-exponential time learning with membership and equivalence queries.
       (3) Probabilistic function compression.
       (4) Average-case probabilistic function compression.
       (5) Exponential time distinguishability from random functions.

           In particular, in the randomized sub-exponential time regime and when restricted to
       learning under the uniform distribution, Valiant’s model [68] and Angluin’s model [10] are
       equivalent in power with respect to the learnability of typical classes of polynomial size
       circuits.

       A Dichotomy between Learning and Pseudorandomness. It is well-known that if the
       class of polynomial-size circuits from a class C is learnable, then there are no pseudo-random
       function generators computable in C, as the learner can be used to distinguish random
       functions from pseudo-random ones [42]. A natural question is whether the converse is true:
       can we in general build pseudo-random functions in the class from non-learnability of the
       class? We are able to use the Speedup Lemma in combination with other techniques to show
       such a result in the non-uniform setting, where the pseudo-random function generator as
       well as the learning algorithm are non-uniform. As a consequence, for each typical circuit
       class C, there is a dichotomy between pseudorandomness and learnability – either there are
       pseudo-random function generators computable in the class, or the class is learnable, but not
       both.

       I Theorem 3 (Dichotomy between Learning and Pseudorandomness, Informal Version). Let C
       be a typical circuit class. There are no pseudo-random function generators computable by
       polynomial-size circuits from C that are secure against sub-exponential size Boolean circuits
       if and only if polynomial-size circuits from C are learnable non-uniformly in sub-exponential
       time.


       1
           Our notion of randomized learning with membership and equivalence queries allows the learner’s
           hypothesis to be incorrect on a polynomially small fraction of the inputs.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      18:5


Nontrivial Learning implies Circuit Lower Bounds. In the algorithmic approach of Williams
[70], non-uniform circuit lower bounds against a class C of circuits are shown by designing
algorithms for satisfiability of C-circuits that beat the trivial brute-force search algorithm.
Williams’ approach has already yielded the result that NEXP 6⊆ ACC0 [73].
    It is natural to wonder if an analogue of the algorithmic approach holds for learning, and
if so, what kinds of lower bounds would follow using such an analogue. We establish such a
result – non-trivial learning algorithms yield lower bounds for bounded-error probabilistic
exponential time, just as non-trivial satisfiability algorithms yield lower bounds for non-
deterministic exponential time. Our connection between learning and lower bounds has
a couple of nice features. Our notion of “non-trivial algorithm” can be made even more
fine-grained than that of Williams – it is not hard to adapt our techniques to show that it is
enough to beat the brute-force algorithm by a super-constant factor for learning algorithms
with constant accuracy, as opposed to a polynomial factor in the case of Satisfiability.
Moreover, non-trivial learning for bounded-depth circuits yields lower bounds against circuits
with the same depth, as opposed to the connection for Satisfiability where there is an additive
loss in depth [54, 35].

I Theorem 4 (Circuit Lower Bounds from Learning and from Natural Proofs, Informal Version).
Let C be any circuit class closed under projections.
  (i) If polynomial-size circuits from C are non-trivially learnable, then (two-sided) bounded-
      error probabilistic exponential time does not have polynomial-size circuits from C.
 (ii) If sub-exponential size circuits from C = ACC0 are non-trivially learnable, then one-sided
      error probabilistic exponential time does not have polynomial-size circuits from ACC0 .
(iii) If there are natural proofs useful against sub-exponential size circuits from C, then
      zero-error probabilistic exponential time does not have polynomial-size circuits from C.

    Observe that the existence of natural proofs against sub-exponential size circuits yields
stronger lower bounds than learning and satisfiability algorithms. (We refer to Section 2 for
a review of the inclusions between exponential time classes.)

Karp-Lipton Theorems for Probabilistic Exponential Time. Our main results are about
learning, but the techniques have consequences for complexity theory. Specifically, our use
of pseudo-random generators has implications for the question of Karp-Lipton theorems
for probabilistic exponential time. A Karp-Lipton theorem for a complexity class gives a
connection between uniformity and non-uniformity, by showing that a non-uniform inclusion
of the complexity class also yields a uniform inclusion. Such theorems were known for a
range of classes such as NP, PSPACE, EXP, and NEXP [39, 12, 30], but not for bounded-error
probabilistic exponential time. We show the first such theorem for bounded-error probabilistic
exponential time. A technical caveat is that the inclusion in our consequent is not completely
uniform, but requires a logarithmic amount of advice.

I Theorem 5 (Karp-Lipton Theorem for Probabilistic Exponential Time, Informal Version). If
bounded-error probabilistic exponential time has polynomial-size circuits infinitely often, then
bounded-error probabilistic exponential time is infinitely often in deterministic exponential
time with logarithmic advice.

Hardness of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem. Our techniques also have consequences
for the complexity of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem (MCSP). In MCSP, the input is
the truth table of a Boolean function together with a parameter s in unary, and the question



                                                                                                   CCC 2017
18:6   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


       is whether the function has Boolean circuits of size at most s. MCSP is a rare example
       of a problem in NP which is neither known to be in P or NP-complete. In fact, we don’t
       know much unconditionally about the complexity of this problem. We know that certain
       natural kinds of reductions cannot establish NP-completeness [49], but until our work, it
       was unknown whether MCSP is hard for any standard complexity class beyond AC0 [3]. We
       show the first result of this kind.

       I Theorem 6 (Hardness of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem, Informal Version). The Min-
       imum Circuit Size Problem is hard for polynomial-size formulas under truth-table reductions
       computable by polynomial-size constant-depth threshold circuits.

       I Remark. This work contains several related technical contributions to the research topics
       mentioned above. We refer to the appropriate sections for more details. Finally, in Section 8
       we highlight some open problems and directions that we find particularly attractive.

       1.2    Related Work
       Speedups in Complexity Theory. We are not aware of any unconditional speedup result of
       this form involving the time complexity of a natural class of computational problems, under
       a general computational model. In any case, it is instructive to compare Lemma 1 to a few
       other speedup theorems in computational complexity.
           A classic example is Blum’s Speedup Theorem [15]. It implies that there is a recursive
       function f : N → N such that if an algorithm computes this function in time T (n), then there
       is an algorithm computing f in time O(log T (n)). Lemma 1 differs in an important way.
       It refers to a natural computational task, while the function provided by Blum’s Theorem
       relies on an artificial construction. Another well-known speedup result is the Linear Speedup
       Theorem (cf. [55, Section 2.4]). Roughly, it states that if a Turing Machine computes in time
       T (n), then there is an equivalent Turing Machine that computes in time T (n)/c. The proof
       of this theorem is based on the simple trick of increasing the alphabet size of the machine. It
       is therefore dependent on the computational model, while Lemma 1 is not.
           Perhaps closer to our result are certain conditional derandomization theorems in com-
       plexity theory. We mention for concreteness two of them. In [30], it is proved that if
                                                  ε
       MA = 6 NEXP, then MA ⊆ i.o.NTIME[2n ]/nε , while in [33], it is shown that if BPP =     6 EXP,
                                            ε
       then BPP ⊆ i.o.pseudo-DTIME[2n ]. It is possible to interpret these results as computational
       speedups, but observe that the faster algorithms have either weaker correctness guarantees,
       or require advice. Lemma 1 on the other hand transforms a non-trivial learning algorithm
       into a sub-exponential time learning algorithm of the same type.
           Further results have been discovered in more restricted computational models. For
       instance, in the OPP model, [56] proved that if Circuit-SAT has algorithms running in time
       2(1−δ)n , then it also has OPP algorithms running in time 2εn . In bounded-depth circuit
       complexity, [8] established among other results that if the Formula Evaluation Problem has
       uniform TC0 -circuits of size O(nk ), then it also has uniform TC0 -circuits of size O(n1+ε ).
           If one considers other notions of complexity, we can add to this list several results that
       provide different, and often rather unexpected, forms of speedup. We mention, for instance,
       depth reduction in arithmetic circuit complexity (see e.g. [1]), reducing the number of rounds
       in interactive proofs [13], decreasing the randomness complexity of bounded-space algorithms
       [52], cryptography in constant locality [11], among many others.

       Connections between Pseudorandomness, Learning and Cryptography. There are well-
       known connections between learning theory, theoretical cryptography and pseudorandomness
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                               18:7


(see e.g. [23]). Indeed, pseudorandom distributions lie at the heart of the definition of semantic
security [25, 26], which permeates modern cryptography, and to every secure encryption
scheme there is a naturally associated hard-to-learn (decryption) problem.
    The other direction, i.e., that from a generic hard learning problem it is always possible
to construct secure cryptographic schemes and other basic primitives, is much less clear.2
Following a research line initiated in [31], results more directly related to our work were
established in [14]. They proved in particular that private-key encryption and pseudorandom
generators exist under a stronger average-case hardness-of-learning assumption, where one
also considers the existence of a hard distribution over the functions in the circuit class C.
    However, these results and subsequent work leave open the question of whether hardness
of learning in the usual case, i.e., the mere assumption that any efficient learner fails on some
f ∈ C, implies the existence of pseudorandom functions computable by C-circuits. While
there is an extensive literature basing standard cryptographic primitives on a variety of
conjecturally hard learning tasks (see e.g., [60] and references therein for such a line of work),
to our knowledge Theorem 3 is the first result to establish a general equivalence between the
existence of pseudorandom functions and the hardness of learning, which holds for any typical
circuit class. A caveat is that our construction requires non-uniformity, and is established
only in the exponential security regime.


Lower Bounds from Learning Algorithms. While several techniques from circuit complexity
have found applications in learning theory in the past (see e.g., [46]), Fortnow and Klivans
[21] were the first to systematically investigate the connection between learning algorithms
and lower bounds in a generic setting.3
    For deterministic learning algorithms using membership and equivalence queries, initial
results from [21] and [27] were strengthened and simplified in [44], where it was shown that
non-trivial deterministic learning algorithms for C imply that EXP * C.
    The situation for randomized algorithms using membership queries is quite different, and
only the following comparably weaker results were known. First, [21] proved that randomized
polynomial time algorithms imply BPEXP lower bounds. This result was refined in [44],
where a certain connection involving sub-exponential time randomized learning algorithms
and PSPACE was observed. More recently, [69] combined ideas from [44] and [61] to prove
that efficient randomized learning algorithms imply lower bounds for BPP/1, i.e., probabilistic
polynomial time with advice. However, in contrast to the deterministic case, obtaining lower
bounds from weaker running time assumptions had been elusive.
    Indeed, we are not aware of any connection between two-sided non-trivial randomized
algorithms and circuit lower bounds, even when considering different algorithmic frameworks
in addition to learning. In particular, Theorem 4 (i) seems to be the first result in this
direction. It can be seen as an analogue of the connection between satisfiability algorithms
and lower bounds established by Williams [70, 73]. But apart from this analogy, the proof of
Theorem 4 employs significantly different techniques.


2
  Recall that secure private-key encryption is equivalent to the existence of one-way functions, pseu-
  dorandom generators and pseudorandom functions, with respect to polynomial time computations
  (cf. [40]). Nevertheless, not all these equivalences are known to hold when more refined complexity
  measures are considered, such as circuit depth. In particular, generic constructions of pseudorandom
  functions from the other primitives are not known in small-depth classes. This can be done under
  certain specific hardness assumptions [50], but here we restrict our focus to generic relations between
  basic cryptographic primitives.
3
  For a broader survey on connections between algorithms and circuit lower bounds, we refer to [71].




                                                                                                            CCC 2017
18:8   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


       Useful Properties, Natural Properties, and Circuit Lower Bounds. The concept of natural
       proofs, introduced by Razborov and Rudich [59], has had a significant impact on research
       on unconditional lower bounds. Recall that a property P of Boolean functions is a natural
       property against a circuit class C if it is: (1) efficiently computable (constructivity); (2)
       rejects all C-functions, and accepts at least one “hard” function (usefulness), and (3) is
       satisfied by most Boolean functions (denseness). In case P satisfies only conditions (1) and
       (2), is it said to be useful against C.
            There are natural properties against AC0 [p] circuits, when p is prime [59]. But under
       standard cryptographic assumptions, there is no natural property against TC0 [50]. Con-
       sequently, the situation for classes contained in AC0 [p] and for those that contain TC0 is
       reasonably well-understood. More recently, [74] (see also [30]) proved that if NEXP * C then
       there are useful properties against C. This theorem combined with the lower bound from
       [73] show that ACC0 admits useful properties.
            Given these results, the existence of natural properties against ACC0 has become one of
       the most intriguing problems in connection with the theory of natural proofs. Theorem 4
       (iii) shows that if there are P-natural properties against sub-exponential size ACC0 circuits,
       then ZPEXP * ACC0 . This would lead to an improvement of Williams’ celebrated lower
       bound which does not seem to be accessible using his techniques alone.4


       Karp-Lipton Theorems in Complexity Theory. Karp-Lipton theorems are well-known
       results in complexity theory relating non-uniform circuit complexity and uniform collapses. A
       theorem of this form was first established in [39], where they proved that if NP ⊆ Circuit[poly],
       then the polynomial time hierarchy collapses. This result shows that non-uniform circuit
       lower bounds cannot be avoided if our goal is a complete understanding of uniform complexity
       theory.
           Since their fundamental work, many results of this form have been discovered for com-
       plexity classes beyond NP. In some cases, the proof required substantially new ideas, and
       the new Karp-Lipton collapse led to other important advances in complexity theory. Below
       we discuss the situation for two exponential complexity classes around BPEXP, which is
       connected to Theorem 5.
           A stronger Karp-Lipton theorem for EXP was established in [12], using techniques from
       interactive proofs and arithmetization. An important application of this result appears
       in [17] in the proof that MAEXP * Circuit[poly]. This is still one of the strongest known
       non-uniform lower bounds. For NEXP, a Karp-Lipton collapse was proved in [30]. This time
       the proof employed the easy witness method and techniques from pseudorandomness, and
       the result plays a fundamental role in Williams’ framework [70], which culminated in the
       proof that NEXP * ACC0 [73]. (We mention that a Karp-Lipton theorem for EXPNP has
       also been established in [18].) Karp-Lipton collapse theorems are known for a few other
       complexity classes contained in EXP, and they have found applications in a variety of contexts
       in algorithms and complexity theory (see e.g., [75, 22]).
           Despite this progress on proving Karp-Lipton collapses for exponential time classes, there
       is no published work on such for probabilistic classes. Theorem 5 is the first such result for
       the class BPEXP.


       4
           The result that P-natural properties against sub-exponential size circuits yield ZPEXP lower bounds
           was also obtained in independent work by Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets and Ilya Volkovich
           (private communication).
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                               18:9


The Minimum Circuit Size Problem. The Minimum Circuit Size Problem (MCSP) and its
variants has received a lot of attention in both applied and theoretical research. Its relevance
in practice is clear. From a theoretical point of view, it is one of the few natural problems
in NP that has not been shown to be in P or NP-complete. The hardness of MCSP is also
connected to certain fundamental problems in proof complexity (cf. [45, 58]).
    Interestingly, a well-understood variant of MCSP is the Minimum DNF Size Problem,
for which both NP-hardness [48] and near-optimal hardness of approximation have been
established [6, 43]. However, despite the extensive literature on the complexity of the
MCSP problem [38, 3, 4, 29, 7, 49, 29, 5, 28], and the intuition that it must also be
computationally hard, there are few results providing evidence of its difficulty. Among these,
we highlight the unconditional proof that MCSP ∈     / AC0 [3], and the reductions showing that
                  MCSP                      MCSP
Factoring ∈ ZPP        [3] and SZK ⊆ BPP         [4]. The lack of further progress has led to the
formulation and investigation of a few related problems, for which some additional results
have been obtained (cf. [3, 7, 5, 28]).
    More recently, [49] provided some additional explanation for the difficulty of proving
hardness of MCSP. They unconditionally established that a class of local reductions that
have been used for many other NP-completeness proofs cannot work, and that the existence
of a few other types of reductions would have significant consequences in complexity theory.
Further results along this line appear in [29].
    Theorem 6 contributes to our understanding of the difficulty of MCSP by providing the
first hardness results for a standard complexity class beyond AC0 . We hope this result will
lead to further progress on the quest to determine the complexity of this elusive problem.5


1.3     Main Techniques
1.3.1     Overview
Our results are obtaining via a mixture of techniques from learning theory, computational
complexity, pseudo-randomness and circuit complexity. We refer to Figure 2 for a web of
connections involving the theorems stated in Section 1.1 and the methods employed in the
proofs. We start with an informal description of most of the techniques depicted in Figure 2,
with pointers to some relevant references.6


Nisan-Wigderson Generator [51]. The NW-Generator allows us to convert a function
f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} into a family of functions NW(f ). Crucially, if an algorithm A is able to
distinguish NW(f ) from a random function, there is a reduction that only needs oracle access
to f and A, and that can be used to weakly approximate f . The use of the NW-Generator
in the context of learning, for a function f that is not necessarily hard, appeared recently in
[19].7


5
  We have learned from Eric Allender (private communication) that in independent work with Shuichi
  Hirahara, they have shown some hardness results for the closely related problem of whether a string has
  high KT complexity. These results do not yet seem to transfer to MCSP and its variants. In addition,
  we have learned from Valentine Kabanets (private communication) that in recent independent work
  with Russell Impagliazzo and Ilya Volkovich, they have also obtained some results on the computational
  hardness of MCSP.
6
  This is not a comprehensive survey of the original use or appearance of each method. It is included
  here only as a quick guide to help the reader to assimilate the main ideas employed in the proofs.
7
  Interestingly, another unexpected and somewhat related use of the NW-generator appears in proof
  complexity (see e.g., [57] and references therein).




                                                                                                            CCC 2017
18:10   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness



                                      Theorem 5                         Worst- to Average-
                                   [Hardness of MCSP]                    Case Reduction

                                                                                           Counting / Chernoff Bound
         Approx. Min-Max Theorem
                                                                  (Uniform) Hardness
                                  NW-Generator
                                                                   Amplification



              Theorem 2                             Lemma 1                                        Theorem 1
            [PRF-Dichotomy]                        [Speedup]                                     [Equivalences]




                                                                                       Easy Witness Method
                                                    Theorem 3                              IW-Generator
                                                 [Lower Bounds]



            Random-self-reducibility             Almost Everywhere                     Williams' ACC Lower Bound
            Downward-self-reducibility           Hierarchy Theorem




                                                   Theorem 4
                                                  [Karp-Lipton]                         Advice Elimination



           Figure 2 An overview of the main techniques employed in the proof of each result discussed in
        Section 1.1. An arrow from P to Q indicates that the proof of Q relies on P .



        (Uniform) Hardness Amplification. This is a well-known technique in circuit complexity
        (cf. [24]), allowing one to produce a not much more complex function g̃ : {0, 1}m(n) → {0, 1},
        given oracle access to some function g : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, that is much harder to approximate
        than g. The uniform formulation of this result shows that a weak approximator for g̃ can
        be converted into a strong approximator for g. The connection to learning was explicitly
        observed in [16].


        Counting and Concentration Bounds. This is a standard argument which allows one to
        prove that most Boolean functions on n-bit inputs cannot be approximated by Boolean circuits
        of size ≤ 2n /nω(1) (Lemma 21). In particular, learning algorithm running in non-trivial time
        can only successfully learn a negligible fraction of all Boolean functions.


        Small-Support Min-Max Theorem [9, 47]. This is an approximate version of the well-
        known min-max theorem from game theory. It provides a bound on the support size of
        the mixed strategies. To prove Theorem 3, we consider a game between a function family
        generator and a candidate distinguisher, and this result allows us to move from a family
        of distinguishers against different classes of functions to a single universal distinguisher of
        bounded complexity.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                     18:11


Worst-Case to Average-Case Reduction. The NW-Generator and hardness amplification
can be used to boost a very weak approximation into a strong one. In some circuit classes
such as NC1 , a further reduction allows one to obtain a circuit that is correct on every input
with high probability (see e.g. [2]). This is particularly useful when proving hardness results
for MCSP.

Easy Witness Method [37] and Impagliazzo-Wigderson Generator [32]. The easy witness
method is usually employed as a win-win argument: either a verifier accepts a string encoded
by a small circuit, or every accepted string has high worst-case circuit complexity. No matter
the case, it can be used to our advantage, thanks to the generator from [32] that transforms a
worst-case hard string (viewed as a truth table) into a pseudorandom distribution of strings.

(Almost Everywhere) Hierarchy Theorems. A difficulty when proving Theorems 4 and 5
is that there are no known tight hierarchy theorems for randomized time. Our approach is
therefore indirect, relying on the folklore result that bounded-space algorithms can diagonalize
on every input length against all bounded-size circuits (Lemma 38 and Corollary 39).

Random-self-reducibility and Downward-self-reducibility. These are important notions of
self-reducibility shared by certain functions. Together, they can be used via a recursive
procedure to obtain from a learning algorithm for such a function, which requires oracle access
to the function, a standard randomized algorithm computing the same function [33, 65].

Advice Elimination. This idea is important in the contrapositive argument establishing
Theorem 5. Assuming that a certain deterministic simulation of a function in BPEXP is not
successful, it is not clear how to determine on each input length a “bad” string of that length
for which the simulation fails. Such bad strings are passed as advice in our reduction, and in
order to eliminate the dependency on them, we use an advice-elimination strategy from [65].

1.3.2    Sketch of Proofs
We describe next in a bit more detail how the techniques described above are employed in
the proof of our main results. We stress that the feasibility of all these arguments crucially
depend on the parameters associated to each result and technique. However, for simplicity
our focus here will be on the qualitative connections.

Lemma 1 (Speedup Lemma). Given query access to a function f ∈ C that we would like
to learn to high accuracy, the first idea is to notice that if there is a distinguisher against
NW(f ), then we can non-trivially approximate f using membership queries. But since this is
not the final goal of a strong learning algorithm, we consider NW(f˜), the generator applied to
the amplified version of f . Using properties of the NW-generator and hardness amplification,
it follows that if there is a distinguisher against NW(f˜), it is possible to approximate f˜,
which in turn provides a strong approximator for f . (A similar strategy is employed in [19],
where a natural property is used instead of a distinguisher.)
    Next we use the assumption that C has non-trivial learning algorithms to obtain a
distinguisher against C. (For this approach to work, it is fundamental that the functions
in NW(f˜) ⊆ C. In other words, the reductions discussed above should not blow-up the
complexity of the involved functions by too much. For this reason, C must be a sufficiently
strong circuit class.) By a counting argument and a concentration bound, while a non-trivial



                                                                                                   CCC 2017
18:12   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        learning algorithm will weakly learn every function in C, it must fail to learn a random
        Boolean function with high probability. We apply this idea to prove that a non-trivial learner
        can be used as a distinguisher against NW(f˜).8
            These techniques can therefore be combined in order to boost a non-trivial learner for
        C into a high-accuracy learner for C. This takes care of the accuracy amplification. The
        running time speedup comes from the efficiency of the reductions involved, and from the
        crucial fact that each function in NW(f˜) is a function over m  n input bits. In particular,
        the non-trivial but still exponential time learning algorithm for C only needs to be invoked
        on Boolean functions over m input bits. (This argument only sketches one direction in
        Lemma 1.)

        Theorem 2 (Learning Equivalences). At the core of the equivalence between all learning
        and compression models in Theorem 2 is the idea that in each case we can obtain a certain
        distinguisher from the corresponding algorithm. Again, this makes fundamental use of
        counting and concentration bounds to show that non-trivial algorithms can be used as
        distinguishers. On the other hand, the Speedup Lemma shows that a distinguisher can be
        turned into a sub-exponential time randomized learning algorithm that requires membership
        queries only.
            In some models considered in the equivalence, additional work is necessary. For instance,
        in the learning model where equivalence queries are allowed, they must be simulated by the
        distinguisher. For exact compression, a hypothesis output by the sub-exponential time learner
        might still contain errors, and these need to be corrected by the compression algorithm. A
        careful investigation of the parameters involved in the proof make sure the equivalences
        indeed hold.

        Theorem 3 (Dichotomy between Learning and PRFs). It is well-known that the existence
        of learning algorithms for a class C implies that C-circuits cannot compute pseudorandom
        functions. Using the Speedup Lemma, it follows that the existence of non-trivial learning
        algorithms for C implies that C cannot compute exponentially secure pseudorandom functions.
            For the other direction, assume that every samplable family F of functions from C
        can be distinguished from a random function by some procedure DF of sub-exponential
        complexity. By introducing a certain two-player game (Section 4.1), we are able to employ
        the small-support min-max theorem to conclude that there is a single circuit of bounded
        size that distinguishes every family of functions in C from a random function. In turn, the
        techniques behind the Speedup Lemma imply that every function in C can be learned in
        sub-exponential time.
            We remark that the non-uniformity in the statement of Theorem 3 comes from the
        application of a non-constructive min-max theorem.

        Theorem 4 (Lower Bounds from Non-trivial Learning and Natural Proofs). Here we
        combine the Speedup Lemma with the self-reducibility approach from [33, 65, 21, 44] and
        other standard arguments. Assuming a non-trivial learning algorithm for C, we first boost
        it to a high-accuracy sub-exponential time learner. Now if PSPACE * C we are done, since


        8
            A natural question is whether a non-trivial learning directly implies the existence of a BPP-natural
            property, which would mean the speedup follows from the main result of [19] in a black-box way. However,
            this does not appear to be the case – the learner might learn successfully with probability strictly
            between 1/3 and 2/3 for some truth tables, which would violate the BPP-promise on constructivity of
            the putative natural property corresponding to the distinguisher.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                    18:13


PSPACE ⊆ BPEXP. Otherwise, using a special self-reducible complete function f ∈ PSPACE
[65], we are able obtain from a sub-exponential time learning algorithm for f a sub-exponential
time decision algorithm computing f . Using the completeness of f and a strong hierarchy
theorem for bounded-space algorithms, standard techniques allow us to translate the hardness
of PSPACE against bounded-size circuits and the non-trivial upper bound on the randomized
complexity of f into a non-uniform circuit lower bound for randomized exponential time. A
win-win argument is used crucially to establish that no depth blow-up is necessary when
moving from a non-trivial algorithm for (depth-d)-C to a (depth-d)-C circuit lower bound.
For C = ACC0 , we combine certain complexity collapses inside the argument with Williams’
lower bound [73].
    In order to obtain even stronger lower bounds from natural properties against sub-
exponential size circuits, we further combine this approach with an application of the easy
witness method. This and other standard techniques lead to the collapse BPEXP = ZPEXP,
which strengthens the final circuit lower bound.


Theorem 5 (Karp-Lipton Collapse for Probabilistic Time). This result does not rely on
the Speedup Lemma, but its argument is somewhat more technically involved than the proof
of Theorem 4. The result is established in the contrapositive. Assuming that an attempted
derandomization of BPEXP fails, we show that polynomial space can be simulated in sub-
exponential randomized time. Arguing similarly to the proof of Theorem 4, we conclude that
there are functions in randomized exponential time that are not infinitely often computed by
small circuits.
     The first difficulty is that the candidate derandomization procedure on n-bit inputs
requires the use of the NW-generator applied to a function on nc -bit inputs, due to our
setting of parameters. However, in order to invoke the self-reducibility machinery, we need
to make sure the generator can be broken on every input length, and not on infinitely
many input lengths. To address this, we introduce logarithmic advice during the simulation,
indicating which input length in [nc , (n + 1)c ] should be used in the generator. This amount
of advice is reflected in the statement of the theorem.
     A second difficulty is that if the derandomization fails on some input string of length n,
it is important in the reduction to know a “bad” string with this property. For each input
length, a bad string is passed as advice to the learning-to-decision reduction (this is the
second use of advice in the proof). This time we are able to remove the advice using an
advice-elimination technique, which makes use of self-correctability as in [65]. Crucially, the
advice elimination implies that randomized exponential time without advice is not infinitely
often contained in C, which completes the proof of the contrapositive of Theorem 5.


Theorem 6 (Hardness of MCSP). Recall that this result states that MCSP is hard for
NC1 with respect to non-uniform TC0 reductions. The proof of Theorem 6 explores the
fine-grained complexity of the Nisan-Wigderson reconstruction procedure and of the hardness
amplification reconstruction algorithm. In order words, the argument depends on the
combined circuit complexity of the algorithm that turns a distinguisher for NW(f˜) into
a high-accuracy approximating circuit for f , under the notation of the proof sketch for
Lemma 1. This time we obtain a distinguisher using an oracle to MCSP. It is possible to
show that this reduction can be implemented in non-uniform TC0 .
    Observe that the argument just sketched only provides a randomized reduction that
approximates the initial Boolean function f under the uniform distribution. But Theorem 6
requires a worst-case reduction from NC1 to MCSP. In other words, we must be able to



                                                                                                  CCC 2017
18:14   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        compute any NC1 function correctly on every input. This can be achieved using that there
        are functions in NC1 that are NC1 -hard under TC0 -reductions, and that in addition admit
        randomized worst-case to average-case reductions computable in TC0 . Using non-uniformity,
        randomness can be eliminated by a standard argument. Altogether, this completes the proof
        that NC1 reduces to MCSP via a non-uniform TC0 computation.
           These proofs provide a few additional examples of the use of pseudorandomness in
        contexts where this notion is not intrinsic to the result under consideration. For instance,
        the connection between non-trivial learning algorithms and lower bounds (Theorem 4), the
        Karp-Lipton collapse for probabilistic exponential time (Theorem 5), and the hardness of
        the Minimum Circuit Size Problem (Theorem 6) are statements that do not explicitly refer
        to pseudorandomness. Nevertheless, the arguments discussed above rely on this concept in
        fundamental ways. This motivates a further investigation of the role of pseudorandomness in
        complexity theory, both in terms of finding more applications of the “pseudorandom method”,
        as well as in discovering alternative proofs relying on different techniques.

         2      Preliminaries and Notation
        2.1     Boolean Function Complexity
        We use Fm to denote the set of all Boolean functions f : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}. If W is a
        probability distribution, we use w ∼ W to denote an element sampled according to W .
        Similarly, for a finite set A, we use a ∼ A to denote that a is selected uniformly at random
        from A. Under this notation, f ∈ Fm represents a fixed function, while f ∼ Fm is a
                                                                      def
        uniformly random function. For convenience, we let Un = {0, 1}n . Following standard
        notation, X ≡ Y denotes that random variables X and Y have the same distribution. We
        use standard asymptotic notation such as o(·) and O(·), and it always refer to a parameter
        n → ∞, unless stated otherwise.
           We say that f, g ∈ Fn are ε-close if Prx∼Un [f (x) = g(x)] ≥ 1 − ε. We say that h ∈ Fn
        computes f with advantage δ if Prx∼Un [f (x) = h(x)] ≥ 1/2 + δ. It will sometimes be
        convenient to view a Boolean function f ∈ Fm as a subset of {0, 1}m in the natural way.
           We often represent Boolean functions as strings via the truth table mapping. Given a
        Boolean function f ∈ Fn , tt(f ) is the 2n -bit string which represents the truth table of f in
                                                                      n
        the standard way, and conversely, given a string y ∈ {0, 1}2 , fn(y) is the Boolean function
        in Fn whose truth table is represented by y.
           Let C = {Cn }n∈N be a class of Boolean functions, where each Cn ⊆ Fn . Given a language
                                                                                   def
        L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ , we write L ∈ C if for every large enough n we have that Ln = {0, 1}n ∩ L is in
        Cn . Often we will abuse notation and view C as a class of Boolean circuits. For convenience,
        we use number of wires to measure circuit size. We denote by C[s(n)] the set of n-variable
        C-circuits of size at most s(n). As usual, we say that a uniform complexity class Γ is contained
        in C[poly(n)] if for every L ∈ Γ there exists k ≥ 1 such that L ∈ C[nk ].
            We say that C is typical if C ∈ {AC0 , AC0 [p], ACC0 , TC0 , NC1 , Formula, Circuit}. Recall
        that

             CNF, DNF ( AC0 ( AC0 [p] ( ACC0 ⊆ TC0 ⊆ NC1 = Formula[poly] ⊆ Circuit[poly].

        We assume for convenience that TC0 is defined using (unweighted) majority gates instead of
        weighted threshold gates. Also, while NC1 typically refers to circuits of polynomial size and
        logarithmic depth, we consider the generalized version where NC1 [s] is the class of languages
        computed by circuits of size ≤ s and depth ≤ log s.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                            18:15


    While we restrict our statements to typical classes, it is easy to see that they generalize
to most circuit classes of interest. When appropriate we use Cd to restrict attention to
C-circuits of depth at most d. In this work, we often find it convenient to suppress the
dependence on d, which is implicit for instance in the definition of a circuit family from a
typical bounded-depth circuit class, such as the first four typical classes in the list above. It
will be clear from the context whether the quantification over d is existential or universal.
    Given a sequence of Boolean functions {fn }n∈N with fn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, we let Cf
denote the extension of C that allows Cn -circuits to have oracle gates computing fn .
    For a complexity class Γ and a language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ , we say that L ∈ i.o.Γ if there
is a language L0 ∈ Γ such that Ln = L0n for infinitely many values of n. Consequently, if
Γ1 * i.o.Γ2 then there is a language in Γ1 that disagrees with each language in Γ2 on every
large enough input length.
    Recall the following diagram of class inclusions involving standard complexity classes:9

                 NP                                                  NEXP
            ⊆

                      ⊆




                                                                ⊆



                                                                            ⊆
ZPP ⊆ RP                  MA ⊆ PSPACE ⊆ EXP ⊆ ZPEXP ⊆ REXP                      MAEXP ⊆ EXPSPACE.
             ⊆


                      ⊆




                                                                 ⊆



                                                                            ⊆
                 BPP                                                 BPEXP

In order to avoid confusion, we fix the following notation for exponential complexity classes.
E refers to languages computed in time 2O(n) . EXP refers to languages computed with bounds
                c                                                 ε
of the form 2n for some c ∈ N. SUBEXP denotes complexity 2n for        ε
                                                                         a fixed but arbitrarily
                                                                    2n
small ε > 0. Finally, ESUBEXP refers to a bound of the form 2 , again for a fixed but
arbitrarily small ε > 0. These conventions are also used for the DSPACE(·) and BPTIME(·)
variants, such as BPE, BPSUBEXP and EXPSPACE. For instance, a language L ⊆ {0, 1}∗
is in BPSUBEXP if for every ε > 0 there is a bounded-error randomized algorithm that
                                   ε
correctly computes L in time ≤ 2n on every input of length n, provided that n is sufficiently
large. For quasi-polynomial time classes such as RQP and BPQP, the convention is that for
each language in the class there is a constant c ≥ 1 such that the corresponding algorithm
                               c
runs in time at most O(n(log n) ).
    We will use a few other standard notions, and we refer to standard textbooks in compu-
tational complexity and circuit complexity for more details.


2.2      Learning and Compression Algorithms
The main learning model with which we concern ourselves is PAC learning under the uniform
distribution with membership queries.

I Definition 7 (Learning Algorithms). Let C be a circuit class. Given a size function s : N → N
and a time function T : N → N, we say that C[s] has (ε(n), δ(n))-learners running in time
T (n) if there is a randomized oracle algorithm Af (the learner) such that for every large
enough n ∈ N:
    For every function f ∈ C[s(n)], given oracle access to f , with probability at least
    1 − δ(n) over its internal randomness, Af (1n ) outputs a Boolean circuit h such that
    Prx∼Un [f (x) 6= h(x)] ≤ ε(n).
    For every function f , Af (1n ) runs in time at most T (n).


9
    Non-uniform lower bounds against unrestricted polynomial size circuits are currently known only for
    MAEXP, the exponential time analogue of MA [17].




                                                                                                          CCC 2017
18:16   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


            It is well-known that the confidence of a learning algorithm can be amplified without
        significantly affecting the running time (cf. [41]), and unless stated otherwise we assume that
        δ(n) = 1/n.
            A weak learner for C[s(n)] is a (1/2 − 1/nc , 1/n)-learner, for some fixed c > 0 and
        sufficiently large n. We say C[s] has strong learners running in time T if for each k ≥ 1
        there is a (1/nk , 1/n)-learner for C[s] running in time T . Different values for the accuracy
        parameter k can lead to different running times, but we will often need only a fixed large
        enough k when invoking the learning algorithm. On the other hand, when proving that a class
        has a strong learner, we show that the claimed asymptotic running time holds for all fixed
        k ∈ N. For simplicity, we may therefore omit the dependence of T on k. We say that C[s]
        has non-trivial learners if it has (1/2 − 1/nk , 1/n)-learners running in time T (n) = 2n /nω(1) ,
        for some fixed k ∈ N.
            We also discuss randomized learning under the uniform distribution with membership
        queries and equivalence queries [10]. In this stronger model, the learning algorithm is also
        allowed to make queries of the following form: Is the unknown function f computed by the
        Boolean circuit C? Here C is an efficient representation of a Boolean circuit produced be
        the learner. The oracle answers “yes” if the Boolean function computed by C is f ; otherwise
        it returns an input x such that C(x) 6= f (x).
        I Definition 8 (Compression Algorithms). Given a circuit class C and a size function s : N → N,
        a compression algorithm for C[s] is an algorithm A for which the following hold:
                                      n
           Given an input y ∈ {0, 1}2 , A outputs a circuit D (not necessarily in C) of size o(2n /n)
           such that if fn(y) ∈ C[s(n)] then D computes fn(y).
           A runs in time polynomial in |y| = 2n .
        We say C[s] admits compression if there is a (polynomial time) compression algorithm for
        C[s].
            We will also consider the following variations of compression. If the algorithm is prob-
        abilistic, producing a correct circuit with probability ≥ 2/3, we say C[s] has probabilistic
        compression. If the algorithm produces a circuit D which errs on at most ε(n) fraction
        of inputs for fn(y) in C[s], we say that A is an average-case compression algorithm with
        error ε(n). We define correspondingly what it means for a circuit class to have average-case
        compression or probabilistic average-case compression.

        2.3    Natural Proofs and the Minimum Circuit Size Problem
        We say that R = {Rn }n∈N is a combinatorial property (of Boolean functions) if Rn ⊆ Fn
        for all n. We use LR to denote the language of truth-tables of functions in R. Formally,
        LR = {y | y = tt(f ) for some f ∈ Rn and n ∈ N}.
        I Definition 9 (Natural Properties [59]). Let R = {Rn } be a combinatorial property, C
        a circuit class, and D a (uniform or non-uniform) complexity class. We say that R is a
        D-natural property useful against C[s(n)] if there is n0 ∈ N such that the following holds:
          (i) Constructivity. LR ∈ D.
         (ii) Density. For every n ≥ n0 , Prf ∼Fn [f ∈ Rn ] ≥ 1/2.
        (iii) Usefulness. For every n ≥ n0 , we have Rn ∩ Cn [s(n)] = ∅.

        I Definition 10 (Minimum Circuit Size Problem). Let C be a circuit class. The Minimum
        Circuit Size Problem for C, abbreviated as MCSP-C, is defined as follows:
                                                   n
           Input. A pair (y, s), where y ∈ {0, 1}2 for some n ∈ N, and 1 ≤ s ≤ 2n is an integer
           (inputs not of this form are rejected).
           Question. Does fn(y) have C-circuits of size at most s?
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                     18:17


   We also define a variant of this problem, where the circuit size is not part of the input.
I Definition 11 (Unparameterized Minimum Circuit Size Problem). Let C be a circuit class,
and s : N → N be a function. The Minimimum Circuit Size Problem for C with parameter s,
abbreviated as MCSP-C[s], is defined as follows:
                              n
   Input. A string y ∈ {0, 1}2 , where n ∈ N (inputs not of this form are rejected).
   Question. Does fn(y) have C-circuits of size at most s(n)?
  Note that a dense property useful against C[s(n)] is a dense subset of the complement of
MCSP-C[s].

2.4     Randomness and Pseudorandomness
I Definition 12 (Pseudorandom Generators). Let ` : N → N, h : N → N and ε : N → [0, 1] be
functions, and let C be a circuit class. A sequence {Gn } of functions Gn : {0, 1}`(n) → {0, 1}n
is an (`, ε) pseudorandom generator (PRG) against C[h(n)] if for any sequence of circuits
{Dn } with Dn ∈ C[h(n)] and for all large enough n,

       Pr [Dn (w) = 1] −     Pr [Dn (Gn (x)) = 1] ≤ ε(n).
      w∼Un                 x∼U`(n)


The pseudorandom generator is called quick if its range is computable in time 2O(`(n)) .
I Theorem 13 (PRGs from computational hardness [51, 32]). Let s : N → N be a time-
constructible function such that n ≤ s(n) ≤ 2n for every n ∈ N. There is a constant c > 0
and an algorithm which, given as input n in unary and the truth table of a Boolean function
on s−1 (n) bits which does not have circuits of size nc , computes the range of a (`(n), 1/n)
pseudorandom generator against Circuit[n] in time 2O(`(n)) , where `(n) = O((s−1 (n))2 / log n).
I Definition 14 (Distinguishers and Distinguishing Circuits). Given a probability distribution
Wn with Support(Wn ) ⊆ {0, 1}n and a Boolean function hn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, we say that
hn is a distinguisher for Wn if

       Pr [hn (w) = 1] − Pr [hn (x) = 1] ≥ 1/4.
      w∼Wn                 x∼Un

We say that a circuit Dn is a circuit distinguisher for Wn if Dn computes a function hn that
is a distinguisher for Wn . A function f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} is a distinguisher for a sequence of
distributions {Wn } if for each large enough n, fn is a distinguisher for Wn , where fn is the
restriction of f to n-bit inputs.
   The following is a slight variant of a definition in [19].
I Definition 15 (Black-Box Generator). Let ` : N → N, γ(n) ∈ [0, 1], and C be a circuit
class. A black-box (γ, `)-function generator within C is a mapping that associates to any
f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} a family GEN(f ) = {gz }z∈{0,1}m of functions gz : {0, 1}` → {0, 1}, for
which the following conditions hold:
  (i) Family size. The parameter m ≤ poly(n, 1/γ).
 (ii) Complexity. For every z ∈ {0, 1}m , we have gz ∈ Cf [poly(m)].
(iii) Reconstruction. Let L = 2` and WL be the distribution supported over {0, 1}L that is
      generated by tt(gz ), where z ∼ Um . There is a randomized algorithm Af , taking as
      input a circuit D and having oracle access to f , which when D is a distinguishing circuit
      for WL , with probability at least 1 − 1/n outputs a circuit of size poly(n, 1/γ, size(D))
      that is γ-close to f . Furthermore, Af runs in time at most poly(n, 1/γ, L(n)).



                                                                                                   CCC 2017
18:18   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


             This definition is realized by the following result.

        I Theorem 16 (Black-Box Generators for Restricted Classes [19]). Let p be a fixed prime, and
        C be a typical circuit class containing AC0 [p]. For every γ : N → [0, 1] and ` : N → N there
        exists a black-box (γ, `)-function generator within C.

        I Definition 17 (Complexity Distinguisher). Let C be a circuit class and consider functions
        s, T : N → N. We say that a probabilistic oracle algorithm Ag is a complexity distinguisher
        for C[s(n)] running in time T if Ag (1n ) always halts in time T (n) with an ouput in {0, 1},
        and the following hold:
            For every g ∈ C[s(n)], PrA [Ag (1n ) = 1] ≤ 1/3.
            Eg∼Fn ,A [Ag (1n )] ≥ 2/3.

        I Definition 18 (Zero-Error Complexity Distinguisher). Let C be a circuit class and s, T : N → N
        be functions. We say that a probabilistic oracle algorithm Ag is a zero-error complexity
        distinguisher for C[s(n)] running in time T if Ag (1n ) always halts in time T (n) with an
        output in {0, 1, ?}, and the following hold:
            If g ∈ C[s(n)], Ag (1n ) always outputs 0 or ?, and PrA [Ag (1n ) = ?] ≤ 1/3.
            For every n ≥ 1 there exists a family of functions Sn ⊆ Fn with |Sn |/|Fn | ≥ 1 − o(1)
            such that for every f ∈ Sn , Af (1n ) always outputs 1 or ?, and PrA [Af (1n ) = ?] ≤ 1/3.

             We will make use of the following standard concentration of measure result.

        I Lemma 19 (Chernoff Bound, cf. [36, Theorem 2.1]). Let X ∼ Bin(m, p) and λ = mp. For
        any t ≥ 0,

                                          t2
                                                
           Pr[|X − E[X]| ≥ t] ≤ exp −              .
                                      2(λ + t/3)

         3      Learning Speedups and Equivalences
        3.1     The Speedup Lemma
        We start with the observation that the usual upper bound on the number of small Boolean
        circuits also holds for unbounded fan-in circuit classes with additional types of gates.

        I Lemma 20 (Bound on the number of functions computed by small circuits). Let C be a
        typical circuit class. For any s : N → N satisfying s(n) ≥ n there are at most 250s(n) log s(n)
        functions in Fn computed by C-circuits of size at most s(n).

        Proof. A circuit over n input variables and of size at most s(n) can be represented by its
        underlying directed graph together with information about the type of each gate. A node
        of the graph together with its gate type can be described using O(log s(n)) bits, since for a
        typical circuit class there are finitely many types of gates. In addition, each input variable can
        be described as a node of the graph using O(log n) = O(log s(n)) bits, since by assumption
        s(n) ≥ n. Finally, using this indexing scheme, each wire of the circuit corresponding to a
        directed edge in the circuit graph can be represented with O(log s(n)) bits. Consequently,
        as we measure circuit size by number of wires, any circuit of size at most s(n) can be
        represented using at most O(s(n) log s(n)) bits. The lemma follows from the trivial fact that
        a Boolean circuit computes at most one function in Fn and via a conservative estimate for
        the asymptotic notation.                                                                         J

             Lemmas 19 and 20 easily imply the following (folklore) result.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                             18:19


I Lemma 21 (Random functions are hard to approximate). Let C be a typical circuit class,
s ≥ n, and δ ∈ [0, 1/2]. Then,

 Pr [∃ C-circuit of size ≤ s(n) computing f with advantage δ(n)] ≤ exp −δ 2 2n−1 + 50s log s .
                                                                                            
f ∼Fn


Proof. Let g ∈ Fn be a fixed function. It follows from Lemma 19 with p = 1/2, m = 2n ,
t = δ2n , and using δ ≤ 1/2 that
                                                  2 n
                                                     δ 2
     Pr [g computes f with advantage δ(n)] ≤ exp −        .
   f ∼Fn                                               2

The claim follows immediately from this estimate, Lemma 20, and a union bound.                       J

I Lemma 22 (Non-trivial learners imply distinguishers). Let C be a typical circuit class,
s : N → N be a size bound, and T : N → N be a time bound such that T (n) = 2n /nω(1) . If
C[s] has weak learners running in time T , then C[s(n)] has complexity distinguishers running
in time T (n) · poly(n).

Proof. By the assumption that C is weakly learnable, there is a probabilistic oracle algorithm
Aflearn , running in time T (n) on input 1n , which when given oracle access to f ∈ C[s], outputs
with probability at least 1 − 1/n a Boolean circuit h which agrees with f on at least a
1/2 + 1/nk fraction of inputs of length n, for some universal constant k. We show how to
construct from Aflearn an oracle algorithm Afdist which is a complexity distinguisher for C[s].
     Afdist operates as follows on input 1n . It runs Aflearn on input 1n . If Aflearn does not output a
hypothesis, Afdist outputs ‘1’. Otherwise Afdist estimates the agreement between the hypothesis
h output by the learning algorithm and the function f by querying f on n5k inputs of length
n chosen uniformly at random, and checking for each such input whether f agrees with h.
The estimated agreement is computed to be the fraction of inputs on which f agrees with h.
If it is greater than 1/2 + 1/n2k , Afdist outputs ‘0’, otherwise it outputs ‘1’.
     By the assumption on efficiency of the learner Aflearn , it follows that Afdist runs in time
T (n) · poly(n). Thus we just need to argue that Afdist is indeed a complexity distinguisher.
     For a uniformly random f , the probability that Aflearn outputs a hypothesis h that has
agreement greater than 1/2 + 1/n4k with f is exponentially small. This is because Aflearn
runs in time T (n) = 2n /nω(1) , and hence if it outputs a hypothesis, it must be of size at
most 2n /nω(1) . By Lemma 21, only an exponentially small fraction of functions can be
approximated by circuits of such size. Also, given that a circuit h has agreement at most
1/2 + 1/n4k with f , the probability that the estimated agreement according to the procedure
above is greater than 1/2 + 1/n2k is exponentially small by Lemma 19. Thus, for a uniformly
random f , the oracle algorithm Afdist outputs ‘0’ with exponentially small probability, and
hence for large enough n, it outputs ‘1’ with probability at least 2/3.
     For f ∈ C[s(n)], by the correctness and efficiency of the learning algorithm, Aflearn outputs
a hypothesis h with agreement at least 1/2 + 1/nk with f , with probability at least 1 − 1/n.
For such a hypothesis h, using Lemma 19 again, the probability that the estimated agreement
is smaller than 1/2 + 1/n2k is exponentially small. Thus, for n large enough, with probability
at least 2/3, Afdist outputs ‘0’.                                                                     J

I Lemma 23 (Faster learners from distinguishers). Let C be a typical circuit class. If C[poly(n)]
has complexity distinguishers running in time 2O(n) , then for every ε > 0, C[poly(n)] has
                                    ε                          ε
strong learners running in time O(2n ). If for some ε > 0, C[2n ] has complexity distinguishers
                                                                                       O(1)
running in time 2O(n) , then C[poly(n)] has strong learners running in time 2log(n)         .



                                                                                                           CCC 2017
18:20   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        Proof. We prove the first part of the Lemma, and the second part follows analogously using
        a different parameter setting.
            Let C be a typical circuit class. If C = AC0 , the lemma holds unconditionally since
        this class can be learned in quasi-polynomial time [46]. Assume otherwise that C contains
        AC0 [p], for some fixed prime p. By assumption, C[poly(n)] has a complexity distinguisher
        Ag0 running in time 2O(n) . We show that for every ε > 0 and every k > 0, C[poly(n)] has
                                                     ε
        (1/nk , 1/n)-learners running in time O(2n ). Let ε0 > 0 be any constant such that ε0 < ε. By
        Theorem 16 there exists a black-box (γ, `)-function generator GEN within C, where γ = 1/nk
                      0
        and ` = nε . For this setting of γ and ` we have that the parameter m for GEN(f ) in
        Definition 15 is poly(n), and that for each z ∈ {0, 1}m , we have gz ∈ Cf [poly(n)]. Let Af1 be
        the randomized reconstruction algorithm for GEN(f ).
                                                                                           ε
            We define a (1/nk , 0.99)-learner Af for C[poly(n)] running in time O(2n ); the confidence
        can then be amplified to satisfy the definition of a strong learner while not increasing the
        running time of the learner by more than a polynomial factor. The learning algorithm
        operates as follows. It interprets the oracle algorithm Ag0 on input 1` as a probabilistic
        polynomial-time algorithm D(·, ~r) which is explicitly given the truth table of g, of size L = 2` ,
        as input, with ~r the randomness for this algorithm. It guesses ~r at random and then computes
        a circuit DL of size 2O(`) which is equivalent to D(·, ~r) on inputs of size 2` , using the standard
        transformation of polynomial-time algorithms into circuits. It then runs Af1 on input DL ,
        and halts with the same output as Af1 . Observe that the queries made by the reconstruction
        algorithm can be answered by the learner, since it also has query access to f .
            Using the bounds on running time of A0 and A1 , it is easy to see that Af can be
                                                                       
        implemented to run in time 2O(`) , which is at most 2n for large enough n. We need to
        argue that Af is a correct strong learner for C[poly(n)]. The critical point is that when
        f ∈ C[poly(n)], with noticeable probability, DL is a distinguishing circuit for WL (using
        the terminology of Definition 15), and we can then take advantage of the properties of the
        reconstruction algorithm. We now spell this out in more detail.
            When f ∈ C[poly(n)], using the fact that C is typical and thus closed under composition
        with itself, and that it contains AC0 [p], we have that for each z ∈ {0, 1}m , gz ∈ C[poly(n)].
                                                  0
        Note that the input size for gz is ` = nε , and hence also gz ∈ C[poly(`)]. Using now that A0 is
        a complexity distinguisher, we have that for any z ∈ {0, 1}m , PrA [Agz (1` ) = 1] ≤ 1/3, while
        Eg∼F` ,A [Ag (1` )] ≥ 2/3. By a standard averaging argument and the fact that probabilities
        are bounded by 1, this implies that with probability at least 0.05 over the choice of ~r, DL is
        a distinguishing circuit for WL . Under the properties of the reconstruction algorithm Af1 ,
        when given as input such a circuit DL , with probability at least 1 − 1/n, the output of Af1 is
        1/nk -close to f . Hence with probability at least 0.05 · (1 − 1/n) > 0.01 over the randomness of
        A, the output of Af is 1/nk -close to f , as desired. As observed before, the success probability
        of the learning algorithm can be amplified by standard techniques (cf. [41]).
            The second part of the lemma follows by the same argument with a different choice of
        parameters, using a black-box (γ, `)-function generator with γ = 1/nk and ` = (log n)c ,
        where c is chosen large enough as a function of ε. Again, the crucial point is that the relative
        circuit size of each gz compared to its number of input bits is within the size bound of the
        distinguisher.                                                                                    J

        I Remark. While Lemma 23 is sufficient for our purposes, we observe that the same argument
        shows in fact that the conclusion holds under the weaker assumption that the complexity
                                      c
        distinguisher runs in time 2n , for a fixed c ∈ N. In other words, it is possible to obtain
        faster learners from complexity distinguishers running in time that is quasi-polynomial in
        the length of the truth-table of its oracle function.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      18:21


I Lemma 24 (Speedup Lemma). Let C be a typical circuit class. The following hold:
   (Low-End Speedup) C[poly(n)] has non-trivial learners if and only if for each ε > 0,
                                                        ε
   C[poly(n)] has strong learners running in time O(2n ).
                                                           ε
   (High-End Speedup) There exists ε > 0 such that C[2n ] has non-trivial learners if and
                                                                 O(1)
   only if C[poly(n)] has strong learners running in time 2log(n)     .

Proof. First we show the Low-End Speedup result. The “if” direction is trivial, so we only
need to consider the “only if” case. This follows from Lemma 23 and Lemma 22. Indeed, by
Lemma 22, if C[poly(n)] has non-trivial learners, it has complexity distinguishers running in
time 2n /nω(1) . By Lemma 23, the existence of such complexity distinguishers implies that
                                                                    ε
for each ε > 0, C[poly(n)] has strong learners running in time O(2n ), and we are done.
    Next we show the High-End Speedup result. The proof for the “only if” direction is
completely analogous to the corresponding proof for the Low-End Speedup result. The
“if” direction, however, is not entirely trivial. We employ a standard padding argument to
establish this case, thus completing the proof of Lemma 24.
                                                                         c
    Suppose that C[poly(n)] has a strong learner running in time 2log(n) , for some constant
c > 0. Let Alow be a learning algorithm witnessing this fact. We show how to use Alow to
                                                                                    1/3c
construct a learning
                  √
                       algorithm Ahigh which is a (1/n, 1/poly(n))-learner for C[2n ], and
runs in time ≤ 2 n . As usual, confidence can be boosted without a significant increase of
                                       1/3c
running time, and it follows that C[2n ] has non-trivial learners according to our definition.
    On input 1n and with oracle access to some function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}, Afhigh (1n )
              0   0              def         1/3c                  0
simulates Aflow (1n ), where n0 = n + 2dn e , and f 0 : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} is the (unique)
                                                                                         0
Boolean function satisfying the following properties. For any input x0 = xy ∈ {0, 1}n , where
          1/3c                                                                         1/3c
|y| = 2dn e and |x| = n, f 0 (x0 ) is defined to be f (x). Note that if f ∈ C[2n ] then
f 0 ∈ C[O(n0 )]: the linear-size C-circuit for f 0 on an input x0 of length n0 just simulates the
smallest C-circuit for f on its n-bit prefix. During the simulation, whenever Alow makes
an oracle call x0 to f 0 , Ahigh answers it using an oracle call x to f , where x is the prefix
                                                                                                0
of x0 of length n. By definition of f 0 , this simulation step is always correct. When Aflow
completes its computation and outputs a hypothesis h0 on n0 input bits, Ahigh outputs a
                                                                                1/3c
modified hypothesis h as follows: it chooses a random string r of length 2dn e , and outputs
                                  def
the circuit hr defined
                   √
                        by hr (x) = h0 (xr). Note that by the assumed efficiency of Alow , Ahigh
halts in time ≤ 2 n on large enough n.
     By the discussion above, it is enough to argue that the hypothesis h output by Ahigh is a
good hypothesis with probability at least 1/poly(n). Since Alow is a strong learner and since
the f 0 used as oracle to Alow in the simulation has linear size, for all large enough n, with
probability at least 1 − 1/n0 , h0 disagrees with f 0 on at most a 1/(n0 )k fraction of inputs of
length n0 , where k is a large enough constant fixed in the construction above. Consider a
randomly chosen r of length n0 − n. By a standard Markov-type argument, when h0 is good,
for at least a 1/poly(n) fraction of the strings r, hr (x) disagrees with f (x) on at most a 1/n
fraction of inputs. This completes the argument.                                               J

3.2    Equivalences for Learning, Compression, and Distinguishers
I Theorem 25 (Algorithmic Equivalences). Let C be a typical circuit class. The following
statements are equivalent:
1. C[poly(n)] has non-trivial learners.
                                                                                  
2. For each ε > 0 and k ∈ N, C[poly(n)] can be learned to error ≤ n−k in time O(2n ).
3. C[poly(n)] has probabilistic (exact) compression.
4. C[poly(n)] has probabilistic average-case compression with error o(1).



                                                                                                    CCC 2017
18:22   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        5. C[poly(n)] has complexity distinguishers running in time 2O(n) .
                                                                                         
        6. For each ε > 0, C[poly(n)] has complexity distinguishers running in time O(2n ).
        7. C[poly(n)] can be learned using membership and equivalence queries to sub-constant error
           in non-trivial time.
        Proof. We establish these equivalences via the following complete set of implications:
            (5) ⇒ (2): This follows from Lemma 23.
            (2) ⇒ (1) and (6) ⇒ (5): These are trivial implications.
            (2) ⇒ (4): Probabilistic compression for
                                                   √
                                                      C[poly(n)] follows from simulating a (1/n3 , 1/n)-
                                                     n
        learner for the class running in time O(2 ), and answering any oracle queries by looking
        up the corresponding bit in the truth table of the function, which is given as input to the
        compression algorithm. The compression algorithm returns as output the hypothesis of the
        strong learner, and by assumption this agrees on a (1 − 1/n3 ) fraction of inputs of length n
        with the input function,√with probability at least 1 − 1/n. Moreover, since√the simulated
        learner runs in time O(2 n ), the circuit that is output has size at most O(2 n ). It is clear
        that the simulation of the learner can be done in time 2O(n) , as required for a compression
        algorithm.
            (2) ⇒ (3): This follows exactly as above, except that there is an additional step after
        the simulation of the learner. Once the learner has output a hypothesis h, the compression
        algorithm compares this hypothesis with its input truth table entry by entry, simulating h
        whenever needed. If h differs from the input truth table on more than a 1/n3 fraction of
        inputs, the compression algorithm rejects – this happens with probability at most 1/n by
        assumption on the learner. If h and the input truth table differ on at most 1/n3 fraction
        of inputs of length n, the compression algorithm computes by brute force a circuit of size
        at most 2n /n2 which computes the function h0 that is the XOR of h and the input truth
        table. The upper bound on size follows from the fact that h0 has at most 2n /n3 1’s. Finally,
        the compression algorithm outputs h ⊕ h0 . For any typical circuit class, the size of the
        corresponding circuit is O(2n /n2 ). Note that h ⊕ h0 computes the input truth table exactly.
            (2) ⇒ (6): This follows from Lemma 22.
            (1) ⇒ (5), (3) ⇒ (5), and (4) ⇒ (5): The distinguisher runs the circuit output by
        the learner or compression algorithm on every input of length n, and computes the exact
        agreement with its input f on length n by making 2n oracle queries to f . If the circuit
        agrees with f on at least a 2/3 fraction of inputs, the distinguisher outputs 0, otherwise
        it outputs 1. By the assumption on the learner/compression algorithm, for f ∈ C[poly(n)],
        the distinguisher outputs 0 with probability at least 2/3. Using Lemma 21, for a random
        function, the probability that the distinguisher outputs 1 is at least 2/3.
            (7) ⇒ (5): The complexity distingisher has access to the entire truth-table, and can
        answer the membership and equivalence queries of the learner in randomized time 2O(n) .
        Randomness is needed only to simulate the random choices of the learning algorithm, while
        the answer to each query can be computed in deterministic time. Since the learner runs in
        time 2n /nω(1) , whenever it succeeds it outputs a hypothesis circuit of at most this size. The
        complexity distinguisher can compare this hypothesis to its input truth-table, and similarly
        to the arguments employed before, is able to distinguish random functions from functions in
        C[poly(n)].
            (2) ⇒ (7): This is immediate since the algorithm from (2) is faster, has better accuracy,
        and makes no equivalence queries.                                                             J

        I Theorem 26 (Equivalences for zero-error algorithms). Let C[poly(n)] be a typical circuit
        class. The following statements are equivalent:
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                         18:23


1. There are P-natural proofs useful against C[poly(n)].
2. There are ZPP-natural proofs useful against C[poly(n)].
                                               ε
3. For each ε > 0, there are DTIME(O(2(log N ) ))-natural proofs useful against C[poly(n)],
   where N = 2n is the truth-table size.
4. For each ε > 0, there are zero-error complexity distinguishers for C[poly(n)] running in
            ε
   time O(2n ).

Proof. We establish these equivalences via the following complete set of implications:
    (1) ⇒ (2): This is a trivial implication.
    (3) ⇒ (4): This is almost a direct consequence of the definitions, except that the density
of the natural property has to be amplified to 1 − o(1) before converting the algorithm into a
zero-error complexity distinguisher. This is a standard argument, and can be achieved by
defining a new property from the initial one. More details can be found, for instance, in the
proof of [19, Lemma 2.7].
    (2) ⇒ (1):10 Let A be an algorithm running in zero-error probabilistic time mk on inputs
of length m and with error probability ≤ 1/4, for m large enough and k an integer, and
deciding a combinatorial property R useful against C[poly(n)]. We show how to define a
combinatorial property R0 useful against C[poly(n)] such that R0 ∈ P, and such that at least
a 1/8 fraction of the truth tables of any large enough input length belong to LR0 . This
fraction can be amplified by defining a new natural property R00 such that any string yz
with |y| = |z| belongs to LR00 if and only if either y ∈ LR0 or z ∈ LR0 (see e.g. [19]).
    We define R0 via a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm A0 deciding LR0 . Given an
                              0
input truth table y of size 2n , A0 acts as follows: it determines the largest integer n such that
n(k + 1) < n0 . It decomposes the input truth table as y = xzw, where |x| = 2n , |z| = 2kn ,
and the remaining part w is irrelevant. It runs A on x, using z as the randomness for the
simulation of A. If A accepts, it accepts; if A rejects or outputs ‘?’, it rejects.
    It should be clear that A0 runs in polynomial time. The fact that A0 accepts at least a
1/8 fraction of truth tables of any large enough input length follows since for any x ∈ LR , A
outputs ‘?’ with probability at most 1/3, and at least a 1/2 fraction of strings of length 2n
are in LR . It only remains to argue that the property R0 is useful against C[poly(n)]. But
                           0
any string y of length 2n accepted by A0 has as a substring the truth table of a function
on n = Ω(n0 ) bits which is accepted by A and hence is in LR . Since R is useful against
C[poly(n)], this implies that R0 is useful against C[poly(n)].
    (4) ⇒ (3): The proof is analogous to (2) ⇒ (1).
    (3) ⇒ (1): This is a trivial direction since N = 2n .
    (1) ⇒ (3): This implication uses an idea of Razborov and Rudich [59]. Suppose there
are P-natural proofs useful against C[poly(n)]. This means in particular that for every c ≥ 1,
there is a polynomial-time algorithm Ac , which on inputs of length 2n , where n ∈ N, accepts
at least a 1/2 fraction of inputs, and rejects all inputs y such that fn(y) ∈ C[nc ]. Consider
an input y to Ac of length 2n , and let ε > 0 be fixed. Let y 0 be the substring of y such that
fn(y 0 ) is the subfunction of fn(y) obtained by fixing the first n − nε bits of the input to
fn(y) to 0. It is easy to see that if fn(y) ∈ C[nc ], then fn(y 0 ) ∈ C[(n0 )c/ε ], where n0 denotes
the number of input bits of fn(y 0 ).
    Let d ≥ 1 be any constant, and ε > 0 be fixed. We show how to define an algorithm
                                   ε
Bd which runs in time O(2log(N ) ) on an input of length N = 2n , deciding a combinatorial
property which is useful against C-circuits of size nd . (Using the same approach, it is possible


10
     This argument is folklore. It has also appeared in more recent works, such as [74].




                                                                                                       CCC 2017
18:24   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        to design a single algorithm that works for any fixed d whenever n is large enough, provided
        that we start with a natural property that is useful in this stronger sense.) On input y of
                                                     ε
        length N , Bd computes y 0 of length 2log(N ) , as defined in the previous paragraph. For the
        standard encoding of truth tables, y 0 is a prefix of y, and can be computed in time O(|y 0 |).
        Bd then simulates Add/εe on y 0 , accepting if and only if the simulated algorithm accepts.
        The simulation halts in time poly(|y 0 |), as Add/εe is a poly-time algorithm. For a random
        input y, Bd accepts with probability at least 1/2, using that y 0 is uniformly distributed, and
        the assumption that Add/εe witnesses natural proofs against a circuit class. For an input y
        such that fn(y) ∈ C[nd ], Bd always rejects, as in this case, fn(y 0 ) ∈ C[(n0 )d/ε ], and so Add/εe
        rejects y 0 , using the assumption that Add/εe decides a combinatorial property useful against
        n-bit Boolean functions in C[ndd/εe ].                                                            J


         4        Learning versus Pseudorandom Functions

        4.1       The PRF-Distinguisher Game
        In this section we consider (non-uniform) randomized oracle circuits B O from CircuitO [t],
        where t is an upper bound on the number of wires in the circuit. Recall that a circuit from
        this class has a special gate type that computes according to the oracle O, which will be set
        to some fixed Boolean function f : {0, 1}m → {0, 1} whenever we discuss the computation of
        the circuit.
            We will view such circuits either as distinguishers or learning algorithms, where the oracle
        is the primary input to the circuit. For this reason and because our results are stated in the
        non-uniform setting, we assume from now on that such circuits have no additional input
        except for variables y1 , . . . , y` representing the random bits, where ` ≤ t. If w ∈ {0, 1}` is a
                                              O
        fixed sequence of bits, we use Bw       to denote the deterministic oracle circuit obtaining from the
                  O
        circuit B by setting its randomness to w. Observe that (non-uniform) learning algorithms
        can be naturally described by randomized oracle circuits from CircuitO with multiple output
        bits. The output bits describe the output hypothesis, under some reasonable encoding for
        Boolean circuits.11
            We will consider pairs (Gn , Dn ) where Gn ⊆ Fn and Dn is a distribution with Support(Dn ) ⊆
        Gn . This notation is convenient when defining samplable function families and pseudorandom
        function families.

        I Definition 27 (Pseudorandom Function Families). We say that a pair (Gn , Dn ) is a
        (t(n), ε(n))-pseudorandom function family (PRF) in C[s(n)] if Gn ⊆ C[s(n)] and for every
        randomized oracle circuit B O ∈ CircuitO [t(n)],

                  Pr      [B g (w) = 1] −     Pr        [B f (w) = 1] ≤ ε.
               g∼Dn , w                     f ∼Fn , w


           This definition places no constraint on the complexity of generating the pair (Gn , Dn ).
        In order to capture this, we restrict attention to Gn ⊆ Cn for some typical circuit class
        C = {Cn }, and assume a fixed encoding of circuits from C by strings of length polynomial in
        the size of the circuit. We say that a circuit A ∈ Circuit[S] is a Cn -sampler if A outputs valid
        descriptions of circuits from Cn .


        11
             In this non-uniform framework it is possible to derandomize a learning circuit with some blow-up in
             circuit size, but we will not be concerned with this matter here.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      18:25


I Definition 28 (Samplable Function Families). We say that a pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn
is S-samplable if there exists a Cn -sampler A ∈ Circuit[S] on ` ≤ S input variables such
that A(U` ) ≡ Dn , where we associate each output string of A to its corresponding Boolean
function.

   It is well-known that the existence of learning algorithms for a circuit class Cn [s(n)]
implies that there are no secure pseudorandom function families in Cn [s(n)]. Moreover, this
remains true even for function families that are not efficiently samplable. Following the
notation from Definition 7, we can state a particular form of this observation as follows.

I Proposition 29 (Learning C implies no PRFs in C). Assume there is a randomized oracle
circuit in CircuitO [t(n)] that (1/3, 1/n)-learns every function in Cn [s(n)], where n ≤ t(n) ≤
2n /n2 . Then for large enough n there are no (poly(t(n)), 1/10)-pseudorandom function
families in Cn [s(n)].

    Our goal for the rest of this section is to establish a certain converse of Proposition 29
(Theorem 34 and Corollary 35). An important technical tool will be a “small-support” version
of the min-max theorem, described next.

Small-Support Approximate Min-Max Theorem for Bounded Games [9, 47]. We follow
the notation from [47]. Let M be an r × c real-valued matrix, p be a probability distribution
over its rows, and q be a probability distribution over its columns. The classic min-max
theorem [66] states that

   min max Ei∼p [M (i, j)] = max min Ej∼q [M (i, j)].                                        (1)
     p   j∈[c]                    q   i∈[r]


The distributions p and q are called mixed strategies, while individual indexes i and j are
called pure strategies. We use v(M ) to denote the value in Equation 1. (Recall that this
can be interpreted as a game between a row player, or Minimizer, and a column player, or
Maximizer. The min-max theorem states that the order in which the players reveal their
strategies does not change the value of the game. It is easy to see that the second player can
be restricted to pure strategies.)
    We will consider a game played on a matrix of exponential size, and will be interested
in near-optimal mixed strategies with succinct descriptions. This motivates the following
definitions. A mixed strategy is k-uniform if it is selected uniformly from a multiset of at
most k pure strategies. We use Pk and Qk to denote the set of k-uniform strategies for
the row player and the column player, respectively. For convenience, given a mixed row
strategy p, we let v(p) = vM (p) = maxj∈[c] Ei∼p [M (i, j)]. Similarly, we use v(q) = vM (q) =
mini∈[r] Ej∼q [M (i, j)] for a column mixed strategy q. We say that a mixed strategy u is
δ-optimal if |v(u) − v(M )| ≤ δ.
    We will need the following “efficient” version of the min-max theorem.

I Theorem 30 (Small-Support Min-Max Theorem [9, 47]). Let M be a r × c real-valued matrix
with entries in the interval [−1, 1]. For every δ > 0, if kr ≥ 10 ln(c)/δ 2 and kc ≥ 10 ln(r)/δ 2
then

    min v(p) ≤ v(M ) + δ,       and     max v(q) ≥ v(M ) − δ.
   p∈Pkr                               q∈Qkc


In other words, there are δ-optimal strategies for the row and column players with relatively
small support size.



                                                                                                    CCC 2017
18:26   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        The PRF-Distinguisher Game. Let Cn [s] be a circuit class and CircuitO [t] be an oracle
        circuit class, with size parameters s(n) and t(n), respectively. We consider a [−1, 1]-valued
                                   O
        matrix M = M Cn [s],Circuit [t] , defined as follows. The rows of M are indexed by Boolean
        functions in Cn [s], and the columns of M are indexed by (single-output) deterministic oracle
        circuits from CircuitO [t]. In other words, such circuit have access to constants 0 and 1,
        compute according to the values of the oracle gates, and produce an output value in {0, 1}. In
        order not to introduce further notation, we make the simplifying assumption that the negation
        of every circuit from CircuitO [t] is also in CircuitO [t]. For h ∈ Cn [s] and C O ∈ CircuitO [t], we
        let
                        def
           M (h, C O ) = C h − Pr [C f = 1],
                                   f ∼Fn

        where C ∈ {0, 1} denotes the output of C O when computing with oracle O = g, for a fixed
                 g

        g : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}. We say that the matrix M is the PRF-Distinguisher game for Cn [s] and
        CircuitO [t]. Observe that this is a finite matrix, for every choice of n.
             Following our notation, we use v(M ) to denote the value of the game corresponding to
        M , which can be interpreted as follows. Let p be a mixed strategy for the row player. In
        other words, p is simply a distribution over functions from Cn [s]. Consequently, to each
        row strategy p we can associate a pair (Gp , Dp ), where p = Dp and Gp = Support(Dp ),
        as in Definition 27. On the other hand, a mixed strategy q over the columns is simply a
        distribution over deterministic oracle circuits from CircuitsO [t], which can be interpreted as a
        (non-constructive) randomized circuit B O . Under this interpretation, the value of the game
        when played with strategies p and q is given by
           Eh∼p, C O ∼q [M (h, C O )]   = Eh,C O [C h − Pr [C f = 1]]
                                                             f ∼Fn
                                                         h
                                        =   Eh,C O [C ] −      Pr [C f = 1]
                                                             f,C O ∼q

                                        =      Pr        [B g = 1] −       Pr        [B f = 1],
                                            g∼Dp , B O                 f ∼Fn , B O

        which corresponds to the distinguishing probability in Definition 27 without taking absolute
        values. But since we assumed that the circuits indexing the columns of M are closed under
        complementation, it follows that the (global) value v(M ) of this game captures the security
        of PRFs from Cn [s] against CircuitO [t]-distinguishers. (Notice though that this value does not
        take into account the samplability of the function families involved, nor the constructivity of
        the ensemble of distinguishers corresponding to a “randomized” oracle distinguisher in the
        argument above.)

        4.2    A (Non-Uniform) Converse to “Learning Implies no PRFs”
        We proceed with our original goal of establishing a converse of Proposition 29. Roughly
        speaking, we want to show that if every samplable function family from Cn can be distinguished
        from a random function (possibly by different distinguishers), then there is a single algorithm
        that learns every function in Cn . Formally, what we get is a sequence of subexponential size
        (non-uniform) circuits learning C.
           The proofs of Lemmas 31 and 32 below rely on Theorem 30.
        I Lemma 31 (∃      samplable PRF → ∃   PRF against ensembles of circuits). There exists a
        universal constant c ∈ N for which the following holds. Let t(n) ≥ n, s(n) ≥ n, δ(n) > 0,
        and ε(n) > 0 be arbitrary functions. If there is no O(t · s · 1/δ)c -samplable pair (G
                                                                                             fn , D
                                                                                                  fn ) that
        is a (t(n), ε(n) + δ(n))-PRF in Cn [s(n)], then there is no pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [s(n)]
        that ε(n)-fools every ensemble of deterministic CircuitO [t(n)]-circuits.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                        18:27


Proof. We use Theorem 30 to establish the contrapositive. Assume there exists a pair
(Gn , Dn ) where Dn is distributed over Gn ⊆ Cn [s(n)] such that for every distribution q over
CircuitO [t(n)] we have

        Pr         [C g = 1] −        Pr         [C f = 1] ≤ ε(n).
    g∼Dn ,C O ∼q                 f ∼Fn ,C O ∼q

Let p = Dn , and observe that in the corresponding PRF-Distinguisher game we get vM (p) ≤
ε(n). Consequently, v(M ) ≤ minp vM (p) ≤ ε(n). It follows from Theorem 30 and a bound on
the number of columns of M (similar to Lemma 20) that there exists a k-uniform distribution
p̃ over functions in Cn [s(n)] with k ≤ O(ln 2O(t log t) /δ(n)2 ) = O((t log t)/δ(n)2 ) such that
vM (p̃) ≤ ε(n) + δ(n).
    In other words, each f ∈ Support(p̃) is in Cn [s(n)], the support of this distribution contains
at most O((t log t)/δ(n)2 ) different functions, and each such function can be encoded by
a string of length poly(s(n)) that describes the corresponding circuit. Using that p̃ is a
k-uniform distribution, it is not hard to see that there exists a circuit A ∈ Circuit[S] with
A(U` ) ≡ p̃ for some ` ≤ S, where S ≤ poly(t, s, 1/δ). Since every randomized circuit B O
can be seen as a distribution over deterministic oracle circuits, it follows that there is an
S-samplable pair (G      fn ) that is a (t(n), ε(n) + δ(n))-PRF in Cn [s(n)]. This completes the
                    fn , D
proof.                                                                                           J

I Lemma 32 (∃     PRF against ensembles of circuits → ∃ universal distinguisher). There exists
a universal constant c ∈ N for which the following holds. Let s(n) ≥ n, t(n) ≥ n, ε(n) > 0,
and γ(n) > 0 be arbitrary functions. If there is no pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [s(n)] that
ε(n)-fools every ensemble of deterministic CircuitO [t(n)]-circuits, then there is a randomized
oracle circuit B O ∈ CircuitO [O(t · s · 1/γ)c ] that distinguishes every such pair from a random
function with advantage at least ε(n) − γ(n).
Proof. We rely on the classical min-max theorem and on Theorem 30. It follows from
the assumption of the lemma that the corresponding PRF-Distinguisher game has value
v(M ) ≥ ε(n). By the min-max theorem, there is an ensemble of CircuitO [t(n)]-circuits that
distinguishes every pair (Gn , Dn ) satisfying Gn ⊆ Cn [s(n)] with advantage at least ε(n).
Applying Theorem 30, we obtain a k-uniform distribution q over deterministic CircuitO [t(n)]-
circuits with distinguishing probability at least ε(n) − γ(n) and support size at most k =
O(ln 2O(s log s) /γ(n)2 ) = O((s log s)/γ(n)2 ). Similarly to the proof of Lemma 31, this ensemble
of circuits implies the existence of a single randomized oracle circuit B O ∈ CircuitO [O(s · t ·
1/γ)c ] that distinguishes every pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [s(n)] from a random function
with advantage at least ε(n) − γ(n). This completes the proof.                                  J

    Lemmas 31 and 32 hold for each value of n. The next lemma is a reduction involving
different values of this parameter.
I Lemma 33 (∃ universal distinguishers → ∃ learning circuits). Assume that for every k ≥ 1
and large enough n there exists a randomized oracle circuit BnO in CircuitO [2O(n) ] that
distinguishes every pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [nk ] from a random function with advantage
≥ 1/40. Then for every ` ≥ 1 and ε > 0 there is a non-uniform sequence of randomized
                               ε
oracle circuits in CircuitO [2n ] that learn every function f ∈ Cn [n` ] to error at most n−` .
Proof. This lemma is simply a (weaker) non-uniform version of the proof of Lemma 23 from
Section 3. It is enough to use the sequence of randomized oracle circuits BnO as distinguishing
circuits, and to observe that the statement of Theorem 16 holds with an arbitrarily small
constant in the distinguishing probability.                                                  J



                                                                                                      CCC 2017
18:28   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


            Recall that C = {Cn } is an arbitrary typical circuit class. The main technical result of
        this section follows from Lemmas 31, 32, and 33 together with an appropriate choice of
        parameters.

        I Theorem 34 (No samplable PRFs in C implies Learning C). If t(n) ≤ 2O(n) and c0 ≥ 1 is a
                                                                                                      0
        large enough constant, the following holds. Suppose that for every k ≥ 1 each O((t(n) · nk )c )-
        samplable pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [nk ] can be distinguished from a random function by
        some randomized oracle circuit from CircuitO [t(n)] with advantage at least 1/10. Then, for
                                                                                                        ε
        every k ≥ 1, ε > 0, and large enough n, there is a randomized oracle circuit from CircuitO [2n ]
        that learns every function in Cn [nk ] to error at most n−k .

        Proof. The existence of the learning circuit will follow if we can prove that the hypothesis of
        Lemma 33 is satisfied. Thus it is enough to argue that, for every k ≥ 1 and large enough n,
        there is a (single) randomized oracle circuit B O from CircuitO [2O(n) ] that distinguishes with
        advantage ≥ 1/40 every pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [nk ]. In turn, this follows from Lemma 32
        for s(n) = nk , ε(n) = 1/20, and γ(n) = 1/40 if there is no pair (Gn , Dn ) with Gn ⊆ Cn [nk ]
        that 1/20-fools every ensemble of deterministic oracle circuits from CircuitO [2O(n) ], for a
        slightly smaller constant in the latter exponent. But this is implied by the hypothesis of
        Theorem 34 together with Lemma 31, instantiated with our value t(n) ≤ 2O(n) , s(n) = nk ,
        ε(n) = 1/20, and δ(n) = 1/20, provided that we take c0 sufficiently large. This completes the
        proof.                                                                                        J

           Dropping the samplability condition, we get the following weaker statement, which
        provides a converse of Proposition 29 in the regime where t(n) is exponential and s(n) is
        polynomial.

        I Corollary 35 (No PRFs in C implies Learning C). Let t(n) ≤ 2O(n) . If for every k ≥ 1
        and large enough n there are no (poly(t(n)), 1/10)-pseudorandom function families in Cn [nk ],
        then for every ε > 0, k ≥ 1, and large enough n, there is a randomized oracle circuit in
                    ε
        CircuitO [2n ] that (n−k , 1/n)-learns every function in Cn [nk ].

            We observe that smaller time bounds t(n) do not necessarily lead to smaller learning
        circuits, due to the running time of the black-box generator in Definition 15 and Theorem 16.
        However, a smaller t(n) implies a weaker samplability condition in the statement of The-
        orem 34, which makes it stronger. A natural question is whether a more efficient distinguisher
        implies that larger circuits can be distinguished by subexponential size oracle circuits, in
        analogy to Lemma 24. We mention that no simple reduction via padding seems to work,
        since a random function on n bits mapped into a larger domain via projections is no longer a
        uniformly random function. Finally, the distinguishing advantage 1/10 is arbitrary. Indeed,
        it can be assumed to be much lower, by following the estimates in the proof of Theorem 16.

        I Remark. In order to prove Theorem 34, we have made essential use of the “efficient” min-
        max theorem from [9, 47], which guarantees the existence of near-optimal mixed strategies
        with simple descriptions. Unfortunately, this result does not provide an efficient algorithm
        to produce such strategies, which would lead to an equivalence between learning algorithms
        and the nonexistence of pseudorandom functions with respect to uniform computations.
        While there are more recent works that explore uniform versions of the min-max theorem
        (cf. [67]), they assume the existence of certain auxiliary algorithms in order to construct
        the near-optimal strategies, and it is unclear to us if they can be applied in the context of
        Theorem 34.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                       18:29


 5     Lower Bounds from Nontrivial Algorithms
I Theorem 36 (Circuit lower bounds from nontrivial learning algorithms). Let C be any typical
circuit class. If for each k, C[nk ] has non-trivial learning algorithms, then for each k,
BPTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ C[nk ].

   Our proof of Theorem 36 relies on previous results relating randomized learning algorithms
and lower bounds. The following connection was established in [44], using ideas from [33, 21])
and most crucially the construction of a downward self-reducible and random self-reducible
PSPACE-complete language in [65].

I Theorem 37 (Connection between learning and lower bounds [44, 21, 33]). There is a
PSPACE-complete language L? ∈ DSPACE(n) and a constant b ∈ N for which the following
holds. Let C be any typical circuit class, and s : N → N be any function with s(n) ≥ n. If
C[s(n)] is learnable to error ≤ n−b in time T (n) ≥ n, then at least one of the following
conditions hold:
  (i) L? ∈
         / C[s(n)].
       ?
 (ii) L ∈ BPTIME(poly(T (n))).

    A self-contained proof of a generalization of Theorem 37 is presented in Section 6. We
will also need a consequence of the following diagonalization lemma.

I Lemma 38 (A nonuniform almost everywhere hierarchy for space complexity). Let S, S 0 : N →
N be space-constructible functions such that S(n) = o(S 0 (n)), S(n) = Ω(log n) and S 0 (n) =
o(2n ). There is a language L ∈ DSPACE(S 0 ) such that L 6∈ i.o.DSPACE(S)/S.

Proof. This is a folklore argument. We define a space-bounded Turing machine M operating
in space S 0 such that L(M ) 6∈ i.o.DSPACE(S)/S. On inputs of length n, M uses the space-
constructibility of S 0 to compute S 0 (n) in unary using space O(S 0 (n)). It marks out S 0 (n)
cells on each of its tapes, and if at any point in its computation, it reads an unmarked cell, it
halts and rejects. Thus, on any input of length n, M uses space O(S 0 (n)). M also computes
and stores S(n) on one of its tapes.
     The high-level intuition is that M diagonalizes against machine Mi with advice z, for
each 1 ≤ i ≤ log n and advice z ∈ {0, 1}S(n) . In particular, for any fixed i and large enough
n, M diagonalizes against Mi with any advice z ∈ {0, 1}S(n) , and hence L(M ) satisfies the
conclusion of the Lemma.
     By a counting argument, there are at most log n · 2S(n) truth tables of Boolean functions
f on n bits such that f is computed by a machine Mi with 1 ≤ i ≤ log n operating in space
S(n) and using S(n) bits of advice. Thus, since S(n) = o(2n ), for large enough n, by the
pigeon-hole principle there exists a Boolean function f 0 : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} which is 0 on all
but the first log n + S(n) inputs of length n, such that f 0 is not computed by machine Mi
with advice z for any i with 1 ≤ i ≤ log n and z ∈ {0, 1}S(n) .
     M computes such a function iteratively as follows. It processes the inputs of length n in
lexicographic order. At stage i + 1, where i ≥ 0, M has stored a binary string yi of length i
representing the values of f 0 on the first i inputs of length n, and M is trying to determine
f 0 on the (i + 1)-th input of length n. For each machine Mi , 1 ≤ i ≤ log n, and each advice
string z for Mi of length S(n), by simulating those Mi ’s with advice z which do not use space
more than S(n) on any of the first i inputs, M determines if the truth table of Mi with advice
z is consistent with yi on the first i inputs. Call such a pair (i, z) a consistent machine-advice
pair at stage i + 1. M sets f 0 to 0 for the (i + 1)-th string if a minority of consistent
machine-advice pairs halt with 0 on the (i + 1)-th string, and to 1 otherwise. Determining



                                                                                                     CCC 2017
18:30   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        whether a minority of consistent machine-advice pairs halt with 0 on the (i + 1)-th string can
        be done by merely keeping a count of how many consistent machine-advice pairs halt with 0,
        and how many halt with 1, which only requires space O(S(n)). Note that using the minority
        value cuts down the number of consistent machine-advice pairs for the next stage by at least a
        factor of half. This implies that at stage log n + S(n), there are no consistent machine-advice
        pairs left, and hence M has successfully diagonalized. It is not hard to see that the overall
        simulation can be carried out in space O(S(n)), using the fact that S(n) = Ω(log n).         J

        I Corollary 39 (Diagonalizing in uniform space against non-uniform circuits). Let S1 , S2 : N → N
        be space-constructible functions such that S2 (n)2 = o(S1 (n)), S2 (n) = Ω(log n) and S1 (n) =
        o(2n ). There is a language L ∈ DSPACE(S1 ) such that L 6∈ i.o.Circuit[S2 ]. In particular, for
        each k, there is a language Lk ∈ PSPACE such that Lk 6∈ Circuit[nk ].

        Proof. Corollary 39 follows from Lemma 38 using the fact that Circuit[S]                       ⊆
        DSPACE(S 2 )/S 2 .                                                                             J

           In fact, a tighter simulation holds, and therefore a tighter separation in Corollary 39, but
        we will not need this for our purposes. We are now ready to prove Theorem 36.

        Proof of Theorem 36. Let C be a typical circuit class. By assumption, C[nk ] has a non-
        trivial learner for each k > 0. Since C is typical, we can use Lemma 24 to conclude that for
                                                                                  ε
        each ε > 0 and for each k > 0, C[nk ] is strongly learnable in time 2n .
            Let L? be the PSPACE-complete language in the statement of Theorem 37. Using
        Theorem 37 and the conclusion of the previous paragraph, we have that at least one of the
                                                                                            ε
        following is true: (1) For all k, L? 6∈ C[nk ], or (2) For all ε > 0, L? ∈ BPTIME(2n ).
            In case (1), since L? ∈ DSPACE(n) ⊆ DTIME(2O(n) ), we have that for each k > 0,
        DTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ C[nk ], and hence also BPTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ C[nk ].
                                                              ε
            In case (2), we have that L? ∈ BPTIME(2n ) for every ε > 0. Since L? is PSPACE-
        complete, this implies that the language Lk in the statement of Corollary 39 is also in
                     ε
        BPTIME(2n ), for every fixed ε > 0 and k ∈ N. (Here the polynomial blowup of instance
        size in the reduction from Lk to L? is taken care of by the universal quantification over ε.)
        In particular, we have Lk ∈ BPTIME(2n ), for every k. Since for any typical circuit class we
        have C[nk ] ⊆ Circuit[nc ] for a large enough c = c(k), there is a language Lc ∈ BPTIME[2n ]
        such that Lc ∈ / C[nk ]. This establishes the desired result.                              J

           We mention for completeness that the same approach yields a trade-off involving the
        running time of the learning algorithm and its accuracy in the hypothesis of Theorem 36.

        I Theorem 40 (Trade-off between error and running time). Let C be a typical circuit class, and
        γ : N → (0, 1/2] ∩ Q be a polynomial time computable function. If for each k, C[nk ] can be
        learned with advantage at least γ(n) in time γ(n)2 ·2n /nω(1) , then for each k, BPTIME[2O(n) ] *
        C[nk ].

        Proof (Sketch). The proof is entirely analogous to the argument in Theorem 36. It is enough
        to observe that such learning algorithms yield the complexity distinguishers required in
        Lemma 24 via a natural generalization of the proof of Lemma 22. The quantitative trade-off
        between accuracy and running time is a consequence of Lemma 21.                           J

        I Remark. Observe that as the advantage γ(n) approaches 2−n/2 from above, the running
        time required in Theorem 40 becomes meaningless. This quantitative connection between
        γ(n) and the running time is not entirely unexpected. On the one hand, it is a consequence
        of the concentration bound, which is essentially optimal. But also note that every function
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                       18:31


g : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} can be approximated with advantage ≥ 2−n/2 by a parity function (or
its negation), and that heavy fourier coefficients corresponding to such parity functions can
be found using membership queries by the Goldreich-Levin Algorithm (see e.g. [53]).
    We can expand the scope of application of Theorem 36, using a win-win argument. The
more general result below applies to subclasses of Boolean circuits satisfying the very weak
requirement that they are closed under projections, rather than just to the more specialized
“typical” classes.
I Theorem 41 (Lower bounds from non-trivial learning algorithms for subclasses of circuits).
Let C be any subclass of Boolean circuits closed under projections. If for each k, C[nk ] has
non-trivial learning algorithms, then for each k, BPTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ C[nk ].
Proof. Consider the Circuit Value Problem (CVP), which is complete for Circuit[poly] under
polynomial size projections. Either CVP is in C[nc ] for some fixed c, or it is not. If it is not,
then we have the desired lower bound for CVP and hence also for the class BPTIME(2O(n) ),
which contains this problem. If CVP is in C[nc ], then since CVP is closed under poly-size
projections, we have by completeness and the assumption of the theorem that for each k,
Circuit[nk ] has non-trivial learning algorithms. Now applying Theorem 36, we have that for
each k, BPTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ Circuit[nk ], which implies that BPTIME(2O(n) ) 6⊆ C[nk ], since C is
a subclass of Boolean circuits.                                                                J

I Remark. Observe that it is possible to instantiate Theorem 41 for very particular classes
such as AND ◦ OR ◦ THR circuits, and that the lower bound holds for exactly the same circuit
class. In particular, there is no circuit depth blow-up.
   We get an improved lower bound consequence for the circuit class ACC0 , but under the
assumption that subexponential-size circuits are non-trivially learnable. (Recall that there
are satisfiability algorithms for such circuits with non-trivial running time [73].)
I Theorem 42 (Improved lower bounds from non-trivial learning algorithms for ACC0 ). If for
                                                                        ε
every depth d ∈ N and modulo m ∈ N there is ε > 0 such that ACC0d,m [2n ] has non-trivial
                                     0
learning algorithms, then REXP 6⊆ ACC [poly].
Proof. Under the assumption on learnability, using Lemma 24, we have that for each k > 0,
ACC0 [nk ] has strong learners running in time 2polylog(n) . Now applying Theorem 37, we
have that at least one of the following is true for the PSPACE-complete language L? in the
statement of the theorem: (1) L? 6∈ ACC0 [nk ] for any k, or (2) L? ∈ BPQP, where BPQP is
bounded error probabilistic quasi-polynomial time.
    In case (1), we have that L? 6∈ ACC0 [poly], and are done as in the proof of Theorem 36.
    In case (2), by PSPACE-completeness of L? , we have that PSPACE ⊆ BPQP. This implies
that NP ⊆ BPQP, and hence that NP ⊆ RQP, where RQP is probabilistic quasi-polynomial
time with one-sided error. The second implication follows using downward self-reducibility
to find a witness for SAT given the assumption that SAT is in BPQP, thus eliminating
error on negative instances. Now NP ⊆ RQP implies NEXP = REXP, using a standard
translation argument. Williams showed that NEXP 6⊆ ACC0 [poly], and so it follows that
REXP 6⊆ ACC0 [poly], as desired.                                                          J

    More generally, the same argument combined with the connection between non-trivial
satisfiability algorithms and circuit lower bounds [73] imply the following result.
I Corollary 43 (Lower bounds from learning and satisfiability). Let C be any typical circuit
class. Assume that for each k, C[nk ] admits a non-trivial satisfiability algorithm, and that
                    ε
for some ε > 0, C[2n ] admits a non-trivial learning algorithm. Then REXP * C[poly].



                                                                                                     CCC 2017
18:32   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


            Recall that randomized learning algorithms and BPP-natural properties are strongly
        related by results of [19]. We can give still stronger lower bound conclusions from assumptions
        about P-natural proofs. The idea is to combine the arguments above with an application of
        the easy witness method of Kabanets [37].

        I Theorem 44 (Improved lower bounds from natural proofs). Let C be any subclass of Boolean
                                                                                            ε
        circuits closed under projections. If there are P-natural proofs useful against C[2n ] for some
        ε > 0, then ZPEXP 6⊆ C[poly].

           The following immediate consequence is of particular interest.

        I Corollary 45 (ACC0 lower bounds from natural proofs). If for some δ > 0 there are P-natural
                               δ
        proofs against ACC0 [2n ] then ZPEXP * ACC0 [poly].

           In order to prove Theorem 44, we will need the following lemma.

        I Lemma 46 (Simulating bounded error with zero error given natural proofs). Suppose there is
                                                                                δ
        a constant δ > 0 such that there are P-natural proofs against Circuit[2n ]. Then BPEXP =
        ZPEXP.

        Proof. Note that zero-error probabilistic time is trivially contained in bounded-error prob-
        abilistic time, so we only need to show that BPEXP ⊆ ZPEXP under the assumption. We
        will in fact show that BPP ⊆ ZPQP, where ZPQP is zero-error bounded probabilistic quasi-
        polynomial time. The desired conclusion follows from this using a standard translation
        argument.
                                                                                  δ
            By assumption, there is a natural property R useful against Circuit[2n ] for some constant
        δ > 0, such that LR ∈ P. Let M be any machine operating in bounded-error probabilistic time
        nd for some d > 0. We define a zero-error machine M 0 deciding L(M ) in quasi-polynomial
                                                                                              d0
        time as follows. On input x of length n, M 0 guesses a random string r of size 2log(n) , where
        d0 is a large enough constant to be defined later. It then checks if r ∈ LR or not, using the
        polynomial-time decision procedure for the natural property R. If not, it outputs ‘?’ and
        halts. If it does, it runs the procedure of Theorem 13 on input n2d in unary and r, to obtain
        the range of a (polylog(n), 1/n2d ) PRG against Circuit[n2d ]. Since r ∈ LR , Theorem 13
        applies, and the output of the procedure is guaranteed to be the range of such a PRG.
        M 0 then runs M on x independently with each element of the range of the PRG used as
        randomness, and takes the majority vote. This is guaranteed to be correct when r ∈ LR ,
        which happens with probability at least 1/2 by the density property of R. Thus M 0 is a
        zero-error machine, and it is clear that M 0 can be implemented in quasi-polynomial time. J

        Proof of Theorem 44. We proceed as in the proof of Theorem 41. Either CVP is in C[poly],
        or it is not. If not, we have the desired lower bound for CVP, and hence for ZPEXP, which
        contains this problem.
            On the other hand, if CVP is in C[poly], we have that CVP is in C[nk ] for some k > 0. By
        the completeness of CVP for poly-size circuits under poly-size projections, and the closure of
        C under projections, we have that Circuit[n] ⊆ C[nk ] for some k > 0, and hence by a standard
                                                         δ        ε
        translation argument, we have that Circuit[2n ] ⊆ C[2n ] for any δ < ε. By assumption, we
                                                       ε
        have P-natural properties useful against C[2n ] and hence we also have P-natural properties
                                 δ
        useful against Circuit[2n ] for any δ < ε. Now, applying Lemma 46, we get BPEXP = ZPEXP.
                                                                                                    δ
            We argue next that under the existence of P-natural properties useful against Circuit[2n ]
        for a fixed δ > 0, we also have EXPSPACE = BPEXP. The mentioned hypothesis implies
                                                                      δ
        that there exist complexity distinguishers against Circuit[2n ] running in deterministic time
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                   18:33


2O(n) (the acceptance probability can be amplified using truth-table concatenation). As
a consequence, Lemma 23 provides strong learning algorithms for Circuit[poly] running in
quasi-polynomial time. By Theorem 37, either PSPACE * Circuit[poly], and we are done, or
PSPACE ⊆ BPQP. Now a standard upward translation gives EXPSPACE ⊆ BPEXP, which
shows that EXPSPACE = BPEXP.
    Altogether,
          √
                we have EXPSPACE = ZPEXP. Now this collapse and Corollary 39 with
S1 (n) = 2 n and S2 (n) = nlog n yield a language L ∈ ZPEXP such that L ∈ / Circuit[poly],
which completes the proof of Theorem 44.                                               J

    Recall that the existence of useful properties against a circuit class C is essentially
equivalent to the existence of non-deterministic exponential time lower bounds against C
[74, 54]. We do not expect a similar equivalence in the case of natural properties and lower
bounds for probabilistic exponential time. The results described in this section show that
natural properties imply such lower bounds. However, if the other direction were true, then
any lower for C with respect to probabilistic exponential time classes would also provide a
non-trivial learning algorithm for C. In particular, since we believe in separations such as
EXP * Circuit[poly], this would imply via the Speedup Lemma that polynomial size circuits
can be learned in sub-exponential time, which seems unlikely.

 6     Karp-Lipton Collapses for Probabilistic Classes

6.1    A Lemma About Learning with Advice
In this section we will need some notions of computability with advice. While this is a
standard notion, we provide some definitions, as bounded-error randomized algorithms taking
advice can be defined in different ways.
   Recall that an advice-taking Turing machine is a Turing machine equipped with an extra
tape, the advice tape. At the start of any computation of an advice-taking Turing machine,
the input is present on the input tape of the machine and a string called the “advice” on the
advice tape of the machine, to both of which the machine has access.

I Definition 47 (Probabilistic time with advice). Let T : N → N and a : N → N be functions.
BPTIME(T )/a is the class of languages L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ for which there is an advice-taking
probabilistic Turing machine M which always halts in time T (n) and a sequence {zn }n∈N of
strings such that:
1. For each n, |zn | ≤ a(n).
2. For any input x ∈ L such that |x| = n, M accepts x with probability at least 2/3 when
    using advice string zn .
3. For any input x 6∈ L such that |x| = n, M rejects x with probability at least 2/3 when
    using advice string zn .

    Note that in the above definition, there are no guarantees on the behaviour of the machine
for advice strings other than the “correct” advice string zn . In particular, for an arbitrary
advice string, the machine does not have to satisfy the bounded-error condition on an input,
though it does have to halt within time T .
    The notion of resource-bounded computation with advice is fairly general and extends
to other models of computation, such as deterministic computation and computation of
non-Boolean functions. These extensions are natural, and we will not define them formally.
    A slightly less standard notion of computation with advice is learnability with advice.
We extend Definition 7 to capture learning with advice by giving the learning algorithm an



                                                                                                 CCC 2017
18:34   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        advice string, and only requiring the learning algorithm to work correctly for a “correct”
        advice string of the requisite length.
           We will also need the standard notions of downward self-reducibility and random self-
        reducibility.

        I Definition 48 (Downward self-reducibility). A function f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} is said to be
        downward self-reducible if there is a polynomial-time oracle procedure Af (x) such that:
        1. On any input x of length n, Af (x) only makes queries of length < n.
        2. For every input x, Af (x) = f (x).

        I Definition 49 (Random self-reducibility). A function f : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} is said to be
        random self-reducible if there are constants k, ` ≥ 1 and polynomial-time computable
        functions g : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}∗ and h : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} satisfying the following conditions:
        1. For large enough n, for every x ∈ {0, 1}n and for each i ∈ N such that 1 ≤ i ≤ nk ,
           g(i, x, r) ∼ Un when r ∼ Un` .
        2. For large enough n and for every function f˜n : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} that is (1/nk )-close to f
              on n-bit strings, for every x ∈ {0, 1}n :

                  f (x) = h(x, r, f˜n (g(1, x, r)), f˜n (g(2, x, r)), . . . , f˜n (g(nk , x, r)))

              with probability ≥ 1 − 2−2n when r ∼ Un` .

        I Theorem 50 (A special PSPACE-complete function [65]). There is a PSPACE-complete
        function fTV : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} such that fTV is downward self-reducible and random self-
        reducible.

           Below we consider the learnability of the class of Boolean functions {fTV } that contains
        only the function fTV .

        I Lemma 51 (Learnability with advice for PSPACE implies randomized algorithms). For any
        polynomial-time computable non-decreasing function a : N → N with a(n) ≤ n, and for any
        non-decreasing function T : N → N such that n ≤ T (n) ≤ 2n , if {fTV } is strongly learnable
        in time T with a bits of advice, then fTV is computable in bounded-error probabilistic time
        T (n)2 · 2a(n) · nO(1) , and hence PSPACE ⊆ BPTIME(T (poly(n))2 · 2a(poly(n)) · poly(n)).

        Proof. The argument is based on and extends ideas from [44, 21, 65, 33]. Recall that fTV is
        the same Boolean function as in the statement of Theorem 50. As stated there, this function
        is downward self-reducible and random self-reducible. Now suppose {fTV } is learnable in
        time T with a bits of advice. We design a probabilistic machine M solving fTV on inputs
        of length n with bounded error in time T (n)2 · 2a(n) · nO(1) . The addition inclusion in the
        statement of Lemma 51 follows from the completeness of fTV .
            Let x ∈ {0, 1}n be the input to M . Let Alearn be a (1/n4k , 1/22n )-learner for {fTV } that
        takes a(n) bits of advice and runs in time T (n).12 Here k is the exponent in the number of
        queries in the random self-reduction for fTV given by Theorem 50.


        12
             In this argument, we do not care about poly(n) multiplicative factors applied to the final running time,
             so we can assume the failure probability of the learner to be exponentially small by amplification. This
             is a standard argument, and we refer to [41] for more details.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                         18:35


Overview. The plan of the proof is that M will use the advice-taking learner to inductively
produce, with high probability, circuits computing fTV correctly on inputs of length 1 . . . n.
The crucial aspect is not to allow the size of these circuits to grow too large. There will be
n phases in the operation of M – during Phase i, M will produce with high probability a
randomized circuit computing fTV on inputs of length i.
    Each phase consists of 2 parts. In Part 1 of Phase i, M computes, for each possible
advice string z of length a(i) that can be fed to the advice-taking learner on input 1i , a
candidate deterministic circuit Ciz on i-bit inputs of size at most T (i). In order for M to do
this, it uses the properties of the learner, as well as the circuits for smaller lengths that have
already been computed. The only guarantee on the candidate circuits is that at least one of
them is a approximately correct circuit for fTV at length i, in the sense that it is correct on
most inputs of this length. In Part 2 of Phase i, M uses the random self-reducibility and
downward self-reducibility of fTV to select the “best-performing” candidate among these
circuits and compute a “correction” Ci of the best-performing circuit. The circuit Ci will have
size T (i) · poly(n), and with high probability, it will be a randomized circuit that computes
fTV correctly on all i-bit inputs, in the sense that on each such string it is correct with
overwhelming probability over its internal randomness. At the end of Phase n, M evaluates
the circuit Cn on x and outputs the answer.
   We now give the details of how Part 1 and Part 2 work for each phase. We will then
need to argue that M is correct, and that it is as efficient as claimed. Phase 1, which is the
base case for M ’s inductive operation, is trivial. The circuit C1 computing fTV correctly on
inputs of length 1 is simply hard-coded into M .
   Now let i > 1 be an integer. We describe how Part 1 and Part 2 of Phase i work, assuming
inductively that M already has stored in memory a sequence of circuit {Cj }, for 1 ≤ j ≤ i − 1,
such that for each such j, Cj has size at most T (j) · poly(n), and with all but exponentially
small probability, computes fTV correctly on each input of length j.

Part 1. M first uses the polynomial-time computability of a to compute a(i). It then cycles
over strings z ∈ {0, 1}a(i) , and for each string z it does the following. It simulates Alearn (1i )
with advice z. Each time Alearn makes a membership query of length i, M answers the
membership query using the downward self-reducibility of fTV as follows. If the downward
self-reduction makes a query of length j < i, M answers it by running the stored circuit Cj
on the corresponding query.
    If Alearn (1i ) with advice z does not halt with an output that is a circuit on i bits, M sets
  z
Ci to be a trivial circuit on i bits, say the circuit that always outputs 0. Otherwise M sets
Ciz to be the circuit output by the learning algorithm. Since Alearn is guaranteed to halt in
time T (i) for every advice string, the circuit Ciz has size at most T (i).

Part 2. M samples strings y1 , . . . , yt , where t = n10k , uniformly and independently at
random amongst i-bit strings. It computes “guesses” b1 , . . . , bt ∈ {0, 1} for the values of fTV
on these inputs by running the downward self-reducibility procedure for fTV , and answering
any queries of length j < i using the stored circuits Cj . Then, for each advice string z, it
simulates Ciz on each input y` , where 1 ≤ ` ≤ t, and computes the fraction ρz of inputs y` for
which Ciz (y` ) = b` . Let zmax be the advice string z for which ρzmax is maximum among all such
advice strings. Let Di be the (deterministic) circuit Cizmax . M produces a randomized circuit
Ci from Di as follows. Ci applies the random self-reduction procedure for fTV O(n) times
independently, using the circuit Di to answer the random queries to fTV , and outputs the
majority answer of these runs. Note that Ci can easily be implemented in size T (i) · poly(n),



                                                                                                       CCC 2017
18:36   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        using the fact that the random self-reduction procedure runs in polynomial time. (We stress
        that Ci is a randomized circuit even though Di is deterministic.)
            It is sufficient to argue that M halts in time T (n) · poly(n) · 2a(n) , and that the final
        circuit Cn computed by M is a correct randomized circuit for fTV on inputs of length n with
        high probability over the random choices of M .

        Complexity of M . We will show that M uses time at most T (i)2 · poly(n) · 2a(i) in Phase
        i, and computes a circuit Ci of size at most T (i) · poly(n). Since a and T are non-decreasing,
        this implies that M uses time at most T (n)2 · poly(n) · 2a(n) in total. We will analyze Part 1
        and Part 2 separately.
            The first step in Part 1, which is computing a(i), can be done in time poly(n). For
        each z, simulating the learner and computing the circuit Ciz can be done in time at most
        T (i) · T (i − 1) · poly(n), since the learner runs in time T (i) and makes at most that many
        oracle queries, each of which can be answered by simulating a circuit Cj of size at most
        T (j) · poly(n), where j ≤ i − 1. There are 2a(i) advice strings z which M cycles over, hence
        the total time taken by M in Part 1 of Phase i is at most T (i)2 · 2a(i) · poly(n) by the
        non-decreasing property of T .
            In Part 2 of Phase i, computing the bits b1 , . . . , bt takes time at most T (i) · poly(n),
        since the downward self-reducibility procedure runs in time poly(n), and every query can be
        answered by simulation of a circuit Cj with j < i in time at most T (i) · poly(n). For each Ciz ,
        computing the fraction ρz takes time at most T (i) · poly(n), since it involves simulating Ciz
        on poly(n) inputs, and Ciz is of size at most T (i). Doing this for each z takes time at most
        T (i) · 2a(i) · poly(n) time, as there are 2a(i) possible advice strings of length a(i). Computing
        zmax takes time poly(n), and then computing the “corrected” circuit Ci takes time at most
        T (i) · poly(n), since the random self-reducibility procedure runs in polynomial time and can
        therefore be simulated using polynomial-size circuits.

        Correctness of M . Clearly Phase 1 concludes with a correct circuit C1 for fTV on 1-bit
        inputs. We will argue inductively that, given that the randomized circuit Ci−1 computed at
        the end of Phase i − 1 is a correct circuit for fTV on inputs of length i − 1 such that its error
        probability is at most 2−2n on any input, with all but exponentially small probability over
        the random choices of M in Phase i, the randomized circuit Ci computed at the end of Phase
        i is a correct circuit for fTV on inputs of length i, with error probability at most 2−2n on any
        input. By a union bound over the phases, it follows from this that with all but exponentially
        small probability, the final circuit Cn is a correct randomized circuit for fTV on inputs of
        length n (with error probability at most 2−2n ), and hence that carrying out all the phases
        and then simulating Cn on x yields the correct value fTV (x) with overwhelming probability.
             Therefore our task reduces to arguing the correctness of Phase i given the correctness of
        Phase i − 1, for an arbitrary i such that 1 < i ≤ n. We discuss the correctness of Part 1 and
        Part 2 separately.
             In Part 1, we argue that with all but exponentially small probability, at least one of the
        circuits Ciz computes fTV correctly on all but a 1/i3k fraction inputs of length i. Consider
        the string zi of length a(i) that is the “correct” advice string for Alearn on input 1i . We
        only analyze Part 1 for the advice string zi – the other advice strings are irrelevant to our
        analysis of correctness for this part. Alearn with advice zi is a correct learner for {fTV };
        hence with probability at least 1 − 2−2i , it outputs a circuit that computes fTV on at least a
        1 − 1/i4k fraction of inputs of length i, when it is given access to a correct oracle for fTV .
        By running the learner poly(n) times independently and doing standard amplification, the
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      18:37


success probability can be boosted to 1 − 2−2n , while keeping the agreement of the hypothesis
with fTV at least 1 − 1/i3k , and not affecting the efficiency of M by more than a polynomial
factor. M might not be able to answer queries to fTV with perfect accuracy, however by the
inductive hypothesis that Cj has error at most 2−2n on any specific input for j < i, it follows
by a union bound that with probability at least 1 − T (i)2−2n ≥ 1 − 2−n over the internal
randomness of M , the simulation of the learner is correct. Hence with probability at least
1 − 2−n , M outputs a circuit Cizi during Phase i, Part 1, such that Cizi agrees with fTV on
at least a 1 − 1/i3k fraction of inputs of length i.
     Next we analyze Part 2 of Phase i. By a union bound, with probability at least 1 −
poly(n)/22n , the “guesses” b1 , . . . , bt ∈ {0, 1} are all the correct values for fTV on inputs
y1 , . . . , yt ∈ {0, 1}i , where by construction t = n10k . By using a standard concentration
bound such as Lemma 19, we have that the estimate ρzi is at least 1 − 1/i2k with probability
at least 1 − 2−4n , and that with probability at least 1 − 2−4n any z such that the agreement
ρz is at least 1 − 1/i2k must be such that Ciz agrees with fTV on at least a 1 − 1/i3k/2
fraction of inputs of length i. Thus with probability at least 1 − poly(n)/22n , we have that
Cizmax has agreement at least 1 − 1/i3k/2 with fTV on inputs of length i. By again using a
union bound and a standard concentration bound such as Lemma 19, we have that with all
but exponentially small probability, the corrected circuit Ci is a randomized circuit which
computes fTV correctly on all inputs of length i, making error < 2−2n on any single input.
This completes the inductive argument for correctness.                                         J

6.2    Karp-Lipton Results for Bounded-Error Exponential Time
I Lemma 52 (Learnability with advice from distinguishability). Let f ∈ EXP be a Boolean
function and a : N → N be a advice function.
1. (High-End Generator) There is a constant c ≥ 1 such that for any ε ∈ (0, 1], there is a
                                                                   nε
                                                       nc
   sequence of functions {GHE                HE
                             n }n∈N with Gn : {0, 1}      → {0, 1}2 computable in determin-
                  c
   istic time 2O(n ) such that if there is a probabilistic procedure A(1n ) taking a(n) bits of
                                     ε
   advice and running in time 2O(n ) , and outputting a circuit distinguisher for GHE  n (Unc )
   with constant probability for all large enough n, then {f } is strongly learnable in time
        ε
   2O(n ) with a(n) bits of advice.
2. (Low-End Generator) There is a constant c ≥ 1 such that for any d ≥ 1, there is a sequence
                                               c           (log n)d
   of functions {GLE                LE
                    n }n∈N with Gn : {0, 1}
                                             n
                                                 → {0, 1}2         computable in deterministic
          O(nc )
   time 2        such that if there is a probabilistic quasipolynomial-time procedure A(1n )
   taking a(n) bits of advice and outputting a circuit distinguisher for GLE
                                                                          n (Unc ) with constant
   probability for all large enough n, then {f } is strongly learnable in quasi-polynomial time
   with a(n) bits of advice.

Proof (Nutshell). This follows from the reconstruction procedure for the Nisan-Wigderson
generator together with hardness amplification. We refer to [51] for more details.     J

I Theorem 53 (Low-end Karp-Lipton Theorem for bounded-error exponential time). If there is
a k ≥ 1 such that BPE ⊆ i.o.Circuit[nk ], then BPEXP ⊆ i.o.EXP/O(log n).

Proof. We will prove the contrapositive. For each bounded-error probabilistic exponential
time machine M , we will define for each rational ε > 0 a deterministic exponential-time
machine Mε taking logarithmic advice which attempts to simulate it. If all of the attempted
simulations Mε fail almost everywhere, we will show that PSPACE ⊆ BPSUBEXP, and we
will then use a translation argument and Corollary 39 to conclude that BPE 6⊆ i.o.Circuit[nk ],
thus establishing the contrapositive.



                                                                                                    CCC 2017
18:38   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


                                                                                    j
            Let M be any bounded-error probabilistic machine running in time 2m , where m is the
        input length, and j is a constant. We assume without loss of generality that j ≥ 1, and that
        M has error < 1/4 on any input. Let ε > 0 be any rational. We define the deterministic
        exponential-time machine Mε taking O(log m) bits of advice on inputs of length m below.
        It uses the generators {GHE n } given by Lemma 52 corresponding to the PSPACE-complete
        language fTV in the statement of Theorem 50, which is clearly in exponential time.
            On input x of length m, Mε first uses the advice on its tape to determine an integer n
                       j      ε           j
        such that 22m ≤ 2n < 22(m+1) . Note that any n ∈ N satisfying these conditions is such
        that n = Θ(mj/ε ). Hence there are poly(m) possibilities for n, and any of these possibilities
        can be encoded using O(log m) bits on the advice tape. Given a number i on the advice tape,
        Mε can decode the relevant n by determining the i-th number in increasing order satisfying
        both inequalities. This can be done in poly(m) time since we can assume ε is hard-coded into
        Mε , and any single inequality verification can be done in poly(m) time. Mε then computes
                                                    nc
        R(y) = GHE n (y) for every string y ∈ {0, 1} . It simulates M on x using each string R(y) in
        turn as the randomness for M , and outputs the majority result of these simulations. It is
                                                                 c         cj/ε
        easy to see that Mε can be implemented to run in 2O(n ) = 2O(m ) time, i.e, in time that
        is exponential on its input length m.
            If any of the simulations Mε succeeds on infinitely many input lengths m, we have that
        L(M ) ∈ i.o.EXP/O(log m). Suppose, contrariwise, that all of the simulations Mε fail almost
        everywhere. We will argue that fTV ∈ BPSUBEXP and hence, by completeness of fTV ,
        PSPACE ⊆ BPSUBEXP.
                                                                             j
            For any x ∈ {0, 1}m , let Cx be the circuit of size at most 22m defined as follows: the
        input of Cx is the sequence of random bits r used by M in its computation on x. Cx (r)
        accepts iff M accepts on x using the sequence r of random bits. By the standard translation
                                                                                                     j
        of deterministic computations into circuits, Cx can be implemented in size at most 22m ,
                                                  j
        using the fact that M halts in time 2m .
            Fix any ε > 0. Let n be an arbitrary positive integer, and let m(n) be the unique m such
                j      ε           j                    def   j
        that 22m ≤ 2n < 22(m+1) (observe that h(a) = 22a is an increasing function, so this m is
        indeed unique if n is not too small). We claim that for every large enough n, there is an
        input x of length m(n) such that Cx is a distinguisher for GHE  n (Unc ). Indeed, if not, there
        are infinitely many n such that for all inputs x of length m(n), Cx is not a distinguisher, but
        this implies that the simulation Mε on inputs of length m(n) would succeed infinitely often
        with advice encoding the input length n. Since for each m, there are only finitely many n
        such that m = m(n), it follows that the simulation Mε succeeds on infinitely many input
        lengths with logarithmic advice. But this contradicts our assumption that the simulation
        Mε fails almost everywhere.
            Now that our claim is established, we define a deterministic procedure A(1n ) taking
                                                         ε
        O(nε ) bits of advice and running in time 2O(n ) , which for each large enough n produces a
        circuit distinguisher for GHE
                                    n . The procedure A computes m(n) in polynomial time. Note
        that m(n) = O(nε/j ) = O(nε ), by our assumption that j ≥ 1. A then interprets its advice
        as an string x of length m(n). It computes Cx , which it can do given x in time polynomial
        in the size of Cx , and outputs Cx . The time taken by A is dominated by the time required
                                       ε
        to compute Cx , which is 2O(n ) , and the advice used by A is of size O(nε ).
                                                                                               ε
            By applying Lemma 52, we get that {fTV } is strongly learnable in time 2O(n ) with
        O(nε ) bits of advice. By applying Lemma 51, we get that fTV is computable in bounded-
                                      ε
        error probabilistic time 2O(n ) . Note that this is the case for every ε > 0, since our choice
        of ε was arbitrary. Thus we have fTV ∈ BPSUBEXP, and hence by completeness that
        PSPACE ⊆ BPSUBEXP. Using a standard upward translation argument and applying
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                   18:39


Corollary 39, we get that for every k > 0, BPE 6⊆ i.o.Circuit[nk ], which is the desired
conclusion.                                                                            J

I Theorem 54 (High-end Karp-Lipton Theorem for bounded-error exponential time). If
                                                                     nε
BPEXP ⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ], then for each ε > 0, BPEXP ⊆ i.o.DTIME(22 )/nε .

Proof (Sketch). The proof is entirely analogous to the proof of Theorem 53, except that we
use generators GLE                              HE
                  n rather than the generators Gn , adjusting other parameters accordingly.
                                                                                    nε
We get that either PSPACE ⊆ BPQP, or that for every ε > 0, BPEXP ⊆ i.o.DTIME(2 )/nε .
In the first case, by upward translation, we get that EXPSPACE = BPEXP, and then by
using Corollary 39, we conclude that BPEXP 6⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ].                        J

I Theorem 55 (Low-end fully uniform Karp-Lipton style theorem for probabilistic time). If
there is a k ≥ 1 such that BPE ⊆ i.o.Circuit[nk ], then REXP ⊆ i.o.EXP.

Proof (Sketch). We use the crucial fact that the union of hitting sets is also a hitting set
to eliminate the advice in the simulation. The argument is the same as in the proof of
Theorem 53, except that the simulating machine Mε runs M on x using as randomness R
                                                                         2mj     ε          j
every element in turn that is in the range of GHE
                                               n for every n such that 2     ≤ 2n < 22(m+1) ,
accepting if and only if any of these runs accepts. Note that Mε does not take advice. We
do not need to give the “correct” n as advice to the machine because, if any n in the interval
produces an accepting path (corresponding to a string in the range of the generator), then
S HE
  n Gn (Un ) for n as above contains an accepting path for M on x. Finally, we observe that
           c

computing the range of the generator for every such n does not blow-up the complexity of
the simulation by more than a polynomial factor.                                            J

I Theorem 56 (High-end fully uniform Karp-Lipton style theorem for probabilistic time). If
BPEXP ⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ], then REXP ⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP.

Proof (Sketch). The proof is entirely analogous to the proof of Theorem 55, except that we
use generators GLE                              HE
                n rather than the generators Gn , adjusting other parameters accordingly.
                                                                                         J

   These results can be combined with a Karp-Lipton collapse for deterministic exponential
time. For instance, the following holds.

I Corollary 57. If there is k ∈ N such that BPE ⊆ Circuit[nk ], then REXP ⊆ i.o.MA.

Proof. It follows from the hypothesis that E ⊆ Circuit[nk ], and hence EXP ⊆ Circuit[poly]
by translation. This in turn implies that EXP = MA [12]. Moreover, the hypothesis gives
REXP ⊆ i.o.EXP using Theorem 55. Consequently, we get REXP ⊆ i.o.MA, which completes
the proof.                                                                              J

6.3    Karp-Lipton Results for Zero-Error Exponential Time
I Lemma 58 (Fully uniform simulations using easy witness and truth-table concatenation).
Either BPP ⊆ ZPQP, or ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP.

Proof. We use the “easy witness” method of Kabanets [37]. Let M be any probabilistic
                                                       j
Turing machine with zero error running in time 2m for some j ≥ 1, such that on each
random computation path of M on any input x, the output is either the correct answer for
M on x or ‘?’, and moreover the probability of outputting ‘?’ is less than 2−2m for any input
x ∈ {0, 1}m . For each ε > 0, we define the following attempted deterministic simulation Mε



                                                                                                 CCC 2017
18:40   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


                                                                                  ε/2
        for M . On input x of length m, Mε cycles over all circuits C of size 2m on mj inputs. For
        each such circuit, it explicitly computes the truth table tt(C) of the circuit C, and runs M
        on x with tt(C) as randomness. If the run accepts, it accepts; if the run rejects, it rejects.
        If the run outputs ‘?’, it moves on to the next circuit C in lexicographic order of circuit
        encodings. If all runs output ‘?’, theε machine rejects. It should be clear that the simulation
                                            m
        Mε runs in deterministic time ≤ 22 on inputs of length m for any sufficiently large m, and
        only accepts inputs x ∈ L(M ).
            If for each ε > 0, we have that the simulation Mε solves L(M ) correctly on all inputs of
        length m for infinitely many input lengths m, we have that L(M ) ⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP.
            Suppose, on the contrary, that there is some ε > 0 such that the simulation Mε fails on
        at least one input x of each large enough input length m. We show how to use this to decide
        every language in BPP in ZPQP.
            Let N be any bounded-error probabilistic machine running in time at most nk for some
        constant k and large enough n. Assume without loss of generality that N has error ≤ 1/10
        on any input of length n. We use M to give a zero-error simulation N 0 of N on all inputs
        of large enough length. Given an input y of length n, N 0 simulates M on each input x
                          def
        of length m(n) = (dlog ne)d in turn, for some constant d ≥ 1 to be specified later. If M
                        0
        outputs ‘?’, N outputs ‘?’, otherwise it moves on to the next input in lexicographic order.
        If running M gives ‘?’ outputs for every input x of length m(n), N 0 outputs ‘?’. Otherwise,
        N 0 concatenates the random strings used on the computation paths of M for each input of
        length m(n) into a single string Rn of length O(2polylog(n) ). It then uses Rn as the truth-table
        of the hard function for the generator in Theorem 13, setting parameters so that at least n2k
        pseudorandom bits are produced by the generator. It cycles over all possible seeds of the
        generator and runs N using each output in turn as the sequence of random choices, accepting
        if and only if a majority of runs accepts.
            Setting d to be a large enough constant depending on j, k, ε and the constant c in the
        statement of Theorem 13, it can be shown that this simulation can be done in quasi-polynomial
        time, and that it is correct for each input y of large enough length whenever N 0 does not
        output ‘?’. The key here is that by the failure of Mε for at least one input of any large
        enough length, the string Rn is guaranteed to be hard enough that the generator is correct.
        This is because Rn contains a subfunction of sufficiently large worst-case circuit complexity.
        Hence cycling over all seeds of the generator and taking the majority value gives the correct
        answer for N on input y. Finally, under our initial assumption that M has exponentially
        small failure probability, by a union bound the probability that N 0 outputs ‘?’ on any large
        enough input is small. This concludes the proof that BPP ⊆ ZPQP.                               J

        I Theorem 59 (High-end fully uniform Karp-Lipton theorem for zero-error exponential time).
        If ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ], then ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP.
        Proof. Observe that the proof of Theorem 56 establishes that if REXP 6⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP,
        then PSPACE ⊆ BPQP. By Lemma 58, if ZPEXP 6⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP, then BPP ⊆ ZPQP,
        and hence by upward translation, BPQP = ZPQP. Putting these together, we have that if
        ZPEXP 6⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP, then PSPACE ⊆ ZPQP. Now by upward translation, we have that
        EXPSPACE = ZPEXP, and hence by Corollary 39, we get ZPEXP 6⊆ i.o.Circuit[2n/3 ].  J

            We have learned from Valentine Kabanets (private communication) that he has independ-
        ently established Theorem 59 in an unpublished manuscript.
            In fact, we can get a non-trivial consequence from the weakest possible non-trivial
        assumption about the circuit size of Boolean functions computable in zero-error exponential
        time. This extension of Theorem 59 relies on the following simple lemma.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                      18:41


I Lemma 60 (Maximally hard functions in exponential space). Let smax : N → N be such that
for each n ∈ N, smax (n) is the maximum circuit complexity among Boolean functions on n
bits. Then EXPSPACE 6⊆ i.o.Circuit[smax − 1].

Proof (Sketch). The proof is by simple diagonalization. In exponential space, we can
systematically list the truth tables of Boolean functions on n bits, and maintain the one with
the highest circuit complexity. To compute the circuit complexity of a listed truth table can
be done by cycling over all circuits, starting from the smallest one, and checking for each
circuit whether it computes the given truth table. Once the truth table of a function with
maximum circuit complexity has been computed, we simply look up the corresponding entry
in the truth table for any particular input.                                                J

    Now by using the same proof as for Theorem 59 but applying Lemma 60 instead of Corol-
lary 39, we have the following stronger version of Theorem 59. (We note that Theorems 54
and 56 admit similar extensions.)

I Theorem 61 (Strong Karp-Lipton Theorem for zero-error probabilistic exponential time). Let
smax : N → N be such that for each n ∈ N, smax (n) is the maximum circuit complexity among
Boolean functions on n bits. If ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.Circuit[smax − 1], then ZPEXP ⊆ i.o.ESUBEXP.


 7     Hardness of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem
We will be dealing with various notions of non-uniform reduction to versions of the Minimum
Circuit Size Problem (MCSP). Reductions computable in a non-uniform class C are formalized
using oracle C-circuits, which are C-circuits with oracle gates. We only use oracle circuits
where oracle gates appear all at the same level. In this setting, we can define size and depth
of oracle circuits to be the size and depth respectively of the oracle circuits with oracle gates
replaced by AND/OR gates.

I Definition 62 (Non-uniform Reductions). Let C be a typical class of circuits, and L and L0
be languages.
    (m-reduction) We say L C-reduces to L0 via m-reductions if there is a sequence of poly-size
    oracle C-circuits computing the slices Ln of L when the circuits are given oracle L0 , and
    such that each oracle circuit has a single oracle gate, which is also the top gate of the
    circuit.
    (tt-reduction) We say L C-reduces to L0 via tt-reductions if there is a sequence of poly-size
    oracle C-circuits computing the slices Ln of L when the circuits are given oracle L0 , and
    such that no oracle circuit has a directed path from one oracle gate to another.
    (ε-approximate reductions) We extend these notions to hold between approximations
    of a language. Given a function ε : N → [0, 1] and languages L and L0 , we say that L
    reduces to ε-approximating L0 under a certain notion of reduction if for each Le0 which
    agrees with L0 on at least a 1 − ε(n) fraction of inputs of length n for large enough n, L
    reduces to Le0 under that notion of reduction. We say that ε-approximating L reduces to
    L0 if there is a language L
                              e which agrees with L on at least a 1 − ε(n) fraction of inputs
    of length n for large enough n, such that L  e reduces to L0 . More generally, we say that
    ε-approximating L reduces to ε -approximating L0 under a certain notion of reduction if
                                      0

    for any language Le0 that ε0 (n)-approximates L0 on inputs of length n for large enough n,
    there is a language Le that ε(n)-approximates L on inputs of length n for large enough n,
    and a corresponding reduction from L   e to Le0 .




                                                                                                    CCC 2017
18:42   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


           (Parameterized reduction) If a reduction is not computed by polynomial size circuits,
           we extend these definitions in the natural way, and say that L C[s]-reduces to L0 , where
           s : N → N is the appropriate circuit size bound.
            The following proposition is immediate from the definitions and the fact that typical
        circuit classes are closed under composition.
        I Proposition 63 (Transitivity of reductions). Let C be a typical circuit class, L, L0 , L00 be
        languages, and ε, ε0 , ε00 : N → [0, 1] be functions.
          (i) If L C-reduces to L0 via m-reductions (resp. tt-reductions) and L0 C-reduces to L00
              via m-reductions (resp. tt-reductions), then L C-reduces to L00 via m-reductions (resp.
              tt-reductions).
         (ii) If ε(poly(n))-approximating L C-reduces to ε0 (poly(n))-approximating L0 via m-reductions
              (tt-reductions) and ε0 (poly(n))-approximating L0 C-reduces to ε00 (poly(n))-approximating
              L00 via m-reductions (tt-reductions), it follows that ε(poly(n))-approximating L C-reduces
              to ε00 (poly(n))-approximating L00 via m-reductions (tt-reductions).
           Using the notation introduced above, the following fact is trivial to establish.
        I Proposition 64 (Relation between parameterized and unparameterized versions of MCSP).
        For any typical circuit class C, MCSP-C[2n/2 ] AC0 -reduces to MCSP-C via m-reductions.
        I Theorem 65 (Hardness of MCSP for weakly approximating functions in typical circuit classes).
        Let C be a typical circuit class that contains AC0 [p], for some fixed prime p. For every Boolean
        function f ∈ C[nk ] there exists c = c(k, δ) ∈ N such that (1/2 − Ω(1/nc ))-approximating f
        AC0 -reduces to MCSP-C[2n/2 ] via tt-reductions, as well as to any property with density at
        least 1/4 that is useful against C[2δn ] for some fixed δ ∈ (0, 1).
        Proof (Sketch). Let f = {fn }n∈N be a function in C[nk ], where fn : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} and
        AC0 [p] ⊆ C[poly]. Further, let 0 < δ < 1 be a constant. We let
                     def                                           2
           NWc (fn ) = {gz : {0, 1}c log n → {0, 1} | z ∈ {0, 1}Θ(n ) }

        be the family (multiset) of functions obtained by instantiating the Nisan-Wigderson [51]
        construction with the AC0 [p]-computable designs from [19] and fn . A bit more precisely, each
        gz is a function specified by a seed z of length Θ(n2 ), the family of sets Sn = {Sw ⊆ [Θ(n2 )] |
                                                        def
        w ∈ {0, 1}c log n }, and fn , and we have gz (w) = fn (zSw ). Here each Sw ⊆ [Θ(n2 )] contains
        exactly n elements (Sw is the w-th set in the design), and zSw ∈ {0, 1}n is the projection of
        z to coordinates Sw . By taking c = c(δ, k) sufficiently large and using that δ > 0, fn ∈ C[nk ],
        and that the design can be implemented in C[poly], it follows from [51, 19] that for large
        enough n:
                                         def
        (A) Each gz is a function on m = c log n input bits of C-circuit complexity ≤ 2δm .

           On the other hand, if hm ∼ Fm is a uniformly random Boolean function on m input bits,
        using that δ < 1 it easily follows from a counting argument (e.g. Lemma 20) that for large
        enough n (recall that m = c log n):

        (B) hm has C-circuit complexity > 2δm with probability 1 − o(1).

            Consequently, from (A) and (B) we get that an oracle to MCSP-C[2n/2 ] (corresponding
        to δ = 1/2) can be used to distinguish the multiset NWc (fn ) (sampled according to z ∼
                 2
        {0, 1}Θ(n ) ) from a random function on m input bits.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                     18:43


    We argue next that it follows from the description of the Nisan-Wigderson reconstruction
procedure [51] that there is a tt-reduction from (1/2 − Ω(1/nc ))-approximating fn to MCSP-
C[2n/2 ] that is computable by AC0 -circuits. That some non-uniform approximate reduction
with oracle access to fn exists immediately follows from the proof of their main result.
That it can be computed in AC0 [poly(n)] with oracle access to the distinguisher MCSP-
C[2n/2 ] (and without oracle access to fn ) follows by our choice of parameters (in particular,
|Sw1 ∩ Sw2 | = O(log n) for every pair w1 6= w2 ), non-uniformity of the reduction, and the fact
that the output of fn on any particular n-bit input can be hardwired into the (non-uniform)
AC0 circuit computing the reduction. Finally, we remark that the Ω(1/nc ) advantage in the
approximation comes from the truth-table size of each gz and the hybrid argument in [51],
and that we get a tt-reduction because the reconstruction procedure is non-adaptive.
    In fact, the same argument shows that (1/2 − Ω(1/nc ))-approximating f AC0 -reduces via
tt-reductions to any property useful against C[2δn ] for some δ ∈ (0, 1) and with density at
least 1/4, since this suffices to implement the Nisan-Wigderson reconstruction routine. This
completes the proof of Theorem 65.                                                            J

I Corollary 66 (Hardness of the standard circuit version of MCSP). For any Boolean function
f ∈ Circuit[poly(n)], there exists c ≥ 1 such that (1/2 − 1/nc )-approximating f AC0 -reduces
via tt-reductions to MCSP-Circuit and to any property with density at least 1/4 that is useful
against Circuit[2n/2 ].

Proof. The second item follows immediately from Theorem 65, since Circuit is typical. The
first item follows from Theorem 65, Proposition 64 and Proposition 63.                 J

I Proposition 67 (Hardness amplification for Formula). There exists a Boolean function
f ∈ Formula that is Formula-hard under AC0 -reductions such that for every integer d ≥ 1, f
TC0 -reduces via tt-reductions to (1/2 − 1/nd )-approximating f .

Proof (Sketch). This is achieved using a standard hardness amplification argument using
the existence of a random self-reducible complete problem in NC1 , as well as the XOR lemma.
It is known that the circuits used in the hardness amplification reconstruction procedure and
for random-self-reducibility can be implemented in non-uniform TC0 . For more details, we
refer to [63, 2, 24].                                                                       J

I Corollary 68 (Hardness of MCSP for NC1 ). For every Boolean function f ∈ Formula, f
TC0 -reduces to the following problems via tt-reductions:
1. MCSP-Formula[2n/2 ].
2. Any property useful against Formula[2δn ] for δ ∈ (0, 1) and with density at least 1/4.
3. MCSP-Formula.
4. MCSP-C for any typical circuit class C ⊇ Formula.

Proof. Items 1 and 2 follow from Theorem 65 applied to the typical class Formula, together
with Propositions 63 and 67. Item 3 follows from Item 1 and Propositions 63 and 64. Finally,
in order to prove Item 4, note that MCSP-C[2n/2 ] is useful against Formula[2n/2 ], using the
assumption that formulas are subclasses of C circuits. Moreover, MCSP-C[2n/2 ] as a property
has density 1 − o(1), since a random function has circuit complexity higher than 2n/2 with
probability exponentially close to 1 by the usual counting argument. Thus, it follows using
the same argument as for Item 2 that MCSP-C[2n/2 ] is TC0 -hard under tt-reductions for
Formula. Item 4 now follows from this via Propositions 63 and 64.                          J



                                                                                                   CCC 2017
18:44   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


           Hardness results as in Corollary 68 also follow for other classes such as non-uniform
        logarithmic space and the class of problems reducible to the determinant using non-uniform
        TC0 reductions, since these classes also have random self-reducible complete problems and
        admit worst-case to average-case reducibility in low complexity classes. We will not further
        elaborate on this here.
           A closely related problem is whether a string has high KT complexity (cf. [3]). KT
        complexity is a version of Kolmogorov complexity, where a string has low complexity if it
        has a short description from which its bits are efficiently computable. We will not explore
        consequences for this notion in this work, but we expect that some of our results can be
        transferred to the problem of whether a string has high KT-complexity using standard
        observations about the relationship between this problem and MCSP.

         8     Open Problems and Further Research Directions
        We describe here a few directions and problems that we find particularly interesting, and
        that deserve further investigation.

        Speedups in Computational Learning Theory. One of our main conceptual contributions is
        the discovery of a surprising speedup phenomenon in learning under the uniform distribution
        using membership queries (Lemma 24). Naturally, it would be relevant to understand which
        learning models admit similar speedups. In particular, is there an analogous result for
        learning under the uniform distribution using random examples? An orthogonal question is
        to weaken the assumptions on concept classes for which learning speedups hold.

        Applications in Machine Learning. Is it possible to use part of the machinery behind the
        proof of the Speedup Lemma (Lemma 24) to obtain faster algorithms in practice? Notice
        that speedups are available for classes containing a constant number of layers of threshold
        gates, as TC0 is a typical circuit class according to our definition. Since these circuits can be
        seen as discrete analogues of neural networks, which have proven quite successful in several
        contexts of practical relevance, we believe that it is worth exploring these implications.

        Non-Uniform Circuit Lower Bounds from Learning Algorithms. As discussed in [72],
        strong lower bounds are open even for seemingly weak classes such as MOD2 ◦ AND ◦ THR
        and AND ◦ OR ◦ MAJ circuits. We would like to know if the learning approach to non-uniform
        lower bounds (Theorem 41) can lead to new lower bounds against such heavily constrained
        circuits. More ambitiously, it would be extremely interesting to understand the learnability
        of ACC0 , given that the existence of a nontrivial algorithm for large enough circuits implies
        REXP * ACC0 (Theorem 42).

        The Frontier of Natural Proofs. Is there a natural property against ACC0 ? Williams [73]
        designed a non-trivial satisfiability algorithm for sub-exponential size ACC0 circuits, which
        implies in particular that NEXP * ACC0 . On the other hand, Corollary 45 shows that
        the existence of a natural property against such circuits implies the stronger lower bound
        ZPEXP * ACC0 .

        Connections between Learning, Proofs, Satisfiability, and Derandomization. Together
        with previous work (e.g. [70, 73, 62, 35]), it follows that non-trivial learning, non-trivial
        proofs of tautologies (in particular, nontrivial satisfiability algorithms), and non-trivial
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                   18:45


derandomization algorithms all imply (randomized or nondeterministic) exponential time
circuit lower bounds. These are distinct algorithmic frameworks, and the argument in each
case is based on a different set of techniques. Is there a more general theory that is able to
explain and to strengthen these connections? We view Corollary 43 as a very preliminary
result indicating that a more general theory along these lines might be possible.


Unconditional Nontrivial Zero-Error Simulation of REXP. Establish unconditionally that
REXP ⊆ i.o.ZPESUBEXP. We view this result as an important step towards the ambitious
goal of unconditionally derandomizing probabilistic computations, and suspect that it might
be within the reach of current techniques. In particular, this would follow if one can
improve Lemma 58, which unconditionally establishes that either BPP ⊆ ZPQP or ZPEXP ⊆
i.o.ESUBEXP, to a result of the same form but with REXP in place of ZPEXP.


Learning Algorithms vs. Pseudorandom Functions. The results from Section 4 establish
an equivalence between learning algorithms and the lack of pseudorandom functions in a
typical circuit class, in the non-uniform exponential time regime. It would be interesting to
further investigate this dichotomy, and to understand whether a more uniform equivalence
can be established.


                                                             / AC0 [p]. We have
Hardness of the Minimum Circuit Size Problem. Show that MCSP ∈
established that if MCSP ∈ TC then NC ⊆ TC . Prove that if MCSP ∈ TC0 then
                             0         1      0

Circuit[poly] ⊆ TC0 .


Acknowledgments. We thank Eric Allender, Marco Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine
Kabanets, Antonina Kolokolova, Jan Krajíček, Tal Malkin, Ján Pich, Rocco Servedio and
Ryan Williams for discussions. We also thank Ruiwen Chen for several conversations during
early stages of this work.


     References
 1   Manindra Agrawal and V. Vinay. Arithmetic circuits: A chasm at depth four. In Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 67–75, 2008. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.
     32.
 2   Eric Allender, Vikraman Arvind, and Fengming Wang. Uniform derandomization from
     pathetic lower bounds. In International Workshop on Randomization and Computation
     (RANDOM), pages 380–393, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-15369-3_29.
 3   Eric Allender, Harry Buhrman, Michal Koucký, Dieter van Melkebeek, and Detlef Ron-
     neburger. Power from random strings. SIAM J. Comput., 35(6):1467–1493, 2006. doi:
     10.1137/050628994.
 4   Eric Allender and Bireswar Das. Zero knowledge and circuit minimization. In Symposium
     on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS), pages 25–32, 2014. doi:10.
     1007/978-3-662-44465-8_3.
 5   Eric Allender, Joshua A. Grochow, and Cristopher Moore. Graph isomorphism and circuit
     size. CoRR, abs/1511.08189, 2015. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08189.
 6   Eric Allender, Lisa Hellerstein, Paul McCabe, Toniann Pitassi, and Michael E. Saks. Min-
     imizing disjunctive normal form formulas and AC0 circuits given a truth table. SIAM J.
     Comput., 38(1):63–84, 2008. doi:10.1137/060664537.




                                                                                                 CCC 2017
18:46   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


         7   Eric Allender, Dhiraj Holden, and Valentine Kabanets. The minimum oracle circuit size
             problem. In Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS), volume 30
             of LIPIcs, pages 21–33, 2015. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2015.21.
         8   Eric Allender and Michal Koucký. Amplifying lower bounds by means of self-reducibility.
             J. ACM, 57(3), 2010. doi:10.1145/1706591.1706594.
         9   Ingo Althöfer. On sparse approximations to randomized strategies and convex combinations.
             Linear Algebra Appl., 199:339–355, 1994. doi:10.1016/0024-3795(94)90357-3.
        10   Dana Angluin. Queries and concept learning. Machine Learning, 2(4):319–342, 1987. doi:
             10.1007/BF00116828.
        11   Benny Applebaum, Yuval Ishai, and Eyal Kushilevitz. Cryptography in NC0 . SIAM J.
             Comput., 36(4):845–888, 2006. doi:10.1137/S0097539705446950.
        12   László Babai, Lance Fortnow, Noam Nisan, and Avi Wigderson. BPP has subexponential
             time simulations unless EXPTIME has publishable proofs. Computational Complexity,
             3:307–318, 1993. doi:10.1007/BF01275486.
        13   László Babai and Shlomo Moran. Arthur-Merlin games: A randomized proof system, and a
             hierarchy of complexity classes. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 36(2):254–276, 1988. doi:10.1016/
             0022-0000(88)90028-1.
        14   Avrim Blum, Merrick L. Furst, Michael J. Kearns, and Richard J. Lipton. Cryptographic
             primitives based on hard learning problems. In Advances in Cryptology (CRYPTO), pages
             278–291, 1993. doi:10.1007/3-540-48329-2_24.
        15   Manuel Blum. A machine-independent theory of the complexity of recursive functions. J.
             ACM, 14(2):322–336, 1967. doi:10.1145/321386.321395.
        16   Dan Boneh and Richard J. Lipton. Amplification of weak learning under the uniform
             distribution. In Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT), pages 347–351,
             1993. doi:10.1145/168304.168372.
        17   Harry Buhrman, Lance Fortnow, and Thomas Thierauf. Nonrelativizing separations. In
             Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 8–12, 1998. doi:10.1109/CCC.
             1998.694585.
        18   Harry Buhrman and Steven Homer. Superpolynomial circuits, almost sparse oracles and the
             exponential hierarchy. In Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoret-
             ical Computer Science (FSTTCS), pages 116–127, 1992. doi:10.1007/3-540-56287-7_99.
        19   Marco L. Carmosino, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova.
             Learning algorithms from natural proofs. In Conference on Computational Complexity
             (CCC), volume 50 of LIPIcs, pages 10:1–10:24, 2016. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2016.10.
        20   Ruiwen Chen, Valentine Kabanets, Antonina Kolokolova, Ronen Shaltiel, and David Zuck-
             erman. Mining circuit lower bound proofs for meta-algorithms. Computational Complexity,
             24(2):333–392, 2015. doi:10.1007/s00037-015-0100-0.
        21   Lance Fortnow and Adam R. Klivans. Efficient learning algorithms yield circuit lower
             bounds. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 75(1):27–36, 2009. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2008.07.006.
        22   Lance Fortnow and Rahul Santhanam. Infeasibility of instance compression and succinct
             PCPs for NP. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 77(1):91–106, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2010.06.
             007.
        23   Oded Goldreich. The Foundations of Cryptography – Volume 1, Basic Techniques. Cam-
             bridge University Press, 2001.
        24   Oded Goldreich, Noam Nisan, and Avi Wigderson. On Yao’s XOR-Lemma. In Stud-
             ies in Complexity and Cryptography, pages 273–301. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/
             978-3-642-22670-0_23.
        25   Shafi Goldwasser and Silvio Micali. Probabilistic encryption and how to play mental poker
             keeping secret all partial information. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC),
             pages 365–377, 1982. doi:10.1145/800070.802212.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                    18:47


26   Shafi Goldwasser and Silvio Micali. Probabilistic encryption.     J. Comput. Syst. Sci.,
     28(2):270–299, 1984. doi:10.1016/0022-0000(84)90070-9.
27   Ryan C. Harkins and John M. Hitchcock. Exact learning algorithms, betting games, and
     circuit lower bounds. Transactions on Computation Theory (TOCT), 5(4):18, 2013. doi:
     10.1145/2539126.2539130.
28   Shuichi Hirahara and Osamu Watanabe. Limits of minimum circuit size problem as oracle.
     In Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), volume 50 of LIPIcs, pages 18:1–18:20,
     2016. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2016.18.
29   John M. Hitchcock and Aduri Pavan. On the NP-completeness of the minimum circuit size
     problem. In Conference on Foundation of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer
     Science (FSTTCS), volume 45 of LIPIcs, pages 236–245, 2015. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.
     FSTTCS.2015.236.
30   Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Avi Wigderson. In search of an easy witness:
     exponential time vs. probabilistic polynomial time. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 65(4):672–694,
     2002. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(02)00024-7.
31   Russell Impagliazzo and Leonid A. Levin. No better ways to generate hard NP instances
     than picking uniformly at random. In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
     (FOCS), pages 812–821, 1990. doi:10.1109/FSCS.1990.89604.
32   Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. P = BPP if E requires exponential circuits: De-
     randomizing the XOR lemma. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
     220–229, 1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258590.
33   Russell Impagliazzo and Avi Wigderson. Randomness vs time: Derandomization under a
     uniform assumption. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 63(4):672–688, 2001. doi:10.1006/jcss.2001.
     1780.
34   Jeffrey C. Jackson. An efficient membership-query algorithm for learning DNF with respect
     to the uniform distribution. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 55(3):414–440, 1997. doi:10.1006/jcss.
     1997.1533.
35   Hamid Jahanjou, Eric Miles, and Emanuele Viola. Local reductions. In International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), pages 749–760, 2015.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-662-47672-7_61.
36   Svante Janson, Tomasz Łuczak, and Andrzej Ruciński. Random graphs. Wiley-Interscience,
     New York, 2000.
37   Valentine Kabanets. Easiness assumptions and hardness tests: Trading time for zero error.
     J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 63(2):236–252, 2001. doi:10.1006/jcss.2001.1763.
38   Valentine Kabanets and Jin-Yi Cai. Circuit minimization problem. In Symposium on
     Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 73–79, 2000. doi:10.1145/335305.335314.
39   Richard M. Karp and Richard J. Lipton. Some connections between nonuniform and uni-
     form complexity classes. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 302–309,
     1980. doi:10.1145/800141.804678.
40   Jonathan Katz and Yehuda Lindell. Introduction to Modern Cryptography. Chapman and
     Hall/CRC Press, 2007.
41   Michael Kearns and Umesh Vazirani. An Introduction to Computational Learning Theory.
     MIT Press, 1994.
42   Michael J. Kearns and Leslie G. Valiant. Cryptographic limitations on learning boolean
     formulae and finite automata. J. ACM, 41(1):67–95, 1994. doi:10.1145/174644.174647.
43   Subhash Khot and Rishi Saket. Hardness of minimizing and learning DNF expressions.
     In Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 231–240, 2008. doi:
     10.1109/FOCS.2008.37.




                                                                                                  CCC 2017
18:48   Conspiracies Between Learning Algorithms, Circuit Bounds, and Pseudorandomness


        44   Adam Klivans, Pravesh Kothari, and Igor C. Oliveira. Constructing hard functions using
             learning algorithms. In Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), pages 86–97,
             2013. doi:10.1109/CCC.2013.18.
        45   Jan Krajícek. Forcing with Random Variables and Proof Complexity, volume 382
             of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Cambridge University Press,
             2011.        URL: http://www.cambridge.org/de/academic/subjects/mathematics/
             logic-categories-and-sets/forcing-random-variables-and-proof-complexity?
             format=PB.
        46   Nathan Linial, Yishay Mansour, and Noam Nisan. Constant depth circuits, fourier trans-
             form, and learnability. J. ACM, 40(3):607–620, 1993. doi:10.1145/174130.174138.
        47   Richard J. Lipton and Neal E. Young. Simple strategies for large zero-sum games with
             applications to complexity theory. In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
             734–740, 1994. doi:10.1145/195058.195447.
        48   William J. Masek. Some NP-complete set covering problems. Unpublished Manuscript,
             1979.
        49   Cody D. Murray and Richard Ryan Williams. On the (non) NP-hardness of computing
             circuit complexity. In Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC), volume 33 of
             LIPIcs, pages 365–380, 2015. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2015.365.
        50   Moni Naor and Omer Reingold. Number-theoretic constructions of efficient pseudo-random
             functions. J. ACM, 51(2):231–262, 2004. doi:10.1145/972639.972643.
        51   Noam Nisan and Avi Wigderson. Hardness vs randomness. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 49(2):149–
             167, 1994. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80043-1.
        52   Noam Nisan and David Zuckerman. Randomness is linear in space. J. Comput. Syst. Sci.,
             52(1):43–52, 1996. doi:10.1006/jcss.1996.0004.
        53   Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean Functions. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
             URL:           http://www.cambridge.org/de/academic/subjects/computer-science/
             algorithmics-complexity-computer-algebra-and-computational-g/
             analysis-boolean-functions.
        54   Igor C. Oliveira. Unconditional Lower Bounds in Complexity Theory. PhD thesis, Columbia
             University, 2015.
        55   Christos H. Papadimitriou. Computational complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1994.
        56   Ramamohan Paturi and Pavel Pudlák. On the complexity of circuit satisfiability. In
             Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 241–250, 2010. doi:10.1145/1806689.
             1806724.
        57   Ján Pich. Circuit lower bounds in bounded arithmetics. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 166(1):29–
             45, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.apal.2014.08.004.
        58   Alexander A. Razborov. Pseudorandom generators hard for k-DNF resolution and polyno-
             mial calculus resolution. Ann. of Math. (2), 181(2):415–472, 2015. doi:10.4007/annals.
             2015.181.2.1.
        59   Alexander A. Razborov and Steven Rudich. Natural proofs. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 55(1):24–
             35, 1997. doi:10.1006/jcss.1997.1494.
        60   Oded Regev. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and cryptography. J.
             ACM, 56(6), 2009. doi:10.1145/1568318.1568324.
        61   Rahul Santhanam. Circuit lower bounds for Merlin–Arthur classes. SIAM J. Comput.,
             39(3):1038–1061, 2009. doi:10.1137/070702680.
        62   Rahul Santhanam and Ryan Williams. On uniformity and circuit lower bounds. Computa-
             tional Complexity, 23(2):177–205, 2014. doi:10.1007/s00037-014-0087-y.
        63   Ronen Shaltiel and Emanuele Viola. Hardness amplification proofs require majority. SIAM
             J. Comput., 39(7):3122–3154, 2010. doi:10.1137/080735096.
I. C. Oliveira and R. Santhanam                                                                    18:49


64   Srikanth Srinivasan. A compression algorithm for AC0 [⊕] circuits using certifying polyno-
     mials. Electronic Colloquium on Computational Complexity (ECCC), 22:142, 2015. URL:
     https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2015/142/.
65   Luca Trevisan and Salil P. Vadhan. Pseudorandomness and average-case complexity
     via uniform reductions. Computational Complexity, 16(4):331–364, 2007. doi:10.1007/
     s00037-007-0233-x.
66   John v. Neumann. Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele. Math. Ann., 100(1):295–320, 1928.
     doi:10.1007/BF01448847.
67   Salil P. Vadhan and Colin J. Zheng. A uniform min-max theorem with applications in
     cryptography. In Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), pages 93–110, 2013. doi:10.1007/
     978-3-642-40041-4_6.
68   Leslie Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, pages 1134–1142,
     1984.
69   Ilya Volkovich. On learning, lower bounds and (un)keeping promises. In International
     Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP), pages 1027–1038, 2014.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-662-43948-7_85.
70   Ryan Williams. Improving exhaustive search implies superpolynomial lower bounds. SIAM
     J. Comput., 42(3):1218–1244, 2013. doi:10.1137/10080703X.
71   Ryan Williams. Algorithms for circuits and circuits for algorithms: Connecting the tract-
     able and intractable. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM),
     Volume IV:659–682, 2014.
72   Ryan Williams. New algorithms and lower bounds for circuits with linear threshold gates.
     In Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 194–202, 2014. doi:10.1145/
     2591796.2591858.
73   Ryan Williams. Nonuniform ACC circuit lower bounds. J. ACM, 61(1):2:1–2:32, 2014.
     doi:10.1145/2559903.
74   Ryan Williams. Natural proofs versus derandomization. SIAM J. Comput., 45(2):497–529,
     2016. doi:10.1137/130938219.
75   Chee-Keng Yap. Some consequences of non-uniform conditions on uniform classes. Theor.
     Comput. Sci., 26:287–300, 1983. doi:10.1016/0304-3975(83)90020-8.




                                                                                                  CCC 2017
