Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit
Commuting Hamiltonians
Adam Bouland1 , Laura Mančinska2 , and Xue Zhang3

1     Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
      adam@csail.mit.edu
2     Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore
      laura@locc.la
3     Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA
      lzh@mit.edu


      Abstract
We classify two-qubit commuting Hamiltonians in terms of their computational complexity. Sup-
pose one has a two-qubit commuting Hamiltonian H which one can apply to any pair of qubits,
starting in a computational basis state. We prove a dichotomy theorem: either this model is
efficiently classically simulable or it allows one to sample from probability distributions which
cannot be sampled from classically unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses. Furthermore, the
only simulable Hamiltonians are those which fail to generate entanglement. This shows that
generic two-qubit commuting Hamiltonians can be used to perform computational tasks which
are intractable for classical computers under plausible assumptions. Our proof makes use of new
postselection gadgets and Lie theory.

1998 ACM Subject Classification F.1.2 Modes of Computation F.1.3 Complexity Measures and
Classes

Keywords and phrases Quantum Computing, Sampling Problems, Commuting Hamiltonians,
IQP, Gate Classification Theorems

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CCC.2016.28


 1      Introduction
Quantum computers hold the promise of performing computational tasks which cannot
be simulated efficiently using classical computers. A hallmark example of this is Shor’s
quantum factoring algorithm [33] for which no classical analog is known. However, proving
that quantum computers hold an advantage over classical ones when it comes to factoring
or any other decision problem would show that P 6= PSPACE, which is well beyond our
current reach. Therefore, we aim to establish quantum advantage under widely accepted
complexity assumptions like P 6= NP, non-collapse of the polynomial hierarchy PH, and
others. In this submission we show that generic two-qubit commuting Hamiltonians can be
used to perform computational tasks which are intractable for classical computers unless PH
collapses. Since commuting gate sets allow for easier fault-tolerant implementation [5], our
results offer the possibility to experimentally perform classically intractable computations
even before achieving universal quantum computation.

1.1     Problem statement and results
The evolution of a quantum system is determined by its Hamiltonian, which corresponds to
a Hermitian matrix H. If we apply a Hamiltonian for time t, then this applies the unitary
            © Adam Bouland, Laura Mančinska, and Xue Zhang;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
31st Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC 2016).
Editor: Ran Raz; Article No. 28; pp. 28:1–28:33
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
28:2   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


       gate eiHt to the system. The Hamiltonian of a system is governed by its underlying physics,
       so oftentimes in quantum computing experiments (e.g. in superconducting qubits) it is
       easy to apply certain Hamiltonians but not others. From this perspective it is natural to
       study the computational power of a fixed Hamiltonian H that can be applied to different
       ordered subsets of qubits for arbitrarily chosen amounts of time. Here we consider the
       model where we have a fixed two-qubit1 Hamiltonian H which we can apply to any ordered
       pair of qubits, where we initialize our system in a computational basis state and perform
       a computational basis measurement at the end. Now it is natural to ask: What is the
       computational power of this model for a fixed H? It is known that almost any choice of H
       in this model yields universal quantum computation [16, 40, 13, 7], but the classification
       of such universal Hamiltonians remains an open problem. Curiously, there exist subsets of
       Hamiltonians that do not seem to offer the full power of BQP but nevertheless are hard to
       simulate classically under plausible complexity assumptions [32, 10, 30].
           We focus on a particular family of Hamiltonians H which, even though incapable of
       universal quantum computation, can perform computations that are hard for classical
       computers and might offer easier experimental implementation. Specifically, we study
       Hamiltonians H that can only give rise to mutually commuting gates, so the order in which
       the gates are applied is irrelevant:

       I Definition 1.1. We say that a two-qubit Hamiltonian H is commuting if [H ⊗ I, I ⊗ H] = 0
       and [H ⊗ I, I ⊗ (T HT )] = 0 and [H, T HT ] = 0, where T is the gate which exchanges two
       qubits, and [A, B] denotes the quantity AB − BA. In other words, H commutes with itself
       when applied to any pair of qubits.

           We are interested in classifying which commuting two-qubit Hamiltonians H allow us to
       perform computational tasks that are hard for classical computers. In particular, we want
       to understand when H gives rise to probability distributions which are hard to simulate
       classically:

       I Definition 1.2. We say that a family of probability distributions {Dx }x∈{0,1}∗ are hard to
       sample from classically if there exists a constant c > 1 such that no BPP machine M can
       satisfy
             1
               Pr[M (x) outputs y] ≤ Dx (y) ≤ c Pr[M (x) outputs y]
             c
       for all y in the sample space of Dx .

           Clearly, if a commuting H is not capable of creating entanglement from any computational
       basis state then the system will remain in a product state, so this model will be efficiently
       classically simulable. Surprisingly, we show that in all the remaining cases H can perform
       sampling tasks which cannot be simulated classically unless PH collapses.

       I Theorem 1.3 (Main Result). If a commuting two-qubit Hamiltonian H is capable of creating
       entanglement from a computational basis state, then it gives rise to probability distributions
       that are hard to sample from classically unless PH collapses.

          Additionally, given such an H, our result provides an algorithm which describes the
       experimental setup required to sample from these hard distributions.


       1
           One-qubit Hamiltonians cannot create entanglement, so are efficiently classically simulable in this model.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                             28:3


Experimental implications
Universal quantum computers have proved challenging to implement in practice as they
require large overheads for fault-tolerance. As a result, some skeptics have questioned if
quantum devices will ever be able to demonstrate an advantage over classical computers
[24, 26].
    One response to this challenge is to study weaker models of quantum computation which
are incapable of universal quantum computation, but still demonstrate an advantage over
classical computation [2, 10, 23, 25, 28, 37]. Aliferis et al. [5] have shown that commuting
gate sets may be easier to implement fault-tolerantly with superconducting qubits than
universal gate sets, and provided numerical evidence that they may admit lower fault-tolerance
thresholds. Therefore, commuting computations form a good candidate for providing the
first “proof of concept" demonstration of quantum supremacy over classical computation
[2]. Our Theorem 1.3 says that almost any commuting Hamiltonian could be used for
this demonstration, and additionally provides the experimentalist with a straightforward
criterion to determine whether a commuting Hamiltonian can be used to sample from hard
distributions.


1.2    Proof ideas
Our proof proceeds in several steps. First, we use that fact that any commuting two-qubit
Hamiltonian H is locally diagonalizable:

I Lemma 1.4 ([14, Lemma 33]). For any commuting two-qubit Hamiltonian there exists a
one-qubit unitary U and a diagonal matrix D such that H = (U ⊗ U )D(U † ⊗ U † ).

The proof of this follows from expanding H in the Pauli basis, and deducing relationships
between the Pauli coefficients.
   Next, we use postselection gadgets to construct a family of one-qubit operations L(t) :
C2 → C2 for t ∈ R that that can be applied to the input state using postselection. We then
show that these gadgets are universal on a qubit whenever H generates entanglement, so
long as H is not
               some exceptional
                                  subcase. The exceptional subcase is H = X(θ) ⊗ X(θ)
where X(θ) =      0   eiθ/2   .
                e−iθ/2 0

I Lemma 1.5. If H is capable of creating entanglement from a computational basis state
and H is not X(θ) ⊗ X(θ) for some θ, then it is possible to construct any one-qubit gate by
taking products of the L(t) gadgets.

The main difficulty in proving this fact is that the maps L(t) are in general non-unitary.
Furthermore since they are generated with postselection, it is unclear how to invert them,
so a priori they might not even form a group. Fortunately, we find new (and somewhat
complicated) postselection gadgets to construct the L−1 operations, thus allowing us to apply
group-theoretic and Lie-theoretic techniques to address this problem.
   The rest of the proof follows from standard techniques in complexity. Since one-qubit
gates plus any entangling Hamiltonian form a universal gate set [17, 9], our model can
perform universal quantum computation under postselection.

I Lemma 1.6. If H is capable of creating entanglement from a computational basis state
and H is not X(θ) ⊗ X(θ) for some θ, then postselected circuits involving H are universal
for BQP.



                                                                                                 CCC 2016
28:4   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


       The proof of this statement uses a non-unitary version of the Solovay-Kitaev theorem proven
       by Aharonov et al. [4] to show our choice of gate set is irrelevant.
           Next, a result of Aaronson [1] tells us that postselecting our circuits further enables us to
       solve PP-hard problems. It then follows by the complexity arguments put forth by Bremner,
       Jozsa, and Shepherd [10] and Aaronson [2] that a randomized classical algorithm cannot
       sample from the probability distributions produced by our circuits unless the polynomial
       hierarchy collapses.
           This completes the classification for all cases except the case H = X(θ) ⊗ X(θ). Hard-
       ness of sampling from these Hamiltonians was previously shown by Fefferman, Foss-Feig,
       and Gorshkov [18] using a construction which embeds permanents directly in the output
       distributions of such Hamiltonians. Hardness then follows from the arguments of Aaronson
       and Arkhipov [2]. We provide a summary of their hardness result for completeness.

       1.3    Relation to prior work
       Our work is inspired by Bremner, Jozsa, and Shepherd [32, 10, 30], who showed that
       certain computations with commuting gates are hard to simulate classically unless the
       polynomial hierarchy collapses. In particular, they show hardness of simulating the gate set
       comprised of HZH, (H ⊗ H)(controlled-Z)(H ⊗ H), and HP H, where P is the π/8-phase
       gate. Similarly, Shepherd [31, 30] considers the power of applying quantum Hamiltonians
       which are diagonal in the X basis, where the Hamiltonians can be applied only for discrete
       amounts of time θ; he describes the values of θ for which the resulting circuits are efficiently
       classically simulable or hard to weakly simulate (that is, to sample from the output probability
       distribution with a classical computer). Our work differs from these in several ways. First,
       We consider Hamiltonians rather than gates, and show hardness of generic or average-case
       commuting Hamiltonians, rather than showing hardness for worst-case commuting operations.
       Furthermore, we fully classify the computational complexity of all commuting Hamiltonians,
       and prove a dichotomy between hardness and classical simulability.
           The hardness results we obtain in this paper (as well as those in [10, 31, 30]) are based on
       the difficulty of sampling the output probability distribution on all n output qubits. A number
       of other works have considered the power of computations with commuting Hamiltonians,
       where one only considers the output distribution on a small number of output qubits. For
       example, Bremner, Jozsa and Shepherd [10] showed that computing the marginal probability
       distributions on O(log(n)) qubits of their model is in P. Ni and Van den Nest [29] showed
       that this holds for arbitrary 2-local commuting Hamiltonians, but also showed there exist
       3-local commuting Hamiltonians for which this task is hard. Hence the problem of strongly
       simulating the output distributions (that is, being able to compute the probability of any
       event) of arbitrary k-local Hamiltonians is hard for k ≥ 3. Along a similar line of thought,
       Takahashi et al. [35] showed that there is a system of 5-local commuting Hamiltonians for
       which weakly simulating the output on O(log(n)) bits is hard.
           Additionally, a number of other authors have also considered “weak" models of quantum
       computation which can sample from difficult probability distributions. Some examples
       include the one clean qubit model [25, 28], the boson sampling model [2], the quantum fourier
       sampling model [19], constant depth quantum circuits [37], and temporally unstructured
       quantum computing [10]. Like many of these models (e.g. [28, 10]), we prove it is difficult
       for a classical computer to sample from the distribution output by the quantum device with
       multiplicative error on every output probability. For some of these models, the authors
       prove stronger hardness results for sampling the output distribution with additive error (as
       measured in trace distance) [2, 11, 19], but at the cost of making additional complexity-
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                      28:5


theoretic assumptions which are not as widely accepted. In comparison with boson sampling,
one clean qubit sampling, and quantum fourier sampling, our model has the advantage of
possibly having lower fault-tolerance thresholds for implementation [5].
    Finally, other works have addressed the classification of universal two-qubit gates and
Hamiltonians. Childs, Leung, Mančinska, and Ozols [13] classified the set of two-qubit
Hamiltonians which give rise to SU (4) when acting on two qubits, and are hence universal.
Lloyd [27] and others [16, 40, 13, 7] have shown that a Haar-random two-qubit gate is
universal with probability 1. Our work differs from these in that our Hamiltonians only
become universal under postselection. Additionally, Cubitt and Montanaro [14] previously
classified the complexity of two-qubit Hamiltonians in the Local Hamiltonian Problem setting.
Specifically, given a two qubit Hamiltonian H, they classify the computational complexity
                                                                              P
of determining the ground state energy of Hamiltonians of the form ij cij Hij for real
coefficients cij . This is incomparable with our classification, since we are studying the power
of the Hamiltonian dynamics (in which the system is not in the ground state), rather than
the complexity of their ground states.


    2     Preliminaries and statement of Main Theorem
A two-qubit Hamiltonian H is a 4 × 4 Hermitian matrix. Let T denote the SWAP gate which
exchanges two qubits, i.e.
                        
            1   0   0   0
           0   0   1   0
        T =
           0
                         
                1   0   0
            0   0   0   1

so T maps the state a|00i + b|01i + c|10i + d|11i to the state a|00i + c|01i + b|10i + d|11i.
Given H, we assume that one can apply either H or T HT to any pair of qubits. In other
words, we can apply the Hamiltonian oriented from qubit i to qubit j, or from qubit j to qubit
i. We will use Hij to denote the Hamiltonian applied from qubit i to qubit j. Additionally,
we will assume we can apply −H as well, i.e., we can perform the inverse Hamiltonian.2
    Suppose we are given some input string x ∈ {0, 1}n , and we want to define a distribution
on n0 = poly(n) bits which we can efficiently sample from using H. Suppose we initialize a
                                                                       0
system of n0 qubits in a computational basis state |yi for y ∈ {0, 1}n , apply each Hamiltonian
Hij for time tij ∈ R, and then measure all the qubits in the computational basis. (Here the
times tij and the string y may depend on x.) This will induce some probability distribution
Dx over bit strings of length n0 on the output bits. Intuitively, these are the sorts of
distributions one can efficiently sample from using H, using circuits which start and end in
the computational basis.
    However, this definition does not quite suffice to capture a realistic model of computation,
because we have not specified how the initial state y and the times tij are chosen. To
fix this, we will require that one could use a classical computer to efficiently calculate
the experimental setup for each n. In other words, we will require that there exists a
polynomial-time algorithm which, given x ∈ {0, 1}∗ , computes the values of y and tij used


2
    If we had only assumed access to H and positive time evolution, we could always approximate the
    action of −H; this follows from compactness of the unitary group and was shown e.g. in Appendix A
    of [13]. However, here we are assuming we have exact access to −H; this will be useful when arguing
    about post-selected versions of these circuits.




                                                                                                          CCC 2016
28:6   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


       in the experiment. Furthermore, we will require that the times tij can be represented with
       polynomially many bits, and that they are all bounded in magnitude by a polynomial in
       n. This ensures that as the size of the system grows, the amount of time one needs to run
       the Hamiltonian does not grow too quickly. In complexity theory this is called a uniformity
       condition. This requirement ensures that any advantage over classical computation arising
       from this model comes from the power of the quantum computation performed, not the
       computation of the experimental setup.
           This is stated more formally as follows:

       I Definition 2.1. Let samp-IQP(H) denote those families of probability distributions {Dx }
       for which there exists a classical poly-time algorithm A which, given an input x ∈ {0, 1}n ,
       outputs the specifications for a quantum circuit using H whose output distribution family is
                                                                                               0
       {Dx }. In particular, A specifies a number of qubits n0 = poly(n), a string y ∈ {0, 1}n and
       and a series of times tij ∈ R, such that running a quantum circuit starting in the state |yi,
       applying the operator eitij Hij for each (i, j), and then measuring in the computational basis
       will yield a sample from Dx . Each tij must be specifiable with poly(n) bits and be bounded
       in magnitude by a polynomial in n.

           In short, the class samp-IQP(H) captures the set of probability distributions one can
       efficiently sample from using H. In our work, we will show that a classical randomized
       algorithm cannot sample from this same set of distributions. More precisely, we say that a
       classical randomized algorithm “weakly simulates" a quantum circuit if its output distribution
       is close to the output distribution of the quantum circuit. To derive our hardness result, we
       will consider classical circuits which produce every output with approximately the correct
       probability, up to multiplicative error:

       I Definition 2.2. A BPP (bounded-error probabilistic polynomial time) machine M weakly
                                                                           ∗
       simulates a family of probability distributions {Px : x ∈ {0, 1} }, where Px is a distribution
       over {0, 1}|x| , with multiplicative error c ≥ 1 if, for all y ∈ {0, 1}n ,
          1
            Pr[M (x) outputs y] ≤ P (x) ≤ c Pr[M outputs y].
          c
          We can now more precisely state our Main theorem: that our commuting circuits cannot
       be weakly simulated unless the polynomial hierarchy PH collapses:

       I Theorem 2.3 (Main Theorem). If H is capable of generating entanglement from the compu-
                 √ then BPP machines cannot weakly simulate samp-IQP(H) with multiplicative
       tational basis,
       error c < 2 unless PH collapses to the third level.

           In other words, there is a dichotomy: either computations which H are efficiently
       classically simulable, or else they cannot be efficiently simulated unless the polynomial
       hierarchy collapses. As the non-collapse of the polynomial hierarchy is a widely accepted
       conjecture in computational complexity, this is strong evidence that samp-IQP(H) circuits
       are not efficiently classically simulable.

       2.1    Complexity Preliminaries
       Before proceeding to a proof of the Main Theorem, we will introduce some of the complexity-
       theoretic preliminaries necessary to understand our proof. We assume the reader is familiar
       with the standard complexity classes such as P, BPP, and NP, as well as oracle notation; for
       background we refer the reader to Arora and Barak [6] for details. Those readers already
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                               28:7


familiar with the complexity theoretic techniques of Bremner, Jozsa, and Shepherd [10] and
Aaronson and Arkhipov [2] may wish to skip to the proof of the Main Theorem.
     In order to reason about the computational complexity of samp-IQP(H) distributions,
we will need to introduce the idea of postselected circuits, which we will relate to classical
complexity classes such as PP. A postselected quantum circuit is a circuit where one specifies
the value of some measurement results ahead of time, and discards all runs of the experiment
which do not obtain those measurement outcomes. This is not something one can realistically
do in a laboratory setting, because the measurement outcomes you specify may occur
extremely infrequently—in fact, they may be exponentially unlikely. However, postselection
can help you examine the conditional probabilities found in the output distribution of your
circuit. In particular, if you can show that those conditional probabilities can encode the
answers to very difficult computational problems, then this can provide evidence against the
ability to classically simulate such circuits. Therefore, we will now define what it means for a
set of probability distributions to decide a problem under postselection. The basic idea is that
if some of the conditional probabilities of the system encode the answer to a problem, then we
say that problem can be decided by postselected versions of these probability distributions.
We define this more formally below:

I Definition 2.4. Let PostIQP(H) be the set of languages L ⊆ {0, 1}∗ for which there exists
a family of samp-IQP(H) circuits {Dx } and a classical poly-time algorithm which, given an
input length n, outputs a subset B of qubits and a string z ∈ {0, 1}|B| such that
    If x ∈ L, then Pr[ Dx outputs 1 on its first bit | bits B take value z ] ≥ 2/3.
    If x ∈
         / L, then Pr[ Dx outputs 1 on its first bit | bits B take value z ] ≤ 1/3.

    In other words, there exists a poly-time algorithm which outputs an experimental setup
and a postselection scheme such that the conditional probabilities of Dx encode the answer
to the problem. In general, the choice of constants 1/3 and 2/3 in the above definition might
matter. For instance, when PostIQP(H) is not capable of universal classical computation, it is
unclear how to take the majority vote of many repetitions to amplify the success probability.
However, we only consider the class PostIQP(H) in cases where PostIQP(H) can perform
universal classical computation, and thus the choice of constants 1/3 and 2/3 is arbitrary.
    One can likewise define the classes PostBQP and PostBPP3 which capture the power of
postselected quantum computation and postselected randomized computation, respectively.
    Finally, we introduce the polynomial hierarchy. The ith level of the polynomial hierarchy,
                                                                          NP               NPNP
denoted ∆i , is defined as follows: let ∆1 = P, let ∆2 = PNP , let ∆3 = PNP , let ∆4 = PNP    ,
and so on. Here, we write AB to refer to computations that can be performed with an
A machine which has been augmented with the ability to solve problems in B in a single
                                                                          S
timestep. The polynomial hierarchy, denoted PH, is defined as PH = i∈N ∆i . It is widely
conjectured that each level of the polynomial hierarchy is distinct; in other words, ∆i ( ∆i+1
for all i ∈ N. This can be seen as a generalization of the conjecture that P 6= NP.
    One of the main technical tools we will use in our proof is the following lemma, which
was first shown by Bremner, Jozsa, and Shepherd [10], but which we will make extensive use
of in our paper:

I Lemma 2.5. Suppose that PostBQP ⊆ PostIQP(H) for some √       H. Then BPP machines
cannot weakly simulate samp-IQP(H) with multiplicative error c < 2 unless PH collapses to
the third level.

3
    PostBPP is more commonly known as BPPpath .




                                                                                                   CCC 2016
28:8   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


           In other words, if postselected commuting Hamiltonian circuits are capable of performing
       (postselected) universal quantum computation, then they cannot be weakly simulated by a
       classical computer under plausible complexity assumptions. The fundamental reason this is
       true is that the class PostBQP is substantially more powerful than the class PostBPP. In
       particular, Aaronson [1] showed that PostBQP = PP. Here PP (which stands for Probabilistic
       Polynomial-time) is the set of languages L decidable by a poly-time randomized algorithm
       M , such that
           If x ∈ L, then Pr[M (x) accepts] > 1/2;
           otherwise, Pr[M (x) accepts] ≤ 1/2.
       In other words, the class PP represents the class of problems solvable by randomized
       algorithms, where the probability of acceptance of “yes" and “no" instances is different, but
       may only differ by an exponentially small amount4 . A famous result in complexity, known
       as Toda’s Theorem [38], states that PH ⊆ PPP . In other words, the class PP is nearly as
       powerful as the entire polynomial hierarchy.
           On the other hand, the class PostBPP is far weaker; it lies in the third level of the
       polynomial hierarchy. So if one assumes that PH does not collapse to the third level, then
       PostBPP 6= PostBQP; i.e. PostBQP is a stronger complexity class than PostBPP.
           From this, we can now state why the inclusion PostBQP ⊆ PostIQP(H) implies there
       cannot exist an algorithm to simulate PostIQP(H) circuits. Suppose there were a BPP
       algorithm to weakly simulate such circuits. Then, by postselecting this BPP algorithm, we
       could solve a PostBQP-hard problem in PostBPP, which would imply the collapse of the
       polynomial hierarchy. A more formal statement of this proof is given below:

       Proof of Lemma 2.5. The proof of this corollary is given in [10] Theorem 2 and Corollary
       1, but we provide a summary for completeness. Suppose that √a BPP machine M can weakly
       simulate samp-IQP(H) circuits to multiplicative error c < 2. Then for any individual
       output string x, we have 1c Pr[M outputs x] ≤ P (x) ≤ c Pr[M outputs x]. Since PostBQP ⊆
       PostIQP(H), and PostBQP = PP [1], this can be shown to imply PP ⊆ PostBPP. But
       PostBPP ⊆ PostBQP = PP, so this implies PostBPP = PP. Hence by Toda’s theorem [38],
       we have PH ⊆ PPP = PPostBPP ⊆ ∆3 , where ∆3 is the third level of the polynomial hierarchy.
       Hence PH = ∆3 as claimed.                                                                J

           Note that in certain cases, Fujii et al. [20] showed that this hardness of simulation result
       could be improved to imply the collapse of PH to the second level rather than the third, using
       a different complexity-theoretic argument involving the class NQP. However, their argument
       is gate-set dependent, so does not apply to our model for arbitrary commuting Hamiltonians.
           We now proceed to a proof of the Main Theorem.


           3    Proof of Main Theorem

       The basic idea is to use postselection gadgets to show that postselected samp-IQP(H)
       circuits are capable of performing universal quantum computation. Hence, adding further
       postselections allows one to decide any language in PostBQP. By Lemma 2.5, this proves
       hardness of weakly simulating such circuits unless PH collapses.


       4
           Note the difference is probabilities is always at least 2−poly(n) , because a PP algorithm can only make
           polynomially many coin flips.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                  28:9


Proof of Theorem 2.3. Suppose we have a commuting two-qubit Hamiltonian H. The first
step in our proof is to characterize the structure of such H. It is clear that if H is diagonal
under a local change of basis, i.e. H = (U ⊗ U )D(U † ⊗ U † ) for some one-qubit U ∈ SU (2)
and diagonal matrix D, then H is commuting. However, it is possible a priori that there
exist commuting Hamiltonians which are not of this form. If T is the gate that swaps two
qubits, then the fact that H is commuting implies that H ⊗ I, (T HT ) ⊗ I, I ⊗ H, and
I ⊗ (T HT ) are all simultaneously diagonalizable. However, it might be that this simultaneous
diagonalization can only happen under a non-local change of basis. Fortunately, it turns out
this is not possible - any commuting Hamiltonian must be locally diagonalizable. This was
first shown by Cubitt and Montanaro [14].

I Claim 3.1 ([14, Appendix B, Lemma 33]). If H is a 2-local commuting Hamiltonian, then
H = (U ⊗ U )D(U † ⊗ U † ) for some one-qubit U ∈ SU (2) and diagonal matrix D.

We provide a proof of Claim 3.1 in Appendix A, which uses expansion in the Pauli basis.
One can also prove this fact using linear algebra, but the proof becomes complicated in the
case of degenerate eigenvalues. We thank Jacob Taylor for pointing us to this simplified
proof, and Ashley Montanaro for pointing us to the proof in reference [14].
   By Claim 3.1, weknow that H = (U ⊗ U ) diag(a, b, c, d)(U † ⊗ U † ) for some one-qubit
                     ∗
                  −β
unitary U = α   β α∗
                         and some real parameters a, b, c, d. The trace of H contributes an
irrelevant global phase to the unitary operator it generates, so without loss of generality we
can assume H is traceless, i.e., a + b + c + d = 0.
    Note that if a = d = −1, b = c = 1, and |α| = |β|, then we have that H = X(θ) ⊗ X(θ),
where eiθ = α/β. As mentioned previously, these Hamiltonians are hard to simulate by
an independent hardness result of Fefferman et al. [18], so in the rest of our proof, we will
assume we are not in the case a = d = −1, b = c = 1 and |α| = |β|. For completeness we will
provide a summary of their work at the end of this proof.
    We now consider the conditions under which computations with H are efficiently classically
simulable. First, if H is diagonal in the computational basis, then it is obviously classically
simulable, because it cannot generate entanglement from the computational basis. This
corresponds to the case that α = 0 or β = 0. So we can assume for the result of the proof
that α 6= 0 and β 6= 0.
    Another way that H can fail to generate entanglement from the computational basis is if
b + c = a + d. Since we are assuming the Hamiltonian is traceless this is equivalent to the
condition b + c = 0. Indeed if H satisfies b + c = 0, and H is traceless so a + d = 0, then it is
easy to check that eiHt is nonentangling for all t ∈ R. So we can assume in the rest of the
proof that b + c 6= 0.
    We now show that for all remaining H, we have PostBQP ⊆ PostIQP(H). To do so, we
break into two cases. Either b = c, so H = T HT and the Hamiltonian is identical when
applied from qubit 1 to 2 vs. from 2 to 1, or b 6= c so H 6= T HT . For clarity of presentation,
we will prove our main theorem in the case b = c, as this proof uses simpler notation. An
analogous proof holds for the case b 6= c, which we provide in Appendix D.
    Now in the case b = c, consider the rescaled Hamiltonian H 0 = H/b. Since b + c 6= 0 and
b = c this Hamiltonian is well-defined, and we have H 0 = (U ⊗ U ) diag(a0 , 1, 1, d0 )(U † ⊗ U † )
for some real parameters a0 and d0 which obey a0 + d0 = −2. Now consider the two-qubit
unitary V (t) we obtain from running H 0 for time t ∈ R
                0                   ⊗2
   V (t) = eitH = (U ⊗2 )D(t)(U †        ),



                                                                                                      CCC 2016
28:10   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


                                   0                 0
        where D(t) , diag(eia t , eit , eit , eid t ). Here we have used the fact that if U is an arbitrary
                           0 †          0
        unitary, then eU H U = U eH U † .
            A samp-IQP(H) circuit is specified by times tij for all unordered5 pairs of qubits (i, j), as
        well as an initial basis state |yi for y ∈ {0, 1}poly(n) . The circuit consists of applying V (tij )
        to each pair of qubits (i, j) to |yi, and then measuring in the computational basis. This can
        be easily seen to be equivalent to the following circuit: Start in the state |yi, apply U to
        every qubit, then apply D(tij ) to each pair of qubits; finally, apply U † to every qubit and
        measure in the computational basis. (This is true because all factors of U and U † in the
        circuit cancel except those at the beginning and end).
            We will now show how to make post-selected gates of this form perform universal quantum
        computing. The basic idea is that we already have a two-qubit entangling Hamiltonian at
        our disposal. Therefore, if we could show how to perform arbitrary one-qubit gates using
        post-selection, this would form a universal gate set for quantum computing by the result
        of Dodd et al. [17] or Bremner et al. [9]. Following the method of Bremner, Jozsa, and
        Shepherd [10], we consider the following post-selection gadget, denoted L(t), which performs
        an operation on a single qubit state |ψi:

            |ψi                        U†            h0|
                          D(t)
            |0i    U                        |ψ 0 i

        The postselection is denoted in the circuit by h0|. Note that this gadget preserves the
        property that every line begins with U |0i, and ends with U † and a measurement. Hence, if
        we could use these postselection gadgets to perform arbitrary single-qubit gates, then we
        could perform universal quantum computing under postselection as follows: Given a target
        quantum circuit to simulate, compile the circuit out of gates of the form D(t) and single-qubit
        gates. Additionally, add a U U † (which is the identity) at the beginning and end of every line,
        so that each line starts with a U and ends with a U † . Now this circuit consists of applying
        a column of U ’s, then a series of diagonal gates D(t) and one-qubit gates, followed by a
        column of U † s. This almost has the form of a samp-IQP(H) circuit, with the exception of
        the one-qubit gates (note that these include both the gates U † in the second column and
        the gates U in the second to last column). Now for each one-qubit gate g, replace it with
        its implementation using postselection gadgets L(t). After this transformation, each line
        begins with a U , ends with a U † , and contains only diagonal gates D(t) in the interior of
        the circuit. However, now we’ve additionally specified some postselection bits, so we have
        created a PostIQP(H) circuit which simulates universal quantum computing.
            Let us examine what transformation L(t) actually performs on the qubits involved. The
        gadget performs some linear transformation on the input state |ψi. In particular, it acts on
        |ψi by
                                                  0
                                                              !
                            1             |α|2 eia t αβ ∗ eit
            L(t) =                                          0   .
                    |α||β| −2i sin(2t) α∗ βeit |β|2 eid t)
                          p


        This is a non-unitary transformation, so it does not preserve the norms of vectors. Since we
        only care about how L(t) behaves on the projective Hilbert space of quantum states, we can
        choose the overall normalization so that L(t) ∈ SL(2, C). Note that this operator is well-
        defined only if the denominator above is non-zero, so we will require that t ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π).


        5
            This is because we are considering the case b = c i.e. H = T HT .
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                                      28:11


    In addition to being able to perform the transformation L(t) as t ranges over t ∈
(0, π) ∪ (π, 2π), we can also perform products of such transformations. In fact, we can perform
any operation in the set

     S , h{L(t) : t ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)}i.

Here the angled brackets hAi denote the set of all matrices obtained by finite products of
elements of A. The bar above hAi means that we take the closure of this set in SL(2, C); in
other words, we include all matrices that one can obtain by taking limits of sequences of
finite products of A, so long as the limit point belongs to SL(2, C).
    If the matrices L(t) were in a compact space such as SU (2), then it would immediately
follow that S contains inverses of all its elements.6 Therefore we would know that S is a
group, and we could apply tools from group theory to categorize S. However, our matrices are
in the non-compact space SL(2, C). Therefore it is not clear whether S is closed under taking
inverses, so S might not be a group! Furthermore, since L is obtained under post-selection,
the assumption that we can perform the inverse of H does not imply we can perform L−1 .
    To fix this problem, we find additional gadgets which allow us to construct L−1 by adding
additional postselections to our circuit. In particular, we will show that for each L(t), there
exists a postselection gadget of finite size which performs L(t)−1 exactly. An important
restriction on this construction is that this inverse must be efficiently computable. Specifically,
for each L(t) the size of the postselection gadget required to invert L(t) is of constant size.
Additionally, the construction of the postselection gadget will in general contain several time
parameters which one needs to set in order to obtain L(t)−1 . We also require that we can
set these times so that we obtain L−1 to accuracy  in polylog(kL 1/) time, where kL is a
constant which depends on L(t) only. Furthermore, the amount of time needed to run the
Hamiltonians in the inverse gadget are bounded above by a polynomial. For convenience we
will refer to these properties as “the construction is efficiently computable."
    At first glance it might sound like this definition of “efficiently computable" is too
weak, because the inverses of arbitrary L matrices might require large postselection gadgets.
However, later in our construction we will use the fact that for any fixed Hamiltonian H,
we will only need to invert a finite set of L matrices. Hence for fixed H, the size of the
postselection gadgets which appear in our circuit will be upper bounded by a constant
depending on H only, but not on the size of the problem we are solving under postselection.
Furthermore, for fixed H, we can compute the times in the inversion gadgets to invert the
relevant L matrices to exponential accuracy in polynomial time. This ability to invert the L
matrices to exponential precision will later be crucial for our hardness of sampling result.
    Furthermore, note that in the case that H 6= T HT , the construction of these gadgets can
be made substantially simpler. In particular, the gadgets to construct L−1 (t) are of size 4 for
any t, and the times used in running the Hamiltonians are trivially efficiently computable to
polynomial digits of accuracy. From a practical experimental perspective these circuits would
be easier to construct, and since H =  6 T HT is the generic case for commuting Hamiltonians,
would be applicable for almost all commuting Hamiltonians. We include this construction in
Appendix D.


6
    To see this, take an element s ∈ S. If s has finite order, than its inverse is clearly in S. If s has infinite
    order, consider the sequence 1, s, s2 , . . .. Since the matrices are in a compact space T , the sequence
    of powers must have a convergent subsequence, i.e. there must be positive n1 , n2 , n3 . . . such that
    n1 < n2 < . . . and sn1 , sn2 , . . . approach some element t ∈ T . Therefore the sequence sn2 −n1 , sn3 −n2 , . . .
    must approach the identity, and the sequence sn2 −n1 −1 , sn3 −n2 −1 , . . . must approach s−1 .




                                                                                                                           CCC 2016
28:12   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        I Claim 3.2. For any given L(t), where t ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π), it is possible to construct L(t)−1
        by introducing a constant number of postselections and a constant number of ancillas into
        the circuit. Furthermore, this construction is efficiently computable in the manner described
        above.
           The proof of Claim 3.2 can be found in Appendix B, and is somewhat involved.
           We now redefine S so that its base set contains these inverses:

           S , h{L(t) : t ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)} ∪ {L(t)−1 : t ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)}i.

        Using this definition, we can now show using standard techniques that S is a Lie group—this
        is essentially a consequence of Cartan’s closed subgroup theorem [12] and the fact that
        inversion is a continuous operation in the matrix entries on SL(2, C). Once we know that S
        has the structure of a Lie group, we can apply the theory of Lie algebras to identify what set
        of matrices are in S. In particular, we can show that S generates all of SL(2, C).
        I Claim 3.3. S = SL(2, C).
        The proof of this claim is a tedious but straightforward calculation using Lie algebras and
        properties of the exponential map on SL(2, C). The proof uses the fact that we are not
        in one of the cases excluded by our theorem (i.e. H does generate entanglement and is
        not X(θ) ⊗ X(θ) for some θ) - in these cases one does not find that S = SL(2, C) as one
        would expect. In certain special cases, the gadgets L(t) alone do not generate SL(2, C),
        specifically when a0 = ±1 or a0 = −3. In these cases, we show that one can add additional
        postselection gadgets, which are closed under taking inverses, which boost the power of the
        L(t) transformations to cover all of SL(2, C). This simply reflects that for very particular
        Hamiltonians, our L matrices need additional help to span all 1-qubit operations. We include
        the proof in Appendix C.
            Now that we have shown density in SL(2, C), as well as the fact that we can produce
        inverses of the gates in our generating set, our proof of yielding PP under postselection
        follows almost immediately. In particular, we will invoke the following theorem by Aharanov,
        Arad, Eban and Landau [4]:
        I Theorem 3.4 ([4, Theorem 7.6], adapted to our case). There exists a constant 0 > 0
        such that, for any G = {g1 . . . gk } ⊂ SL(2, C) which is an 0 -net over B, where B is the set
        of operations in SL(2, C) which are 2.1-far from the identity (which in particular contains
        SU (2)), then for any unitary U ∈ SU (2, C), there is an algorithm to find an -approximation
        to U using polylog(1/) elements of G and their inverses which runs in polylog(1/) time.
        In the above theorem, when we say an operation is “-far" from another, we are referring to
        the operator norm.
            From this, we can immediately prove the main theorem. Suppose we wish to compute
        a language L0 ∈ PP, and we have a commuting Hamiltonian H of the form promised in
        Theorem 2.3. By Aaronson’s result that PP ⊆ PostBQP [1], there is an efficiently computable
        postselected quantum circuit C composed of Hadamard and Toffoli gates which computes
        L. Additionally, by Claim 3.3 there exists a finite set G of products of L’s and L−1 ’s which
        form an 0 -net over B (which can be computed in finite time). Hence by Theorem 3.4 there
        is a poly-time algorithm which expresses single-qubit gates as products of elements of G
        to exponential accuracy. Likewise, since H is entangling, we can generate some entangling
        two-qubit gate g, as well as its inverse g −1 (by applying −H). Since g and single-qubit gates
        are universal [9], by the usual Solovay–Kitaev theorem [15], we can express the circuit C in
        terms of g, g −1 , and single-qubit gates to exponential accuracy with polynomial overhead.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                         28:13


Combining these, we can express the circuit C as a polynomial sized product of g’s, g −1 ’s,
L’s, and L−1 ’s , which we can express as a PostIQP(H) circuit using the gadgets described
previously. Hence this PostIQP(H) circuit decides the language L0 .
    Note that in this construction, it is crucial that we only ever need to invert a finite number
of L(t) matrices. This ensures that the size of the postselection gadgets involved to construct
the L−1 operations are upper bounded by a constant depending on the choice of H only.
Additionally, it is important that we can construct the L−1 matrices exponential accuracy.
This is crucial because in order to perform PostBQP under postselection, one needs to be able
to simulate Aaronson’s algorithm to exponential accuracy 7 . Fortunately our construction
allows us to simulate the algorithm to high accuracy, and hence these Hamiltonians can
be used to sample from probability distributions which are not possible to simulate with a
classical computer unless the polynomial hierarchy collapses.
    This completes the proof in all cases except the exceptional case H = X(θ) ⊗ X(θ). This
has a separate hardness of sampling result which was shown by Fefferman, Foss-Feig, and
Gorshkov [18]. In particular, they showed the following:
I Theorem 3.5 (Fefferman et al. [18]). If H = X(θ) ⊗ X(θ) for some θ, then a BPP
machine cannot weakly simulate samp-IQP(H)with any constant multiplicative error unless
PH collapses to the third level.
Their proof makes use of that fact that using such Hamiltonians, for any matrix A ∈
{0, ±1}n , one can perform a unitary U on a system of O(n) qubits such that h1n |U |0n i =
k (Perm(A) + ), where k is independent of A and exponentially small in n, Perm(A) denotes
the permanent of A, and  is a term with norm o(2−n ). Note that Perm(A)2 is #P-hard
to compute with any constant multiplicative error [2]. Therefore Theorem 3.5 immediately
follows by the techniques of Aaronson and Arkhipov [2] - because if there were an efficient
classical simulation of such circuits, thenusing approximate
                                                             counting [34], one could approxi-
                                             1
mate Perm(A)2 to multiplicative error 1 + poly(n)             in BPPNP . But BPPNP ⊆ ∆3 , so again
by Toda’s theorem [38] this implies the collapse of PH to the third level.
   This completes the last remaining case, and hence completes the proof.                               J

    4    Open Problems
Our results leave a number of open problems.
1. An interesting open problem is to classify all Hamiltonians in terms of their computa-
   tional power under this model. Childs et al. [13] previously classified which two-qubit
   Hamiltonians can perform any unitary on two qubits. However, this does not classify
   which Hamiltonians are computationally universal for two reasons. First, as Childs et
   al. point out in their paper, it is possible that H fails to generate all unitaries on two
   qubits, but does generate all unitaries on three qubits (i.e. adding ancillas helps one
   attain universality). It remains open to classify which two-qubit H generate all unitaries
   on sufficiently large systems. Second, even if a Hamiltonian H does not generate all
   unitaries, it is still possible that H is computationally universal. For example, H could be
   universal on an encoded subspace. Classifying which Hamiltonians are universal under an
   encoding seems to be a challenging task. We conjecture that the power of any two-qubit
   Hamiltonian obeys a dichotomy: either H is efficiently classicaly simulable in this model,


7
    This is because the algorithm postselects on an exponentially unlikely event, so to maintain polynomial
    accuracy after postselection we require exponential accuracy prior to postselection.




                                                                                                              CCC 2016
28:14   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


           or it is universal under postselection and hence cannot be weakly simulated unless PH
           collapses. This is true of all known two-qubit Hamiltonians, and our classification proves
           this result rigorously in the case of commuting Hamiltonians.
        2. In this paper we considered the power of quantum circuits with commuting Hamiltonians.
           A more difficult related problem is classify the power of quantum circuits with commuting
           gate sets. The challenge in solving this problem would be to classify when a discrete set
           of L’s generates a continuum of gates. There are some sufficient conditions under which
           this holds (see e.g. Aharonov et al. [4], Corollary 9.1). However, finding necessary and
           sufficient conditions under which a finite set of operators densely generates a continuous
           subgroup of SL(2, C) seems very difficult, in part because there is no complete, explicit
           classification of discrete subgroups of SL(2, C). Indeed, discrete subgroups of SL(2, C) are
           related to the theory of Möbius transformations [8], where they are known as “Kleinian
           subgroups," and they are the subject of a deep area of mathematical research.

        Acknowledgements. We thank Bill Fefferman, Michael Foss-Feig, and Alexey Gorshkov
        for allowing us to include a summary of their unpublished work [18]. We also thank Jacob
        Taylor for pointing us to a simplified proof of Claim 3.1, Michael Bremner for pointing
        us to references [30, 31], and Scott Aaronson, Joseph Fitzsimons and Ashley Montanaro
        for helpful discussions. A.B. was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
        Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1122374, in part by the Center for Science
        of Information (CSoI), an NSF Science and Technology Center, under grant agreement
        CCF-0939370, and in part by Scott Aaronson’s NSF Waterman award. L.M. was supported
        by Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) and National Research Foundation Singapore, as
        well as MOE Tier 3 Grant “Random numbers from quantum processes” (MOE2012-T3-1-009).
        X.Z. was supported by the MIT UROP program.


             References
         1   Scott Aaronson. Quantum computing, postselection, and probabilistic polynomial-time.
             Proc. R. Soc. A, page 0412187, 2005.
         2   Scott Aaronson and Alex Arkhipov. The Computational Complexity of Linear Optics.
             Theory of Computing, 9(4):143–252, 2013.
         3   Dorit Aharonov and Itai Arad. The BQP-hardness of approximating the Jones Polynomial.
             New J. Phys. 13 035019, 2011.
         4   Dorit Aharonov, Itai Arad, Elad Eban, and Zeph Landau. Polynomial Quantum Algo-
             rithms for Additive approximations of the Potts model and other Points of the Tutte Plane.
             arxiv:quant-ph/0702008, 2007.
         5   Panos Aliferis, Frederico Brito, David P. DiVincenzo, John Preskill, Matthias Steffen, and
             Barbara M. Terhal. Fault-Tolerant Computing With Biased-Noise Superconducting Qubits.
             New J. Phys. 11 013061, 2009.
         6   Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach. Cam-
             bridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 1st edition, 2009.
         7   Bela Bauer, Claire Levaillant, and Michael Freedman. Universality of single quantum gates.
             arXiv:1404.7822v3
         8   Alan F. Beardon. The geometry of discrete groups. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983.
         9   Michael J. Bremner, Christopher M. Dawson, Jennifer L. Dodd, Alexei Gilchrist, Aram W.
             Harrow, Duncan Mortimer, Michael A. Nielsen, and Tobias J. Osborne. A practical scheme
             for quantum computation with any two-qubit entangling gate. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 247902,
             2002.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                             28:15


10   Michael J. Bremner, Richard Jozsa, and Dan J. Shepherd. Classical simulation of commut-
     ing quantum computations implies collapse of the polynomial hierarchy. Proc. R. Soc. A
     467, 459, 2011.
11   Michael J. Bremner, Ashley Montanaro, and Dan J. Shepherd. Average-case complexity
     versus approximate simulation of commuting quantum computations. arXiv:1504.07999,
     2015
12   Élie Cartan. La théorie des groupes finis et continus et l’analysis situs. Mémorial des
     Sciences Mathématiques, 42:1–61, 1930.
13   Andrew M. Childs, Debbie Leung, Laura Mančinska, and Māris Ozols. Characterization
     of universal two-qubit Hamiltonians. Quantum Info. Comput. 11, 19–39, 2011.
14   Toby Cubitt and Ashley Montanaro. Complexity classification of local Hamiltonian prob-
     lems. Proc. IEEE FOCS 2014.
15   Christopher M. Dawson and Michael A. Nielsen. The Solovay-Kitaev algorithm. Quantum
     Info. Comput., 6(1):81–95, January 2006.
16   David Deutsch, Adriano Barenco, and Artur Ekert. Universality in quantum computation.
     Proc. R. Soc. A:449, 669-677, 1995.
17   Jennifer L. Dodd, Michael A. Nielsen, Michael J. Bremner, and Robert T. Thew. Universal
     quantum computation and simulation using any entangling Hamiltonian and local unitaries.
     Phys. Rev. A (Rapid Comm.) 65, 040301(R), 2002.
18   Bill Fefferman, Michael Foss-Feig and Alexey Gorshkov. Unpublished Manuscript.
19   Bill Fefferman and Chris Umans.            The Power of Quantum Fourier Sampling.
     arXiv:1507.05592, 2015.
20   Keisuke Fujii, Hirotada Kobayashi, Tomoyuki Morimae, Harumichi Nishimura, Shuhei Ta-
     mate, and Seiichiro Tani. Impossibility of Classically Simulating One-Clean-Qubit Compu-
     tation. arXiv:1409.6777, 2014.
21   Brian Hall. Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Representations: An Elementary Introduction.
     Springer-Verlag, New York, 2003.
22   Yenjo Han, Lane A. Hemaspaandra, and Thomas Thierauf. Threshold Computation and
     Cryptographic Security. SIAM J. Comput., 26(1), 59–78, 1997.
23   Stephen P. Jordan. Permutational quantum computing. Quantum Info. Comput.,
     10(5):470–497, 2010.
24   Gil Kalai. How Quantum Computers Fail: Quantum Codes, Correlations in Physical Sys-
     tems, and Noise Accumulation. arXiv:1106.0485, 2011.
25   Emanuel Knill and Raymond Laflamme. Power of One Bit of Quantum Information. Phys.
     Rev. Lett. 81(25):5672–5675, 1998.
26   Leonid A. Levin. Polynomial time and extravagant models, in The tale of one-way functions.
     Problems of Information Transmission, 39(1):92-103, 2003. arXiv:cs.CR/0012023.
27   Seth Lloyd. Almost any quantum logic gate is universal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, pp. 346–349,
     1995.
28   Tomoyuki Morimae, Keisuke Fujii, and Joseph F. Fitzsimons. On the hardness of classically
     simulating the one clean qubit model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 130502, 2014.
29   Xiaotong Ni and Maarten Van den Nest. Commuting quantum circuits: efficient classical
     simulations versus hardness results. Quantum Info. Comput. 13:1–2, 0054–0072, 2013.
30   Dan Shepherd. Quantum Complexity: restrictions on algorithms and architectures. PhD
     Thesis, University of Bristol, 2009.
31   Dan Shepherd. Binary Matroids and Quantum Probability Distributions. arXiv:1005.1744
     (2010).
32   Dan Shepherd and Michael J. Bremner. Temporally unstructured quantum computation.
     Proc. R. Soc. A:465, 1413, 2009.




                                                                                                  CCC 2016
28:16   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        33     Peter W. Shor. Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete logarithms and factoring
               Proc. IEEE FOCS’94, pp. 124–134, 1994.
        34     Larry Stockmeyer. The complexity of approximate counting. Proc. STOC’83, pp. 118–126,
               1983.
        35     Yasuhiro Takahashi, Seiichiro Tani, Takeshi Yamazaki, and Kazuyuki Tanaka. Commuting
               Quantum Circuits with Few Outputs are Unlikely to be Classically Simulatable. Quantum
               Inf. Comp. 16:3&4, pp. 251–270, 2016.
        36     Barbara M. Terhal and David P. DiVincenzo. Classical simulation of noninteracting-fermion
               quantum circuits. Phys. Rev. A. 65.032325, 2002.
        37     Barbara M. Terhal and David P. DiVincenzo. Adaptive Quantum Computation, Constant
               Depth Quantum Circuits and Arthur-Merlin Games. Quant. Inf. Comp. 4:2, pp. 134–145,
               2004.
        38     Seinosuke Toda. PP is as hard as the polynomial-time hierarchy. SIAM J. Comp. 20(5),
               pp. 865–877, 1991.
        39     Leslie Valiant. Quantum circuits that can be simulated classically in polynomial time.
               SIAM Journal on Computing, 31(4):1229–1254, 2002.
        40     Nik Weaver. On the universality of almost every quantum logic gate. J. Math. Phys. 41,
               240, 2000.

         A       Commuting Hamiltonians are locally diagonalizable
        To establish Claim 3.1, we prove the following stronger statement.
        I Claim A.1. If H is a two-qubit Hamiltonian and [H ⊗I, I ⊗H] = 0, then (U ⊗U )H(U ⊗U )†
        is diagonal for some one-qubit unitary U .
           This is actually slightly stronger than Lemma 33 of [14], which shows that if [H⊗I, I⊗H] =
        [H ⊗ I, I ⊗ T HT ] = [T HT ⊗ I, I ⊗ H] = 0, then H is locally diagonalizable. Here we merely
        require that [H ⊗ I, I ⊗ H] = 0.

        Proof. As a first step we expand H in Pauli basis and let αAB be the coefficient at A ⊗ B
        term for any A, B ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}. Also, for all A ∈ {I, X, Y, Z}, let
             ~cA := (αXA , αY A , αZA )T   and ~rA := (αAX , αAY , αAZ )T .                              (1)
        Given a vector ~v = (vx , vy , vz )T ∈ R3 , we adopt a commonly used notation and write ~v · ~σ to
        denote the linear combination vx X + vy Y + vz Z.
            Since (H ⊗ I)(I ⊗ H) = (I ⊗ H)(H ⊗ I), we know that both products must have the
        same expansion in Pauli basis. Let us fix A, B ∈ {I, X, Y, Z} and consider the terms of the
        form A ⊗ ⊗ B in the Pauli expansion of each of the products.
            First, for (H ⊗ I)(I ⊗ H) we notice that, when restricted to terms of the form A ⊗ ⊗ B,
        its Pauli expansion is given by
                                                                      
             A ⊗ (αAI I + ~rA · ~σ ) ⊗ I I ⊗ (αIB I + ~cB · ~σ ) ⊗ B =                                 (2)
                                                                              
            A ⊗ αAI αIB I + (αAI ~cB + αIB ~rA ) · ~σ + (~rA · ~σ )(~cB · ~σ ) ⊗ B =                   (3)
                                                                                   
            A ⊗ (αAI αIB + ~rA · ~cB )I + (αAI ~cB + αIB ~rA + i(~rA × ~cB )) · ~σ ⊗ B,                (4)
        where we have applied the identity (~v · ~σ )(w
                                                      ~ · ~σ ) = (~v · w)I
                                                                       ~ + i(~v × w)~
                                                                                    ~ σ in the last step.
            Next, we consider the product (I ⊗ H)(H ⊗ I) and similarly obtain that, when restricted
        to terms of the form A ⊗ ⊗ B, its the Pauli expansion is given by
                                                                     
             I ⊗ (αIB I + ~cB · ~σ ) ⊗ B A ⊗ (αAI I + ~rA · ~σ ) ⊗ I =                                    (5)
                                                                                  
            A ⊗ (αAI αIB + ~cB · ~rA )I + (αAI ~cB + αIB ~rA + i(~cB × ~rA )) · ~σ ⊗ B.                   (6)
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                 28:17


Since the coefficients in the Pauli expansions of (H ⊗ I)(I ⊗ H) have to coincide with those
in the expansion of (I ⊗ H)(H ⊗ I), we know that the difference between expressions (4)
and (6) equals zero. Considering the middle tensor and canceling some therms gives

     (~rA × ~cB ) · ~σ = (~cB × ~rA ) · ~σ .                                                   (7)

Since ~v × w~ = −w ~ × ~v , we obtain that ~rA × ~cB = 0. This further implies that ~rA and ~cB are
collinear, that is, dim(span{~rA , ~cB }) ≤ 1. Since we can choose arbitrary A, B ∈ {I, X, Y, Z},
it must be that all the vectors ~rA and ~cB must lie in the same one-dimensional subspace, i.e.,

                                            
     dim span ~rA , ~cB : A, B ∈ {I, X, Y, Z} ≤ 1.                                             (8)

Let us now consider a 3 × 3 matrix M whose rows and columns are indexed by Pauli matrices
X, Y and Z and its entries are defined via MAB = αAB . Then the vectors ~cA are the columns
of M and ~rB are its rows. From Equation (8), we see that M has rank at most one. Moreover,
the row and column spaces of M must coincide as
                                                   
   span {~rX , ~rY , ~rZ } = span {~cX , ~cY , ~cZ } .                                   (9)

These two observations imply that M = ~v~v T for some ~v ∈ R3 . So we can express our
Hamiltonian H as

     H = αII I ⊗ I + (a~v · ~σ ) ⊗ I + I ⊗ (b~v · ~σ ) + (~v · ~σ ) ⊗ (~v · ~σ ),             (10)

where a, b ∈ R are such that r~I = a~v and c~I = b~v . If we pick a unitary U that diagonalizes
~v · ~σ , then from Equation (10) we see that U ⊗ U diagonalizes our Hamiltonian H. This
 concludes the proof.                                                                        J

 B        Inverting L matrices using postselection gadgets
We now prove Claim 3.2.

Proof. We will need two additional gadgets for our construction. First, consider a modifica-
tion of the gadget for L(t), where we start the qubit in the |1i state and postselect on the
|1i state:

 |ψi                           U†               h1|
                    D(t)
  |1i       U                          |ψ 0 i

By a direct calculation, one can show the linear transformation performed on |ψi is given by
                                          0
                                                       !
                     1            |β|2 eia t −αβ ∗ eit
   M (t) =        √                                 0    .
            |α||β| e−2it − e2it −α∗ βei |α|2 eid t

This is tantalizingly close to the inverse of L, which is
                                             0
                                                          !
        −1              1            |β|2 eid t −αβ ∗ eit
   L(t) =           √                                  0    .
              |α||β| e−2it − e2it −α∗ βeit |α|2 eia t

   The only thing that is off is that the phase of the upper left and bottom right entries
are incorrect. We now break into three cases to describe how to correct the phases in each.
(Recall that d0 = −2 − a0 as our without loss of generality our Hamiltonian is traceless).



                                                                                                      CCC 2016
28:18   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        Case 1: a0 = d0 = −1.        In this case we already have M (t) = L−1 (t), so we have found the
        inverse.

        Case 2: a0 = 1, d0 = −3 OR a0 = −3, d0 = 1. We will prove the case a0 = 1; an
        analogous proof holds for a0 = −3.
           To correct the phases in M (t), we need to introduce an additional gadget:
         |ψi                                     |ψ 0 i
                       D(t)
          |0i    U              U†               h1|
        In other words, instead of using the gate in a teleportation-like protocol, we instead use it to
        apply phases to |ψ 0 i. This gate performs the following transformation on the input state:
                                                              0
                                                                             !
                                  1                  eit − eia t      0
            N (t) = p                                               0          .
                      (eit − eia0 t )(eid0 t − eit )      0      eid t − eit

           In the case that a0 = 1, this gadget becomes singular, and hence it performs the operation
                 
             0 0
             0 1
        In other words, this gadget postselects the qubit involved on the state |1i. This holds in
        particular for t = π/4. (In fact it holds for any t such that e−3it 6= eit , in which case it
        becomes undefined).
            By composing N (π/4) with other gadgets, this now empowers us to create gadgets in
        which we postselect on |1i on lines which do not end in U † . For instance, we can create the
        following gadget:
         |ψi                      |ψ 0 i
                       D(t)
          |0i    U                         h1|
        Which one can easily check is equivalent to the following circuit, which maintains the property
        that every line begins and ends with U and U † .
         |ψi                                              |ψ 0 i
                       D(t)
          |0i    U                                 U†
                                 D(π/4)
          |0i    U                                 U†     h1|

        This is simply composing the gadget with N (π/4). (Here the output of the middle qubit is
        an independent sample from measuring the state U † |1i in the computational basis).
           This gadget performs the following operation on |ψi:
                    it         2it         
                     e    0        e       0
           P (t) ∝             ∝
                      0 e−3it        0 e−2it
        In other words, the matrix P (t) is a phase gate by phase θ = 2t.
                                        phase gates suffices to correct the diagonal phases of M (t),
            The construction of arbitrary
                                
                                  a b
        because for any matrix            we have that
                                  c d
             iθ/2                 iθ/2            iθ            
             e        0       a b      e        0         ae       b
                                                       =
               0    e−iθ/2    c d        0    e−iθ/2        c    de−iθ
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                       28:19


Hence by choosing θ = (d0 − a0 )t, and multiplying M (t) by this matrix on both sides, we
obtain L−1 (t) as desired. Clearly this construction is efficient, i.e. the postselection gadget
is of constant size, and one can efficiently compute the times to run the Hamiltonians in the
gadget to high precision. This completes the proof.

Case 3: a0 6= ±1, −3. To correct the phases in M (t), we need to consider the same gadget
N (t) which we used in Case 2:

 |ψi                                   |ψ 0 i
                  D(t)
  |0i    U                    U†        h1|

In other words, instead of using the gate in a teleportation-like protocol, we instead use it to
apply phases to |ψ 0 i. This gate performs the following transformation on the input state:
                                                      0
                                                                     !
                          1                  eit − eia t      0
    N (t) = p                                               0
              (eit − eia0 t )(eid0 t − eit )      0      eid t − eit

Since N is a diagonal matrix, the only physical quantity that matters is the ratio r(t) of its
two entries, which is a complex number given by
                       0
             eit − eia t
   r(t) =                 .
             eid0 t − eit
                                                                                        √          
                                                                                           r  0
If r(t) takes on a certain value, then it immediately follows that N (t) = ±              0
                                                                                             √ −1
                                                                                              r
                                                                                                        ,
because of our normalization. Furthermore, if we compose N (s)N (t), then the ratio of the
resulting diagonal matrix is r(s)r(t). Note the ±1 term is an irrelevant global phase, so we
omit it in the further calculations.
    We will now show that for any complex phase eiθ , where θ 6= 0, π, there exists a finite set
of times t1 , t2 , ...tk , s1 , s2 , ...sk0 such that
                                                         iθ/2        
                                                         e       0
    N (t1 )N (t2 )...N (tk )N (s1 )N (s2 )...N (sk0 ) =
                                                           0   e−iθ/2

   As previously mentioned in Case 2, the construction
                                                      of such
                                                           matrices suffices to correct
                                                      a b
the diagonal phases of M (t), because for any matrix        we have that
                                                      c d
    iθ/2                        iθ/2                    iθ           
    e             0      a     b    e           0             ae      b
                 −iθ/2                                     =
      0        e          c    d      0       e−iθ/2           c    de−iθ

Hence by choosing θ = (d0 − a0 )t, and multiplying M (t) by this matrix on both sides, we
obtain L−1 (t) as desired and this will complete the proof.
    To prove this, we will prove two separate facts. First, we will                       θ, there
                                                                           show that given
                                                                        iθ/2
                                                                        ce         0
exists a sequence t1 , t2 , ...tk such that N (t1 )N (t2 )...N (tk ) =          1 −iθ/2     for some
                                                                           0    ce
c ∈ R+ . Next, we will show that for   any c ∈ R, there exists a sequence s1 , s2 , ...sk0 of times
                                        1/c 0
such that N (s1 )N (s2 )...N (sk0 ) =           . Together these imply the claim.
                                         0 c
    Moreover, we will show this construction is efficiently computable. More specifically,
suppose you want to find invert L. The for each L the size of the postselection gadget
required to invert L is of constant size. Additionally, the amount of computational time



                                                                                                            CCC 2016
28:20   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        required to compute the values of ti and si to ensure that we find L−1 to accuracy  scales as
        polylog(kL ∗ 1/), where kL is a constant which depends on L. Furthermore, the times ti and
        si are upper bounded by a constant which only depends on the value of a0 . For convenience
        we will refer to these properties as "the construction is efficiently computable."
            At first glance it might sound like this definition of “efficiently computable" is too weak,
        because the inverses of arbitrary L matrices might require large postselection gadgets, or
        might require a long time to compute the values of the ti and si to sufficient accuracy.
        However, later in our construction we will use the fact that for any fixed Hamiltonian H,
        we will only need to invert a fixed number of L matrices. Hence for fixed H, the size of
        the postselection gadgets which appear in our circuit will be upper bounded by a constant
        depending on H only, but not on the size of the problem we are solving under postselection.
        Furthermore, for fixed H, we can compute the times ti , si required to invert the relevant L
        matrices to exponential accuracy in polylog(1/epsilon) time (where a hidden constant kL
        depending on L has been absorbed into the big-O notation).
        I Claim B.1. For any θ ∈ (0, 2π), there exists a sequence t1 , t2 , ...tk such that
                                       iθ/2          
                                       ce       0
           N (t1 )N (t2 )...N (tk ) =
                                          0  e−uθ/2 /c

        for some c ∈ R+ . Furthermore, this construction is computationally efficient.

        Proof. To see this, consider the expression for the ratio
                           0               0
                 eit − eia t      1 − ei(a −1)t
           r(t) = id0 t       = −                .
                 e      − eit     1 − ei(d0 −1)t
        Let Phase(c) denote the phase of c modulo 2π. Then by direct calculation we have that
                                              0
                                                     !
                                      1 − ei(a −1)t
           Phase(r(t)) = π + Phase
                                     1 − ei(−3−a0 )t
                                           0
                                                                    0
                                                                          
                       = π + Phase 1 − ei(a −1)t − Phase 1 − ei(−3−a )t
                                           0
                                                                  0
                                                                        
                       = π + Phase 1 − ei(a −1)t + Phase 1 − ei(3+a )t
                                0
                                                        (3 + a0 )t
                                                                       
                                 (a − 1)t
                       = π+                 mod π +                mod π       mod 2π
                                    2                       2
                        = (π + (t0    mod π) + (Rt0    mod π))     mod 2π
                                                 0
                                            (3+a )
        Where t0 = (a0 − 1)t/2 and R = (1−a                                             0
                                                0 ) . Since we are in the case that a 6= ±1, −3, we are

        promised that R is well-defined and R 6= 0, 1. Also note that we cannot have that R = −1
        because this would imply 3 = −1, a contradiction.
            Suppose R > 0 (an analogous proof holds for R < 0). Then for t0 ∈ [0, min(π, π/R)], we
        know that Phase(r(t0 )) = π + (R + 1)t0 , because in this range t0 is sufficiently small such that
        both t0 mod π = t0 and Rt0 mod π = Rt0 . Hence using t0 in this interval, we can achieve
        any phase in (π, π + s) where s = (R + 1) min(π, π/R). For any R 6= 0, −1 this range is
        of constant size. Thus by multiplying together 1/s phases in the range (π, π + s), one can
        achieve any phase in (0, 2π), as desired.
            Note that this construction is manifestly efficient; the ti ’s are upper bounded by a constant
        min(π, π/R) which is a function of H only, and computing them to polynomially many digits
        requires polynomial time, as it just requires simple addition.                                  J
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                   28:21


I Claim B.2. For any c ∈ R+ − {1}, there exists a finite sequence s1 , s2 , ...sk such that
                                     
                                1/c 0
   N (s1 )N (s2 )...N (sk ) =           .
                                 0 c

Proof. Consider products of matrices of the form N (s)N (−s) for s ∈ R+. Let f (s) =
r(s)r(−s). One can check by direct calculation that

             1 − cos((1 − a0 )s)
   f (s) =
             1 − cos((3 + a0 )s)
In other words, the productof the ratios      is real and positive, hence the resulting matrix
                                 1/` 0
N (s)N (−s) is of the form                  for some ` ∈ R+ . Note since we are in the case
                                  0 `
a0 6= ±1, −3 this ratio is well-defined.
     If we redefine s0 = s/(1 − a0 ), and set R = (1 − a0 )/(3 + a0 ), then this ratio becomes

     1 − cos s0
                .
    1 − cos Rs0
We know R 6= 0, 1 because we have a0 6= ±1, 3, and furthermore R 6= −1 as well, since this
would imply 1 = −3, a contradiction.
   For clarity of explanation assume R > 0; an analogous proof holds for the case R < 0.
   Next we claim that the range of f (s) as s varies over R includes the interval

   (min(R−2 , R2 ), max(R−2 , R2 )).

Since R 6= 1 this is an interval of constant size around 1. To see this, we will break into two
cases.
    First, assume R > 1. Consider the value of this function when s0 ∈ (0, π/R). The function
f (s ) in continuous in this range. Additionally lims0 →0 f (s0 ) = 1/R2 by L’Hôpital’s rule, and
    0

lims0 →π/R = +∞. Hence the range of f covers (R−2 , +∞) = (min(R−2 , R2 ), +∞) by the
mean value theorem.
    Next, assume 0 < R < 1. Now consider the value of the function when s0 ∈ (0, π). Again
the function is continuous in this range, and we have lims0 →0 f (s0 ) = 1/R2 by L’Hôpital’s
rule, and lims0 →π = 0. Hence the range of f covers (0, R−2 ) = (0, max(R−2 , R2 )) by the
mean value theorem.
    Hence in either case, by choosing an appropriate value of s0 , we can set f (s) to be any
real value in a finite-length interval containing 1. Hence for any target ratio c2 ∈ R+ , one
can take a finite product of O(log(c)) values of f (s) such that f (s1 )f (s2 )...f (sk ) = c2 . This
implies the claim.
    Note that this construction is efficient. First, the times si are upper bounded by
min(π, π/R), which is a constant which depends on the Hamiltonian H only. Second, to
compute each individual time si , one simply needs to solve the problem
     1 − cos s0
                =k
    1 − cos Rs0
For some k ∈ (min(R−2 , R2 ), max(R−2 , R2 )) and s0 in (0, min(π, π/R)). In the region of s
where the value of this function is between min(R−2 , R2 ) and max(R−2 , R2 )) , the derivatives
of this function are bounded by a function of R only. Furthermore, the derivatives of these
terms are computable to accuracy  in time polylog(1/) time using the Taylor series for sine
and cosine. Hence Newton’s method can be used to solve this problem, and will achieve



                                                                                                        CCC 2016
28:22   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        quadratic convergence, i.e. for each step you run Newton’s method, the error is squared, and
        the number of digits of accuracy achieved doubles. Hence one can compute each time ti to
        accuracy  in polylog(1/) time as desired. Furthermore, since inverting any particular L
        only requires inverting some fixed c ∈ R+ using Claim B.2, an error  in an individual N (si )
        matrices contributes c error to the operator norm8 of N (s1 )...N (sk ), and hence c error to
        the operator norm of L−1 . Hence this construction is “computationally efficient" for each
        fixed L as defined previously.                                                               J

                This completes the proof in Case 3 and hence the entire proof.                                 J

            C      Showing density in SL(2, C)
        We now prove Claim 3.3.

        Proof of Claim 3.3. To show that S = SL(2, C), we will first show that S is a group, and
        then show S is a Lie group.
        I Claim C.1. S is a group.

        Proof. Clearly, if we only took finite products of these elements, the resulting set of matrices
        would be a group, because we have the inverses of every element in the generating set. So
        what we need to show is that taking the closure of this set of matrices still yields a group. To
        see this, suppose that some element s ∈ S ⊆ SL(2, C) is the limit of a sequence L1 , L2 , . . .
        where each Li is a finite product of element of the form L(D(t1 , t2 )), and limi→∞ Li = s.
        Now consider the sequence L−1        −1
                                        1 , L2 , . . .. We claim that limi→∞ Li
                                                                                −1
                                                                                   = s−1 . To see this,
                                               a  b                                         d −b
        simply note that for a 2 × 2 matrix c d ∈ SL(2, C), its inverse is given by −c         a . Since
        the limit point s exists in SL(2, C), the limit of each matrix entry of the Li ’s must converge
        as well to the entries of s. Hence the entries of the sequence L−1i converges to the entries of
        s−1 .                                                                                          J

        Note that it is critical that we’ve taken the closure in SL(2, C); if we took the closure in the
        set of 2 × 2 complex matrices, this would not necessarily be true.
            We have now established that S is a group. Furthermore, S is a closed subgroup of
        SL(2, C) by construction, and SL(2, C) is a Lie group. We now invoke a well-known theorem
        from Lie theory.
        I Theorem C.2 (Cartan’s Theorem [12] or the Closed Subgroup Theorem). Any closed subgroup
        of a Lie group is a Lie group.
        I Corollary C.3. S is a Lie group.
            Now that we know S is a Lie group, we can use facts from Lie theory to show S = SL(2, C).
        We will summarize the basics here, but a more complete treatment can be found in e.g. [21]
        or a more advanced textbook on Lie groups.
            A Lie group is a continuous manifold which is also a group, for which the group operations
        are smooth. In this work we will only consider matrix groups, i.e. continuous groups of
        complex matrices. For any Lie group G, one can define the Lie algebra of G, denoted Lie(G),
        to be the tangent space to the group G at the identity. More concretely, suppose that you


        8
            This is because for non-unitary matrices, the norm of the singular values are not one. Hence when
            considering the product AB, where λmax is the largest singular value of A, an  error in B will induce
            an λmax  error in AB.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                   28:23


have a smooth path γ(t) : R → G ⊆ GL(n, C) in G, such that γ(0) = I. Then the matrix
∂
∂t γ(t)         belongs to the tangent space of G at the identity. One can show that Lie(G) obeys
          t=0
the following properties [21]:
1. g is a real vector space, i.e. g1 , g2 ∈ g ⇒ ag2 + bg2 ∈ g for any a, b ∈ R.
2. g is closed under commutators, i.e. g1 , g2 ∈ g ⇒ [g1 , g2 ] , g1 g2 − g2 g1 ∈ g for any a, b ∈ R.
                                 2      3       n
3. Let exp(A) = I +A+ A2 + A6 +. . .+ An! +. . .. Then we have that for all g ∈ g, exp(g) ∈ G.
   In other words, the function exp maps from the Lie algebra into the Lie group.
4. g is closed under taking commutators with the group G. That is, for any G1 ∈ G and
   g ∈ g, we have G1 gG−1
                        1 ∈ g.


    To show that S = SL(2, C), we will consider g , Lie(S). We will then show that
g = sl(2, C), which is the Lie algebra of SL(2, C), which consists of all traceless two by two
complex matrices. By property 3, this implies that exp(sl(2, C)) ⊆ S. From this, we will
leverage the following fact:

I Claim C.4. exp(sl(2, C)) is dense in SL(2, C).


Proof. It is well known [21] that exp(sl(2, C)) contains all matrices in SL(2, C) except
matrices A for which Tr(A) = −2 and A 6= −I. This implies the claim.                  J


   Hence to prove Claim 3.3, it suffices to prove the following claim:

I Claim C.5. g , Lie(S) spans sl(2, C), i.e. all 2 × 2 traceless matrices.


Proof. Consider elements of the form

   M (t, s) , L(t)L(s)−1 .

As t, s vary over (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π), these form continuous paths within S. In particular, at the
point where s = t, this path passes through the identity. Now consider

                ∂
   g(v) ,          [M (t, s)]       .
                ∂t            s=t=v

These are tangent vectors to paths in S, evaluated as they pass through the identity. Hence
we have that g(v) ∈ g for all v ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π). By direct calculation, one can show that
                                                                           !
                                                             0 i(1+a0 )v
                1                (a0 + 1)e−2iv       α
                                                     β (1 − a )e
   g(v) = −                   β       0 i(−1−a0 )v         0     −2iv
            2 sin(2v)         α (3 + a )e             −(a + 1)e

where we have simplified using the fact that d0 = −2 − a0 .
   We will now break into cases to show that these matrices span the entire Lie algebra. We
begin with the generic case and then give the special cases. In the special cases, we will also
add additional postselection gadgets to our model in order to get single-qubit transformations
which span all traceless matrices. The gadgets introduced are inherently closed under taking
inverses. So this simply reflects that for very particular Hamiltonians, our L matrices need
additional help to span all 1-qubit operations.



                                                                                                        CCC 2016
28:24   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        Case 1: a0 6= ±1, −3.       In this case all of the entries of g(v) are non-zero.
                                                                              !
                                                                  0 i(1+a0 )v
                          1          (a0 + 1)e−2iv        α
                                                          β (1 − a )e
           g(v) = −               β       0 i(−1−a0 )v
                      2 sin(2v)   α (3 + a )e               −(a0 + 1)e−2iv

        We can therefore rewrite g(v) with four non-zero parameters k1 ∈ R, k2 , k3 ∈ C, and using a
        new parameter v 0 = −2v:
                           0               0
                                             !
                        ev       k2 eik1 v
           g(v) ∝              0        0
                    k3 e−ik1 v    −eiv

        Here we omit real coefficients as the Lie algebra is closed under scalar multiplication by R.
        The fact that a0 6= ±1, −3 also implies that k4 6= ±1
           Now consider the value of g(v 0 ) for small values of v 0 . In particular, pick a θ << 1. Then
        we have that
                                                 
                       (A ± Bi)     k2 (C ± Di)
           g(±θ) ∝
                      k3 (C ∓ Di) −(A ± Bi)

        for some nonzero real coefficients A, B, C, D ∈ R. Taking the sum and difference of these
        matrices, we see the following are elements of the Lie algebra:
                                         
               A   k2 C         Bi     k2 Di
              k3 C −A        −k3 Di −Bi

        Likewise, by considering taking the sum and difference of g(±2θ), we get there exist nonzero
        A0 , B 0 , C 0 , D0 ∈ R such that the lie algebra contains.
              0
                          k2 C 0      B0i     k2 D 0 i
                                                    
                  A
              k3 C 0 −A0             −k3 D0 i −B 0 i

        Furthermore, since sine and cosine are nonlinear, and k1 6= 0, ±1, the vectors (A, C) and
        (A0 , C 0 ) are linearly independent. Likewise the vectors (B, D) and (B 0 , D0 ) are linearly
        independent. Hence by taking linear combinations of these matrices, we have that any matrix
        of the form
                            
                  E     k2 F
               k3 F ∗ −E

        is in the Lie algebra for any E, F ∈ C. Hence our Lie algebra spans at least these two
        complex dimensions. Now we take the closure of such matrices under commutators. Suppose
        A, B, C, D ∈ C. We have that

                                                k2 k3 (BD∗ − B ∗ D)
                                                                                  
                 A    k2 B       C    k2 D                             2k2 (AD − BC)
                            ,                =
               k3 B ∗ −A       k3 D ∗  C         2k3 (B ∗ C − AD∗ ) k2 k3 (B ∗ D − BD∗ )

        Since we previously showed all traceless diagonal matrices are in the Lie algebra, this implies
        the following matrices are in the Lie algebra:
                                                
                       0         2k2 (AD − BC)
             2k3 (B ∗ C − AD∗ )         0

        By setting A, D, B, C such that (AD − BC)∗ 6= (B ∗ C − AD∗ ), we can see that these matrices
        span the remaining two real dimensional space of off-diagonal matrices. Hence our Lie algebra
        spans all traceless matrices. This completes the proof in Case 1.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                          28:25


Case 2: a0 = 1 or a0 = −3. We will prove the claim for a0 = 1; an analogous proof holds
for a0 = −3. (These are the Hamiltonians diag(1, 1, 1, −3) and diag(−3, 1, 1, 1), which are
identical except the role of 0 and 1 is switched.).
    In this case we have that
             −2iv             
               e           0
    g(v) ∝     β −2iv
             2α  e     −e−2iv

By evaluating g(v) at ±θ and ±2θ for some small value of θ, by the same arguments put
forth in Case 1, these matrices span the space of matrices of the form
                           
        A + Bi         0
       β
     2α  (A + Bi) −A − Bi
Where A, B ∈ R are arbitrary real parameters.
   We will now use another postselection gadget, which is inherently closed under taking
inverses, to boost the span of the algebra to all of sl(2, C). This is the same gadget which
appears in the construction of L−1 in Appendix B.

 |ψi                                          |ψ 0 i
              D(t)
  |0i   U                          U†
                        D(π/4)
  |0i   U                          U†         h1|

This gadget performs the operation
            it        2it         
            e     0        e       0
   P (t) ∝             ∝
             0 e−3it         0 e−2it
Hence its Lie algebra spans the space of traceless diagonal imaginary matrices. Combining
this with the previous result, we see the Lie algebra now spans the space
                            
        A + Bi         0
       β
     2α  (A + Ci) −A − Bi
Where A, B, C ∈ R are arbitrary real parameters.
   Now consider taking commutators of such matrices; one can easily see that for
A, B, C, D, E, F ∈ R,
                                                                             
         A + Bi        0           D + Ei        0                       0        0
        β                     ,   β                       =    β
      2α  (A + Ci) −A − Bi       2α (D + F i) −D − Ei         4α (A + Ci)(D + Ei) 0
Hence by appropriate choice of A, C, D, E these commutators span all complex values in the
lower left hand corner. So our Lie algebra now spans
                       
     A + Bi        0
     C + Di −A − Bi
Where A, B, C, D ∈ R are arbitrary real parameters. In other words we span all traceless
lower triangular matrices.
   Next we will use the fact that the Lie algebra is closed under conjugation by the group.
Therefore it must contain all elements of the form
                
          A    0
   L(t)            L−1 (t)
          B −A
where A, B are now complex parameters


                                                                                               CCC 2016
28:26   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


           Since we already span lower triangular matrices, the only relevant entry of the above
        matrix is the upper-right entry, as we can zero out the other entries by adding lower triangular
        matrices. This upper left entry is proportional to

           i −2αβ ∗ |α|2 e2it A − α2 β ∗2 e2it B
                                                 

        Since α and β are non-zero, and setting B = 0, we can see that by choosing A we can set
        this value to be any complex number. Hence our Lie algebra must span
                         
                   A C
            L(t)            L−1 (t)
                  B −A

        Where A, B, C ∈ C, that is all of sl(2, C), as desired. This completes the proof of Claim 2.

        Case 3: a0 = −1.     In this case we have that
                                     !
                         1     0 α β
             g(v) = −          β
                      sin(2v) α    0

        Thus the matrices g(v) span a one-dimensional space. Since the Lie algebra is closed under
                                                          −1
        scalar multiplication by reals, the factor of sin(2v)  out front is irrelevant, and we will drop
        real prefactors in future calculations.
            We will now use the fact the Lie algebra is closed under conjugation by the group.
        Consider matrices of the form
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                  −2is
                                    −1               |β|4 − |α|4          |α|4 α
                                                                               βe      − αβ ∗ |β|2 e2is
            T (s, v) = L(s)g(v)L(s) ∝ i β 4 −2is
                                             α |β| e     − α∗ β|α|2 e2is          |α|4 − |β|4

        where the proportionality is over real scalar multiples. Here we have simplified using the fact
        we are in the case a0 = d0 = −1. This is well defined for any s and v which are not integer
        multiples of π.
           Now we break into two subcases:

        Subcase A: |α|2 6= |β|2 . In this case, the matrix T (s, v) has a nonzero entry on the
        diagonals. Hence the matrix T (s, v) has the form

                                            k2 e−2is − k3 e2is
                                                              
                                 k1
           T (s, v) ∝ i
                         k4 e−2is − k5 e2is       −k1
        Where k1 ∈ R is nonzero, k2 , k3 , k4 , k5 ∈ C are nonzero. One can easily check that the
        constraint |α|2 6= |β|2 further implies that k2 , k3 , k4 , k5 have four distinct values, i.e. ki 6= kj
        for any i =6 j, i, j ≥ 2. For instance, to see that k2 6= k3 , note that if k2 = k3 then
                    ∗
        |α|4 α
             β = αβ   |β|2 , which implies |α|4 = |β|4 , a contradiction.
            Furthermore, one can show that there cannot exist a constant9 K such that k2 = Kk4 and
        k3 = Kk5 , because this would imply |K| = | α        6      α 2
                                                          β | = | β | which is a contradiction if |α| =  6 |β|.
        Hence the matrices T (s, v) span matrices of the form
                                
                Ai      B + Ci
              D + Ei       −Ai

                                                                                                                     
        9                                                                                              Ai       B + Ci
            If this were the case, the matrices T (s, v) would only span matrices of the form                          .
                                                                                                    K(B + Ci)    −Ai
            Fortunately this does not happen in this case.
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                                 28:27


where A, B, C, D, E ∈ R are arbitrary real parameters. Now taking the closure of such
matrices under commutators, one can easily see this spans all traceless matrices. Hence the
Lie algebra spans sl(2, C) as desired.

Subcase B: |α|2 = |β|2 = 1/2. In this case the Hamiltonians generated are of the form
X(θ) ⊗ X(θ), so are not covered in the scope of this theorem. Note that the Lie alebgra of
the L gadgets here only span a two dimensional subspace of the form

                  e−iθ (A + Bi)
                               
           0
     eiθ (A + Bi)        0

where A, B ∈ R. This is closed under conjugation and does not span sl(2, C).                                      J

                                                                                                                  J

 D        Proof of postselected universality when b 6= c
Here we consider the postselected universality of circuits with entangling Hamiltonians
for which H 6= T HT . The proof in this case will follow analogously to the main proof.
Furthermore, the construction of the inverse gadgets will have a much cleaner construction
than the case H = T HT .
     Suppose we have a commuting Hamiltonian H such that H 6= T HT . By Claim 3.1, we       
                                                                                        −β ∗
know that H = (U ⊗ U ) diag(a, b, c, d)(U † ⊗ U † ) for some one-qubit unitary U = α  β α∗
and some real parameters a, b, c, d. The trace of H contributes an irrelevant global phase to
the unitary operator it generates, so without loss of generality we can assume H is traceless,
i.e., a + b + c + d = 0. Since H 6= T HT we have b 6= c. As before, the fact H can generate
entanglement starting from the computational basis implies α 6= 0, β 6= 0, and b + c 6= 0.
     Now consider the Hamiltonians
               1                                          1
     H1 =           (cH12 − bH21 ),          H2 =               (bH12 − cH21 ) .
            c2 − b2                                    b2 − c 2
Since we can apply both H, −H, T HT , and −T HT , this allows us to apply H1 and H2 for
independent amouts of time. Let V (t1 , t2 ) be the two-qubit unitary we obtain from running
H1 for time t1 ∈ R and H2 for time t2 ∈ R. We have
                                                                ⊗2
     V (t1 , t2 ) = eit1 H1 eit2 H2 = (U ⊗2 )D(t1 , t2 )(U †         ),
                                   0                        0
where D(t1 , t2 ) , diag(eia (t1 +t2 ) , eit1 , eit2 , eid (t1 +t2 ) ).
   Now following our previous proof, we consider the following postselection gadget:

 |ψi                                   U†            h0|
                     D(t1 , t2 )
 |0i       U                                |ψ 0 i

This performs the following transformation on the input state:
                                                                          0
                                                                                                          !
                                        1                       |α|2 eia (t1 +t2 )      αβ ∗ eit2
     L(t1 , t2 ) =                                                                      2 id0 (t1 +t2 )       .
                                                                   α∗ βeit1
                           q
                     |α||β| e−i(t1 +t2 ) − ei(t1 +t2 )
                                                                                    |β| e

   As before, this is a non-unitary transformation, and hence it is unclear how to invert L.
Fortunately, when H 6= T HT we have the freedom to apply H1 and H2 for separate times,
and this allows us to make a much simpler postselecting gadget to invert L, as follows:



                                                                                                                      CCC 2016
28:28   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        I Claim D.1. Given L(t1 , t2 ), where ti ∈ (0, π)∪(π, 2π), it is possible to construct L(t1 , t2 )−1
        by introducing three postselections into the circuit. Furthermore, this construction is efficiently
        computable in the manner described above.
        Proof. We will need two additional gadgets for our construction. First, consider a modifica-
        tion of the gadget for L(t1 , t2 ), where we start the qubit in the |1i state and postselect on
        the |1i state:

         |ψi                                   U†                  h1|
                            D(t1 , t2 )
          |1i      U                                      |ψ 0 i

        By a direct calculation, one can show the linear transformation performed on |ψi is given by
                                                                      0
                                                                                                    !
                                        1                     |β|2 eia (t1 +t2 )   −αβ ∗ eit2
           M (t1 , t2 ) =                                                                0
                                                                −α∗ βeit1        |α|2 eid (t1 +t2 )
                                q                           
                          |α||β| e−i(t1 +t2 ) − ei(t1 +t2 )

        This is tantalizingly close to the inverse of L, which is
                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                          !
                       −1                             1                         |β|2 eid (t1 +t2 )     −αβ ∗ eit2
            L(t1 , t2 )     =                                                                                0
                                                                                  −α∗ βeit1          |α|2 eia (t1 +t2 )
                                         q                                  
                                |α||β|        e−i(t1 +t2 ) − ei(t1 +t2 )

        The only thing that is off is that the phase of the upper left and bottom right entries are
        incorrect. To correct these phases, we need to introduce another gadget:

         |ψi                                                       |ψ 0 i
                            D(t1 , t2 )
          |0i      U                           U†                  h1|

        In other words, instead of using the gate in a teleportation-like protocol, we instead use it to
        apply phases to |ψ 0 i. This gate performs the following transformation on the input state:
                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        !
                                                  1                           eit1 − eia (t1 +t2 )          0
            N (t1 , t2 ) = p                                                                          0
                             (eit1 − eia0 (t1 +t2 ) )(eid0 (t1 +t2 ) − eit2 )         0            eid (t1 +t2 ) − eit2

        Since N is a diagonal matrix, the only physical quantity that matters is the ratio r(t1 , t2 ) of
        its two entries, which is a complex number given by
                                          0
                            eit1 − eia (t1 +t2 )
            r(t1 , t2 ) =                         .
                            eid0 (t1 +t2 ) − eit2

         √r = r(t
        If        1 , t2 ) takes on a certain value, then it immediately follows that N (t1 , t2 ) =
            r  0
              √ −1 , because of our normalization.
           0   r
            We will now show that by setting t1 and t2 , we can choose r(t1 , t2 ) to be any complex
                                              0
        phase eiθ that we like. In fact, if ad0 is irrational, one can also show that one can choose t1 , t2
        to approximate any complex number; however, this will not be necessary for our construction,
        so we omit this here.
        I Claim D.2. For any θ ∈ (0, 2π), there exist t1 , t2 ∈ R such that r(t1 , t2 ) = eiθ .

        Proof. Set t1 = θ and t2 = −θ. We immediately have

                            eiθ − 1      eiθ − 1
            r(θ, −θ) =           −iθ
                                     = −iθ iθ    = eiθ .
                            1−e       e (e − 1)
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                                            28:29


Note that this only works if eiθ =
                                 6 1 - this is why we have omitted θ = 0 from our range of
θ. In other words, this gadget can be used to perform any diagonal matrix other than the
identity.                                                                               J

     Putting this all together, we now show how to invert L(t1 , t2 ). Set s1 = i(d0 (t1 + t2 ) −
a0 (t1 + t2 )) and s2 = −s1 . Then we have10
                      i   0           0
                                                                                 !
                    e 2 (d (t1 +t2 )−a (t1 +t2 ))               0
     N (s1 , s2 ) =                                  i   0           0
                                  0               e− 2 (d (t1 +t2 )−a (t1 +t2 ))

Now one can easily check that

       L(t1 , t2 )−1 = N (s1 , s2 )M (t1 , t2 )N (s1 , s2 ) .

And therefore the following gadget performs L(t1 , t2 )−1 :

     |0i      U                                                            U†             h1|
                       D(s2 , s1 )
 |ψi                                                                       U†             h1|
                                           D(t2 , t2 )
     |1i      U                                                                          |ψ 0 i
                                                          D(s1 , s2 )
     |0i      U                                                            U†             h1|

(Note that s1 and s2 are switched in the first diagonal matrix, as we have switched the usual
order of the qubits.)
   Hence using these postselection gadgets, we can generate not only L(t1 , t2 ), but also its
inverse. Furthermore, this construction is manifestly efficient, since s1 and s2 are efficiently
computable given t1 and t2 .                                                                  J

   We can therefore apply both L(t1 , t2 ) and L(t1 , t2 )−1 in our postselected circuits. This
once again allows us to apply Lie theory to determine which subset of transformations can
be applied by taking products of L matrices. Following our proof of the main theorem, we
now show the Lie algebra of the L matrices spans sl(2, C). This completes the proof of
postselected universality in this case in analogy with the main theorem.
                                                                                  6 T HT .
I Claim D.3. The Lie algebra of the L matrices spans sl(2, C) in the case where T =
Proof. Consider elements of the form

       M (t1 , t2 , s1 , s2 ) , L(D(t1 , t2 ))L(D(s1 , s2 ))−1 .

As t1 , t2 , s1 , s2 vary over the set

       {t1 , t2 : t1 + t2 ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)} × {s1 , s2 : s1 + s2 ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)} ,

these form continuous paths within S. In particular, at the point where s1 = t1 and s2 = t2 ,
this path passes through the identity. Now consider
                        ∂
       g(v1 , v2 ) ,       [M (t1 , t2 , s1 , s2 )] s1 =t1 =v1
                       ∂t1                          s2 =t2 =v2



                                       0            0
10
     This is possible as long as ei(d (t1 +t2 )−a (t1 +t2 )) 6= 1. If this quantity is one, then L(t1 , t2 )−1 = M (t1 , t2 ),
     so no additional gadgets are necessary to obtain inverses.




                                                                                                                                 CCC 2016
28:30   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        and
                             ∂
           h(v1 , v2 ) ,        [M (t1 , t2 , s1 , s2 )] s1 =t1 =v1 .
                            ∂t2                          s2 =t2 =v2

        These are tangent vectors to paths in S, evaluated as they pass through the identity. Hence
        we have that g(v1 , v2 ) and h(v1 , v2 ) ∈ g for all v1 , v2 ∈ {v1 , v2 : v1 + v2 ∈ (0, π) ∪ (π, 2π)}.
        By direct calculation, one can show that
                                                                                            0      0
                                                                                                              !
                                  1        a0 e−i(v1 +v2 ) + cos(v1 + v2 )       −αβ a0 ei(a v1 +(a +1)v2 )
           g(v1 , v2 ) = −                  β         0 i((d0 +1)v1 +d0 v2 )
                           2 sin(v1 + v2 )  α (2 + a )e                      −a0 e−i(v1 +v2 ) − cos(v1 + v2 )
        and
                                                                                                    0      0
                                                                                                                         !
                               1               a0 e−i(v1 +v2 ) − i sin(v1 + v2 )     α        0 i(a v1 )+(a +1)v2
                                                                                     β (1 − a )e
        h(v1 , v2 ) = −                          β                0       0
                                                          0 i((d +1)v1 +d v2 )
                        2 sin(v1 + v2 )          α (1 + a )e                     −a0 e−i(v1 +v2 ) + i sin(t + 1 + v2 )
        where we have simplified using the fact that d0 = −1 − a0 . Now suppose that we evaluate
        these matrices at the points where v1 = θ and v2 = π2 − θ for some real parameter θ; this
        ensures that v1 , v2 are in the allowed set, and simplifies the above expressions to
                                                                             !
                                                           0 i(−θ+(a0 +1) π
                     1           −a0 i            −α  β a   e             2)
           g(θ) = −       β                 0π
                     2 α    (2 + a0 )ei(θ+d 2 )                 a0 i
                                                         0
                                                           !
                     1         −a0 i          −αβ a0 eiθ
                =−        β               0                   ,
                     2 α    (2 + a0 )e−iθ        a0 i
        here we define θ0 = −θ + (a0 + 1) π2 ; this follows from the fact that d0 = −1 − a0 . Likewise,
        we can consider h(v1 , v2 ) evaluated when v1 = θ and v2 = π2 − θ; this evaluates to
                                                                     0    π
                                                                              !
                     1        −ia0 − i            α
                                                  β (1 − a0 )ei(−θ+(a +1) 2 )
           h(θ) = −      β                 0π
                     2 α   (1 + a0 )ei(θ+d 2 )               ia0 + i
                                                            0
                                                              !
                     1     −i(a0 + 1)        α
                                             β (1 − a0 )eiθ
                =−       β               0                      .
                     2 α   (1 + a0 )e−iθ       i(a0 + 1)
        By setting the value of θ in the range [0, 2π), we can select any values of θ0 we like; hence we
        will work with θ0 from this point forward.
            For now we will assume that a0 6= 0 and a0 6= 1; we will handle the cases a0 = 0 and
         0
        a = −1 separately. The proof of the general case is the most difficult one.

        Case 1: a0 6= 0 and a0 6= −1. We know that g(θ0 ) ∈ g and h(θ0 ) ∈ g . Furthermore, since
        g is a real Lie algebra, it is closed as a vector space over R. Hence we must also have that
                                                           
                                   1              1
            j(θ1 , θ2 ) , − 2          h(θ 2  ) −    g(θ 1 )
                                a0 + 1            a0
                                                                            
                                                           α 1−a0 iθ2
                                       0                   β   1+a0e   + eiθ1
                        = β                                                 ∈g
                                 −iθ2   2+a0 −iθ1
                            α  e      −   a 0   e                    0

        Where we have used the assumption that a0 6= 0 and a0 6= −1. We will now show that as
        we vary θ1 and θ2 , these elements j(θ1 , θ2 ) span all two by two matrices of the form c02 c01 ,
                                                                                                       

        where c1 , c2 ∈ C.
           To prove this, we will break into two subcases. For convenience, define
                 a0 − 1
           k=           .
                 a0 + 1
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                                         28:31


Subcase A: a0 > 0, i.e., −1 < k < 1.              In this subcase, consider the matrices

      −a0 (1 + a0 ) h 
                                                                                
                                 π                  π i                   0 0
                     j arcsin k,    + j π − arcsin k,      =                 β                         (11)
           4                     2                    2                      αi 0


                                                                                           !
                                                                                       α
      1 + a0 h           π                  π i                     0              β
        √     j arcsin k,    − j π − arcsin k,      =                 β 2+a   0                        (12)
      4 a0                2                    2                     −α  a0            0

and

      a0 (1 + a0 )
                                                                      
                                                                 0    0
                   [j (arccos k, 0) + j (− arccos k, 0)] =       β                                     (13)
            4                                                    α    0

                                                                             !
                                                                        α
      1 + a0                                                 0          βi
        √ [j (arccos k, 0) − j (− arccos k, 0)] =       β 2+a0                    .                    (14)
      4 a0                                              α a0 i           0

   These are well-defined as we have a0 > 0 in this case. Clearly matrices (11) and (13) span
the space of all matrices with a single complex entry in the bottom left hand corner. Hence,
when combined with matrices (12) and (14), they clearly span the space of all matrices with
complex entries in the off diagonal elements.

Subcase B: a0 < 0 and a0 6= −1, i.e., −1 < 1/k < 1. This subcase follows similarly;
consider the matrices

   a0 (1 − a0 )
                                                           
                    π          1        π              1      0 0
                 j    , arcsin     +j     , π − arcsin     = β                (15)
         4          2          k        2              k      αi 0


                                                                                                   !
                                                                                               α
      1 + a0
                                                  
                 π          1        π              1                        0                 β
       √      j    , arcsin     −j     , π − arcsin      =               β 1+a         0               (16)
      4 −a0      2          k        2              k                   −α 1−a0                0

and

      −a0 (1 − a0 )
                                                                                
                                 1                   1      0                         0
                     j 0, arccos     + j 0, − arccos     = β                                           (17)
           4                     k                   k      α                         0

                                                                                           !
                                                                                      α
      1 + a0
                                            
                          1                   1                         0             βi
       √      j 0, arccos     − j 0, − arccos      =                 β 1+a0                    .       (18)
      4 −a0               k                   k                      α 1−a0 i          0

    These are well-defined as we have a0 < 0 in this case, as well as a0 6= −1. Again, clearly
we have that (15) and (17) span all matrices with a single complex entry in the bottom left
of the matrix. Hence, adding in (16) and (18), we span all off-diagonal complex matrices,
which is what we wanted to show.
    In either subcase, our j matrices span all matrices of the form
                         
         0    A + Bi
       C + Di   0



                                                                                                              CCC 2016
28:32   Complexity Classification of Two-Qubit Commuting Hamiltonians


        where A, B, C, D ∈ R. Additionally, our g and h matrices are also in g, and clearly combining
        these with the j matrices increases the span to
                               
                 Ei   A + Bi
               C + Di  −Ei

        where A, B, C, D, E ∈ R. This is a five-dimensional subspace of sl(2, C). Now to show that we
        can span all 6 dimensions of sl(2, C),         we invoke the fact that g is closed under commutation,
        so g contains [( 00 10 ) , ( 01 00 )] = 10 −1
                                                   0
                                                       . Hence g must include all matrices of the form
                            
               F + Ei A + Bi
               C + Di −F − Ei

        where A, B, C, D, E, F ∈ R. In other words, g = sl(2, C).
            We’ve now shown Claim C.5 in the case where a0 6= 0 and a0 6= −1. We now prove the
        claim in these remaining two cases.


        Case 2: a0 = 0. In this case we have
                                   
              0      1      0     0
           g(θ ) = −     β      0
                     2 α   2e−iθ 0

        As θ varies these matrices clearly span all matrices a single complex number in the bottom
        left entry. Now in this case we also have that
                                          !
                                   α iθ 0
                0     1     −i     β e
            h(θ ) = −     β −iθ 0
                      2 α  e         i

        Since g is closed under addition and scalar multiplication by R, and applying

                                                                        !
                                                       α iθ 0      00
                                1         0            β (e   − eiθ )
           h(θ0 ) − h(θ00 ) = −     β −iθ 0      00                         ∈g
                                2   α (e    − eiθ )           0

        Now adding in multiples of g, we have that g contains matrices of the form
                                     !
                    iθ 0     iθ 00
            0 αβ (e      − e       )
            0            0

        which clearly span all matrices with a complex entry in the upper right corner. Hence we
        span all
               off-diagonal matrices.
                                       Now adding in h(θ) for any θ, we span all matrices of the
                  Ei      A + Bi
        form                       where A, B, C, D, E ∈ R. As discussed in Case 1, by taking the
                C + Di     −Ei
        closure of these under commutation we have that g = sl(2C) as desired, which completes the
        proof of Case 2.


        Case 3: a0 = −1. This case follows very similarly to Case 2. When a0 = −1 we have that
                                    !
                          α    iθ 0
                      1 0   2e
           h(θ0 ) = −     β
                      2 0    0
A. Bouland, L. Mančinska, and X. Zhang                                                             28:33


which clearly span all complex matrices with a single entry in the upper right corner. In this
case, we also have that
                                        !
                                   iθ 0
       0      1      i    −αβ −  e
   g(θ ) = −     β −iθ 0                  ,
              2 α  e          −i

By considering the difference g(θ0 ) − g(θ00 ), and noting that we already span matrices with a
single entry in the upper right corner, this shows that we span all off-diagonal
                                                                                matrices. Now
                                                                                             
                                                                               Ei     A + Bi
adding in g(θ0 ) for any θ0 we see that we span all matrices of the form
                                                                             C + Di    −Ei
where A, B, C, D, E ∈ R. As discussed in Case 1, by taking the closure of these under
commutation we have that g = sl(2, C) as desired. This completes the proof of Case 3, hence
the proof of the claim.                                                                      J




                                                                                                  CCC 2016
