An Approximation Algorithm for #k-SAT
Marc Thurley

Centre de Recerca Matemàtica, Bellaterra, Spain. Supported by Marie Curie
Intra-European Fellowship 271959

        Abstract
We present a simple randomized algorithm that approximates the number of satisfying assign-
ments of Boolean formulas in conjunctive normal form. To the best of our knowledge this is the
first algorithm which approximates #k-SAT for any k ≥ 3 within a running time that is not
only non-trivial, but also significantly better than that of the currently fastest exact algorithms
for the problem. More precisely, our algorithm is a randomized approximation scheme whose
running time depends polynomially on the error tolerance and is mildly exponential in the num-
ber n of variables of the input formula. For example, even stipulating sub-exponentially small
error tolerance, the number of solutions to 3-CNF input formulas can be approximated in time
O(1.5366n ). For 4-CNF input the bound increases to O(1.6155n ).
     We further show how to obtain upper and lower bounds on the number of solutions to a CNF
formula in a controllable way. Relaxing the requirements on the quality of the approximation, on
k-CNF input we obtain significantly reduced running times in comparison to the above bounds.

1998 ACM Subject Classification F.2.2 Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems, G.2.1 Com-
binatorics

Keywords and phrases #k-SAT, approximate counting, exponential algorithms

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2012.78


    1    Introduction
The design and analysis of algorithms that determine the satisfiability or count the models
of k-CNF formulas has quite some tradition. In the case of the satisfiability problem the
earliest algorithm with a worst case running time which is significantly better than the trivial
poly(n)2n bound dates back to at least 1985 [14]. The time bounds have improved gradually
over the years with most recent results (only a few of which are [11, 18, 10, 9]) being analyses
of randomized algorithms that have been obtained from either Schöning‘s algorithm [20], the
algorithm of Paturi, Pudlák, Saks, and Zane [17], or a combination of both. The currently
fastest algorithm for 3-SAT by Hertli [9] running in time O(1.30704n ) falls roughly into
the second category. The corresponding counting problems have seen similar improvements
[3, 26, 2, 13, 4, 24] over the trivial time bound, with the current best worst case running
time for #3-SAT being O(1.6423n ) obtained by Kutzkov [13].
    Quite surprisingly, however, the situation is completely different for the approximation of
#k-SAT. To the best of my knowledge not even small improvements over the trivial worst
case time bound are known.1 This, however, does not seem to be due to a general lack of
interest in the problem itself. From a complexity theoretical point of view, for example,
several already classic papers [22, 23, 19] study questions closely related to direct algorithmic
problems in #k-SAT approximation. In particular Valiant and Vazirani [23] bound the


1
    Disregarding, of course the pathological fact that exact methods can be interpreted as approximation
    algorithms, as well.
            © Marc Thurley;
            licensed under Creative Commons License NC-ND
29th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS’12).
Editors: Christoph Dürr, Thomas Wilke; pp. 78–87
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
M. Thurley                                                                                               79


complexity of the approximation problem from above by reduction to SAT, and hence settle
its complexity in a certain sense.
    While theoretical results on the approximation of #k-SAT are rather old, there are several
heuristic approaches to the problem, that have all appeared only fairly recently. Motivated
by questions of practicability, these results focus on methods that can be shown empirically
to work well, while sacrificing some (at least theoretically) desirable properties. That is,
some of these approaches yield approximations without any guarantee on the quality of
the approximation [25, 5]. Others yield reliable lower and upper bounds [8, 7, 12] which,
in certain cases, are surprisingly good although generally their quality is rather low. In
particular, this line of work does not provide rigorous bounds on running times and neither
does it yield rigorous quality estimates of the approximation computed.
    With regard to the above results, the lack of competitive worst case bounds for #k-SAT
approximation algorithms seems to be due to several factors. First of all the exact algorithms
found in the literature and their analyses do not seem to carry over easily to the approximation
problem. Secondly, complexity theoretical insights are usually not considered applicable in
the context of designing fast exponential algorithms. An example is the technique of Valiant
and Vazirani which leads to a significant blow up in formula size. And thirdly, it is not
clear which of the known algorithmic ideas used in the heuristic approaches could at least in
principle show a good worst case behavior.


1.1    Contributions
In this paper we will see that one can indeed not only improve upon the trivial worst-case
time bound mentioned above. But the algorithm we will present also provides arbitrarily
good precision in significantly less time than known exact methods. To be more precise, the
algorithm we present is a randomized approximation scheme for #k-SAT for every k ≥ 3.
Given a freely adjustable error tolerance  > 0, randomized approximation schemes produce
an output that is within a factor of e of the number #F of solutions of some input formula
F.
    We obtain the following main result, which we state here only for k = 3 and k = 4. The
general result will be discussed in Section 3.
I Theorem 1.1. There is a randomized approximation scheme running in time O(−2 ·1.5366n )
for #3-SAT and in time O(−2 · 1.6155n ) for #4-SAT.
    For #3-SAT this algorithm is already significantly faster than the currently fastest exact
algorithm from [13] which runs in time O(1.6423n ). For #4-SAT the benefit of approximation
is even more impressive, as the best bound for exact methods is still the O(1.9275n ) bound
of the basically identical algorithms of Dubois [3] and Zhang [26].
    We will see that the algorithm of Theorem 1.1 is not complicated and monolithic like
the branching algorithms usually employed in exact counting results. But it is actually a
combination of two very simple and very different algorithms. The main reason for considering
this combination relies on two pieces of intuition. On the one hand, if a formula has few
solutions, then it is not too bad an idea to compute their number by simply enumerating
them. On the other hand, if a formula has many solutions, then a quite trivial sampling
algorithm should yield good results.
    Observe that the result of Theorem 1.1 can already be used to compute e.g. #F exactly in
time O(1.5366n ) for any 3-CNF formula which has only a sub-exponential number of solutions.
To achieve this we only have to set  appropriately. However, we shall see below, that this
can also be achieved in significantly less time. Motivated by the heuristic results on the



                                                                                                   S TA C S ’ 1 2
80   An Approximation Algorithm for #k-SAT


     approximation of #k-SAT described above, we also study the effect of weaker requirements
     on the approximation bounds. It seems, of course, perfectly reasonable to assume that weaker
     bounds should come at the benefit of dramatically improved running time bounds. We will
     therefore show that this is the case. With respect to lower bounds we obtain:
     I Theorem 1.2 (Lower Bound Algorithm). There is a randomized algorithm which, on input a
     3-CNF formula F on n variables and a natural number N , performs the following in time
     O(N 0.614 · 1.30704n ):
        If #F > N it reports this with probability at least 3/4.
        If #F ≤ N then with probability at least 3/4 it reports this and outputs the correct
        value #F .
     Furthermore, there is a deterministic algorithm solving this task in time O(N 0.585 · 1.3334n ).
         This lower bound algorithm will in fact be used in the proof of Theorem 1.1 and relies on
     the above observation that we can simply use a SAT algorithm for enumerating all solutions
     provided the input formula has only few. The time bounds mentioned thus arise from the SAT
     algorithms used – the randomized 3-SAT algorithm by Hertli [9] and the deterministic one of
     Moser and Scheder [15] (which is in fact a derandomized version of Schöning’s algorithm).
         To obtain upper bounds, on the other hand, we cannot use the high-solution part of
     Theorem 1.1. But, although it might seem unreasonable to expect that this would yield a
     competitive running time, we can use an algorithm based on the bisection technique of Valiant
     and Vazirani [23]. Interestingly an algorithm based on Valiant and Vazirani‘s technique has
     been used already in the heuristic result of [8]. Their approach, however, is quite different
     from ours and does not have a good worst-case behavior.
         By systematically augmenting the input formula F with randomly chosen GF(2)-linear
     constraints, the bisection technique makes it possible to approximate #F by determining
     satisfiability of the augmented formulas. The main difference of our approach to this classical
     scheme lies in the observation that it is more reasonable for our purposes to work directly
     with the system of linear equations obtained, instead of encoding it into k-CNF. In this way
     we obtain the running time bounds which are valid even for general CNF input formulas.
     I Theorem 1.3 (Upper Bound Algorithm). There is an algorithm, which on input a CNF
     formula F on n variables and an integer µ ≤ n takes time O∗ (2n−µ ) and performs the
     following with probability at least 2/3:
         It outputs a number u ≥ µ such that U := 2u+3 ≥ #F . If furthermore u > µ then 2u is
     a 16-approximation of #F .

     Remark
     This algorithm will actually work for upper bounding |S| for any set S ⊆ {0, 1}n with a
     polynomial membership test. However, as this is a trivial consequence of the proof, we
     consider only the case that the input is a CNF formula.
         Moreover, we do not particularly focus on improving the approximation ratio mentioned
     in Theorem 1.3. Such an improvement is in fact unnecessary if we want to use this algorithm
     to design a randomized approximation scheme: We can combine the above algorithm with
     that of Theorem 1.2 to obtain a 16-approximation algorithm for e.g. #3-SAT which runs
     (up to a polynomial factor) within the same time bound as that stated in Theorem 1.1. This
     algorithm can then be plugged into a Markov chain by Jerrum and Sinclair [21] to boost
                                                         1
     the quality of approximation. This yields a (1 + poly(n) )-approximation algorithm incurring
     only a polynomial overhead in the computation. Thus we have a second, although more
     complicated, algorithm that satisfies the claim of Theorem 1.1.
M. Thurley                                                                                                          81


    2     Preliminaries
For a CNF formula F , let sat(F ) be the set of its solutions and #F = |sat(F )|. We shall
always use n to denote the number of variables of a CNF formula under consideration. A
randomized α-approximation algorithm A for #k-SAT outputs, on input a k-CNF formula
F , a number A(F ) such that

        Pr α−1 #F ≤ A(F ) ≤ α#F ≥ p.
                              
                                                                                                       (1)

Here p is some constant, independent of the input and strictly larger than2 1/2. A randomized
approximation scheme for #k-SAT, is then an algorithm which on input F and a natural
number −1 behaves like a randomized e -approximation algorithm.
    We use the notation x1 = x and x0 = x̄. For a clause C, a variable x, and a truth value
a ∈ {0, 1}, the restriction of C on x = a is the constant 1 if the literal xa belongs to C,
and C \ {x1−a } otherwise. We write C|x=a for the restriction of C on x = a. A partial
assignment is a sequence of assignments (x1 = a1 , . . . , xr = ar ) with all variables distinct.
Let α be a partial assignment. We will use the notation α ∪ (x = a) to denote the assignment
(x1 = a1 , . . . , xr = ar , x = a). If C is a clause, we let C|α be the result of applying the
restrictions x1 = a1 , . . . , xr = ar to C. Clearly the order of application does not matter. If
F is a CNF formula, we let F |α denote the result of applying the restriction α to each clause
in F , and removing the resulting 1’s. We call F |α the residual formula.
    As we will use the algorithm of Paturi, Pudlák, Saks, and Zane [17] and a very recent
paper by Hertli [9], we need the constant
                                                ∞
                                                X        1
                                         µk =               1    .
                                                j=1
                                                    j(j +  k−1 )



    3     The Algorithm
We are now able to state the main result in full detail.
I Theorem 3.1. For k ≥ 3, #k-SAT has a randomized approximation scheme running in
time3                                                  k−1
                                                    n
                                       O∗ −2 · 2       k−1+µk
                                                                     .

As already outlined, the randomized approximation scheme of Theorem 3.1 is a combination
of two different algorithms. We will discuss the algorithm for the case of few solutions now.
The case of many solutions will be treated afterwards in Section 3.2.


3.1       Formulas with few solutions
For formulas with few solutions we will now present an algorithm relying on a simple
enumeration of solutions by using a k-SAT algorithm as a subroutine. This will also prove
Theorem 1.2.


2
  In the literature, usually either the value p = 3/4 or a further parameter δ such that p = 1 − δ seems to
  be common. However, it is well-known that all of these can be translated into each other with only
  polynomial overhead.
3
  We use the O∗ notation to suppress factors sub-exponential in n.




                                                                                                              S TA C S ’ 1 2
82   An Approximation Algorithm for #k-SAT


     I Lemma 1. Let F be a k-CNF formula on n variables and let A be an algorithm performing
     the following task in time O∗ (2βk n ). If F is satisfiable, with probability at least 3/4 it outputs
     a solution to F . If F is unsatisfiable, it reports this correctly.
         Then, there is a algorithm, which on input F and a natural number N , takes time
       ∗ βk n (1−βk )
     O (2 N           ), and performs the following:
         If #F > N it reports this with probability at least 3/4.
         If #F ≤ N then with probability at least 3/4 it reports this and outputs the correct value
         #F .
     Furthermore, if the algorithm reports #F > N then this holds with certainty.

     Theorem 1.2 follows directly from this lemma by using the randomized 3-SAT algorithm of
     Hertli [9] which has β3 = 0.3864. For the claim about the deterministic algorithm we use the
     result of Moser and Scheder [15], with β3 = 0.4151.
        In the proof of the above lemma, we will use the following fact which is very easily proven.

     I Lemma 2. A rooted tree with N leaves and depth (i.e. max root to leaf-distance) n has at
     most n · N vertices in total.

     Proof of Lemma 1. Note first, that by a standard trick we can boost the success probability
     of A. Assume that, as provided by the statement of the lemma, we have error probability at
     most 1 − p ≤ 1/4. Then the probability of erring in M independent repetitions is at most
     (1 − p)M ≤ e−pM . Call the boosted version of this algorithm A∗ .
         We shall fix a good value for M . Below we will see that algorithm A∗ will be queried a
     number O(nN ) of times, for some N ≤ 2n , each time on a formula of at most n variables.
     The probability that the algorithm errs in any of these queries is at most nN · e−pM . So
     choosing M within a constant factor of log nN (which is polynomial in n) allows us to
     condition on the SAT algorithm not erring in any of the O(nN ) queries. The probability
     of that latter event is close to 1. And as this is the only possible source of failure of the
     algorithm, we will easily achieve a success probability of 3/4 in the end.

     The algorithm
     Check if F is satisfiable, using A∗ , and if so, perform the following. Inductively, construct a
     search tree associated with partial assignments α, such that F |α is satisfiable. For a leaf in
     the current search tree associated with some assignment α, choose a variable x from F |α
     and check F |α∪(x=0) and F |α∪(x=1) for satisfiability using the algorithm A∗ . For each of the
     satisfiable restrictions add a new child to the current leaf in the search tree. We stop the
     algorithm, if it has N leaves, or if it has found all of the solutions of F . Traversing this
     tree, e.g. in a depth first manner we can implement this procedure in polynomial space (not
     taking the space needs of A∗ into account).

     Time
     Consider the search tree this algorithm produces. As it has at most N leaves, and depth at
     most n, we have (recall Lemma 2) at most nN nodes overall in the tree.
         Observe first, that at each node we perform at most 2 queries to the SAT algorithm
     A . A node of level ` in the tree incurs queries taking time at most O∗ (bn−` ) for b = 2βk .
       ∗

     Therefore, we can give an upper bound of the overall time spent in answering all queries by
     bounding the time spent on a completely balanced binary search tree of depth d = log nN .
         Let T (d, n) denote the overall time spend to run the algorithm on a balanced binary
     search tree with d levels with an n variable formula. Then, up to a sub-exponential factor
M. Thurley                                                                                              83


for the time spent at each node in the tree, T (d, n) = bn + 2T (d − 1, n − 1). Note that
T (0, n) = 1, and thus
                                            Xd
                                 T (d, n) =     2ν bn−ν
                                               ν=0
which yields the claimed bound.                                                             J

3.2    Formulas with many Solutions
We use the following simple folklore algorithm which can be found e.g. in Motwani and
Raghavan’s book [16]. Given a CNF formula F on n variables, choose an assignment from
{0, 1}n uniformly at random. Repeat this process a number N of times and let X be the
number of solutions of F among these N trials. By a simple argument (see e.g. Theorem
11.1. in [16]), if                            n 
                                                2
                                      N =Ω 2
                                               #F
                                                  2n
then with probability at least 3/4, the value X ·    is an e -approximation of #F . Hence,
                                                  N
we have the following
                                                                                  −1
I Lemma 3. Let F be an n variable CNF formula with at least  nN solutions and     a
                                                              2
natural number. Then there is an algorithm which, in time O∗ 2     yields a randomized
                                                              N
 
e -approximation of #F .

3.3    Combining the algorithms
We shall now prove Theorem 3.1 by combining both of the above algorithms. Let F be a
k-CNF formula on n variables and −1 a natural number. We run the algorithm of Lemma 1
with a parameter N . The exact value of N will be determined later. Note that if the
algorithm reports #F ≤ N , it also computes #F exactly with probability at least 3/4.
Otherwise, if the algorithm reports that #F > N , we know with certainty that this is the
case. Hence,
            ngiven
                   that the algorithm reports the latter, the algorithm of Lemma 3 will take
         ∗    2
time O             to yield an e -approximation of #F .
             2 N
    It remains to bound the running time which amounts to optimizing the cutoff parameter
N . For every choice of N , the combined algorithm works in time within a sub-exponential
factor of
                                                           2n
                                      max{2βk n N (1−βk ) , }.
                                                           N
Let f be such that log2 N = f · n. Then this maximum translates into max{βk + f (1 −
βk ), 1 − f }. Since (βk + f (1 − βk ) is increasing and 1 − f is decreasing in f , the minimum
over all f of the maximum of the two is obtained when f is chosen so as to make them equal,
that is, at
                                                 1 − βk
                                            f=          .
                                                 2 − βk
This translates into an overall running time of
                                                n 
                                            O∗ 2 2−βk .

Recall that βk determines the running time O∗ (2βk n ) of the subroutine consisting of a
randomized k-SAT algorithm, used in the algorithm of Lemma 1. We shall have a look at
these running times, now.



                                                                                                  S TA C S ’ 1 2
84   An Approximation Algorithm for #k-SAT


     3.3.1    The case k ≥ 5
     The algorithm of Paturi, Pudlák, Saks and Zane [17], can be used as the subroutine randomized
     k-SAT algorithm, which has a running time of
                  µk
                      
        O∗ 2(1− k−1 )n .                                                                       (2)
                                    µk
     Hence, we have here, βk = 1 − k−1 which yields the claimed bound.

     3.3.2    The cases k = 3 and k = 4
     For these values of k, several improvements over the PPSZ algorithm have been presented.
     The currently fastest one is that by Hertli [9], whose bounds match those of the PPSZ
     algorithm in the unique-SAT case. We thus also have here the corresponding bound of
     equation (2).

      4      Upper bounds
     In this section we will prove Theorem 1.3 by presenting a simple algorithm producing
     upper bounds on #F . We will use Valiant and Vazirani’s bisection technique [23] and
     its application to approximate counting. We will therefore consider random GF(2)-linear
     systems of equations of the form Ax = b. For some m ≤ n these consist of an m × n matrix
     A, an m dimensional vector b and a vector x representing the variables of F . The entries of
     A and b are chosen independently and uniformly at random from {0, 1}. As such systems
     give rise to a family of pairwise independent hash functions of the form h(x) = Ax − b, we
     will use the following well known
     I Fact 4.1 (Hashing Lemma). Let F be a CNF formula, and Ax = b an m × n random linear
     system of equations. Then
                                                                       (1 − 2−m )2m
                                           / (1 − , 1 + ) · 2−m · #F ≤
                 
               Pr |{x ∈ sat(F ) | Ax = b}| ∈                                         .
                                                                           #F · 2
     The formulation of this fact in terms of CNF formulas is just for convenience. In fact, in its
     general wording it can be applied to any finite set – its proof can be found e.g. in Goldreich’s
     book [6]. Secondly, we need a standard fact about the rank of random matrices such as
     the matrices obtained in the above way. Consider a random m × n matrix A as above with
     m ≤ n and let r denote its rank. The proof of the following lemma then follows easily, for
     example, from a result of Blömer, Karp and Welzl [1]:

     I Lemma 4. There is a constant c such that E[r] ≥ m − c. Furthermore, r ≥ m − O(log m)
     with probability at least 1 − O(m−1 ).

     A third ingredient of the algorithm is the following Lemma, which can be proved by simple
     linear algebra .

     I Lemma 5. Let Ax = b be a system of GF(2)-linear equations with solution set A. There
     is an algorithm listing all solutions in time within a polynomial factor of |A|.

     We are now ready to prove the Theorem.

     Proof of Theorem 1.3. We start with the description of the algorithm. Choose a random
     GF(2)-linear n × n system of equations Ax = b. Starting with a parameter ν = n and decreas-
     ing ν in each step, we build random linear systems An x = bn , An−1 x = bn−1 , . . . , Aµ x = bµ .
M. Thurley                                                                                                  85


The system Aν x = bν is obtained from Ax = b by deleting the last n − ν rows of A and
entries of b. Then Fν denotes the pair consisting of F and Aν x = bν . We say that Fν is
satisfiable if there is a solution x ∈ sat(F ) such that Aν x = bν .
    For each ν we rigorously determine whether Fν is satisfiable by using the algorithm of
Lemma 5 to list all solutions of the linear system and for each determine whether it satisfies
F . We let u be the minimum ν ≥ µ such that Fν is unsatisfiable. If all Fn , . . . , Fµ are
unsatisfiable, we set u = µ.
    To establish the time bound, note that the running time is dominated by the time the
algorithm spends in determining satisfiability of Fµ . By Lemma 4 the matrix Aµ has with
high probability rank at least m − O(log n) and we have |A| = O∗ (2n−µ ) which yields the
claimed time bound. Thus we shall in the following condition on the event that the rank of
Aµ satisfies this rank criterion.


Correctness
The correctness follows from standard arguments also used in the classical approach [23]. We
give a proof for completeness. Let f = dlog #F e. Assume first, for simplicity, that µ = 0.
We will show that with the desired probability, u is a 16-approximation to #F .
   First, consider the event that u = f − c for some c ≥ 4. The probability pc of this event is
the probability that all of Fn , . . . , Fu are unsatisfiable. Furthermore, conditional on Fu being
unsatisfiable, all Fν for ν ≥ u are unsatisfiable, as well. Hence, we have pc = Pr[Fu is unsat ],
and by the Hashing Lemma 4.1, we have thus

                                                     2u
                                Pr[Fu is unsat ] <      ≤ 21−c .
                                                     #F

By a union bound argument, we thus see that f − 3 ≤ u with probability at least 3/4.
   Next, consider u = f + c which implies that Fu−1 is satisfiable. Applying the Hashing
Lemma 4.1 with parameter  = ζ − 1 for ζ = 2u−1 /#F , we see that

                                                              ζ
                               Pr[Fu−1 is satisfiable] <            .
                                                           (ζ − 1)2

As ζ ≥ 1, this bound is decreasing in ζ, and hence in u, therefore, the probability that Fu−1
is satisfiable is at most 2c−1 (2c−1 − 1)−2 . Again, a union bound shows that u ≤ f + 3 with
probability at least 33/49.
     Next, note that if µ > 0 then these findings do not change. Especially, if µ < f − 3 then
the above result does not change. And if µ ≥ f − 3, then by the above, with probability at
least 3/4 we have u = µ.
     Taking into account that we have conditioned on Aµ having rank m − O(log m) the above
probabilities degenerate a bit. But the bounds claimed in the statement of the Theorem are
still easily achieved.                                                                      J


Remarks
Note that the use of listing algorithm of Lemma 5 can be avoided by using a uniform sampling
algorithm for the solutions of Ax = b, this then yields essentially the same time bounds.
Furthermore, uniform sampling is easily achieved by fixing a basis of the column space of
A, choosing u.a.r. assignments to non-basis variables and extending these assignments to
solutions of Ax = b.



                                                                                                      S TA C S ’ 1 2
86   An Approximation Algorithm for #k-SAT


      5     Open Problems
     It is a peculiar fact that our result falls short of yielding any reasonable time bound for the
     approximation of #2-SAT. A direct application of the algorithm of Theorem 3.1 to this case
     would yield (using a polynomial time 2-SAT subroutine) a bound of O(1.4142n ) whereas the
     fastest exact method [24] takes time only O(1.2377n ). It would therefore be interesting to
     develop an approximation algorithm which beats the bounds of these exact methods.
         Secondly, the time bounds achieved in this paper are significantly better than those
     for known exact methods, but also, they are much worse than the bounds known for the
     corresponding satisfiability problems. Is it possible to close this gap, maybe even in terms of
     a purely algorithmic analog of Valiant and Vazirani’s result?

      6     Acknowledgments
     I would like to thank Martin Grohe for bringing this problem to my attention and for several
     helpful discussions on the topic. For further discussions, I would also like to thank Holger
     Dell, Alistair Sinclair, and Piyush Srivastava.


          References
      1   Johannes Blömer, Richard M. Karp, and Emo Welzl. The rank of sparse random matrices
          over finite fields. Random Struct. Algorithms, 10(4):407–419, 1997.
      2   Vilhelm Dahllöf, Peter Jonsson, and Magnus Wahlström. Counting models for 2sat and
          3sat formulae. Theor. Comput. Sci., 332(1-3):265–291, 2005.
      3   Olivier Dubois. Counting the number of solutions for instances of satisfiability. Theor.
          Comput. Sci., 81(1):49–64, 1991.
      4   Martin Fürer and Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan. Algorithms for counting 2-satsolutions
          and colorings with applications. In AAIM, pages 47–57, 2007.
      5   Vibhav Gogate and Rina Dechter. Approximate counting by sampling the backtrack-free
          search space. In AAAI, pages 198–203, 2007.
      6   Oded Goldreich. Computational complexity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008.
          A conceptual perspective.
      7   Carla P. Gomes, Jörg Hoffmann, Ashish Sabharwal, and Bart Selman. From sampling to
          model counting. In IJCAI, pages 2293–2299, 2007.
      8   Carla P. Gomes, Ashish Sabharwal, and Bart Selman. Model counting: A new strategy for
          obtaining good bounds. In AAAI, 2006.
      9   Timon Hertli. 3-sat faster and simpler - unique-sat bounds for ppsz hold in general. In
          FOCS, 2011. To appear.
     10   Timon Hertli, Robin A. Moser, and Dominik Scheder. Improving ppsz for 3-sat using
          critical variables. In STACS, pages 237–248, 2011.
     11   Kazuo Iwama and Suguru Tamaki. Improved upper bounds for 3-sat. In J. Ian Munro,
          editor, SODA, page 328. SIAM, 2004.
     12   Lukas Kroc, Ashish Sabharwal, and Bart Selman. Leveraging belief propagation, backtrack
          search, and statistics for model counting. Annals OR, 184(1):209–231, 2011.
     13   Konstantin Kutzkov. New upper bound for the #3-sat problem. Inf. Process. Lett.,
          105(1):1–5, 2007.
     14   B. Monien and E. Speckenmeyer. Solving satisfiability in less than 2n steps. Discrete Appl.
          Math., 10(3):287–295, 1985.
     15   Robin A. Moser and Dominik Scheder. A full derandomization of Schöning’s k-sat algorithm.
          In STOC, pages 245–252, 2011.
M. Thurley                                                                                                87


16   Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. Randomized algorithms. Cambridge University
     Press, Cambridge, 1995.
17   Ramamohan Paturi, Pavel Pudlák, Michael E. Saks, and Francis Zane. An improved
     exponential-time algorithm for -sat. J. ACM, 52(3):337–364, 2005.
18   Daniel Rolf. Improved bound for the PPSZ/Schöning-algorithm for 3-sat. JSAT, 1(2):111–
     122, 2006.
19   Dan Roth. On the hardness of approximate reasoning. Artif. Intell., 82(1-2):273–302, 1996.
20   Uwe Schöning. A probabilistic algorithm for k-sat and constraint satisfaction problems. In
     FOCS, pages 410–414, 1999.
21   Alistair Sinclair and Mark Jerrum. Approximate counting, uniform generation and rapidly
     mixing markov chains. Inf. Comput., 82(1):93–133, 1989.
22   Larry J. Stockmeyer. On approximation algorithms for #p. SIAM J. Comput., 14(4):849–
     861, 1985.
23   Leslie G. Valiant and Vijay V. Vazirani. Np is as easy as detecting unique solutions. Theor.
     Comput. Sci., 47(3):85–93, 1986.
24   Magnus Wahlström. A tighter bound for counting max-weight solutions to 2sat instances.
     In IWPEC, pages 202–213, 2008.
25   Wei Wei and Bart Selman. A new approach to model counting. In SAT, pages 324–339,
     2005.
26   Wenhui Zhang. Number of models and satisfiability of sets of clauses. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
     155(1):277–288, 1996.




                                                                                                    S TA C S ’ 1 2
