Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and
Kernelization
Fedor V. Fomin1 , Daniel Lokshtanov2 , Neeldhara Misra3 ,
Geevarghese Philip3 , and Saket Saurabh3

1    Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway.
     fomin@ii.uib.no
2    University of California, San Diego, Department of Computer Science and
     Engineering, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0404, USA,
     dlokshtanov@cs.ucsd.edu
3    The Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Chennai 600113, India.
     {neeldhara|gphilip|saket}@imsc.res.in



      Abstract
We study a general class of problems called p-F-Deletion problems. In an p-F-Deletion
problem, we are asked whether a subset of at most k vertices can be deleted from a graph G such
that the resulting graph does not contain as a minor any graph from the family F of forbidden
minors. We obtain a number of algorithmic results on the p-F-Deletion problem when F
contains a planar graph. We give
    a linear vertex kernel on graphs excluding t-claw K1,t , the star with t leves, as an induced
    subgraph, where t is a fixed integer.
    an approximation algorithm achieving an approximation ratio of O(log3/2 OP T ), where OP T
    is the size of an optimal solution on general undirected graphs.
Finally, we obtain polynomial kernels for the case when F only contains graph θc as a minor for a
fixed integer c. The graph θc consists of two vertices connected by c parallel edges. Even though
this may appear to be a very restricted class of problems it already encompasses well-studied
problems such as Vertex Cover, Feedback Vertex Set and Diamond Hitting Set. The
generic kernelization algorithm is based on a non-trivial application of protrusion techniques,
previously used only for problems on topological graph classes.

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2011.189


 1      Introduction
Let F be a finite set of graphs. In an p-F-Deletion problem, we are given an n-vertex
graph G and an integer k as input, and asked whether at most k vertices can be deleted from
G such that the resulting graph does not contain a graph from F as a minor. We refer to
such a subset as an F-hitting set. The p-F-Deletion problem is a generalization of several
fundamental problems. For example, when F = {K2 }, a complete graph on two vertices,
this is the Vertex Cover problem. When F = {C3 }, a cycle on three vertices, this is the
Feedback Vertex Set problem. Other famous cases are F = {K2,3 , K4 }, F = {K3,3 , K5 }
and F = {K3 , T2 }, which correspond to removing vertices to obtain outerplanar graphs,
planar graphs, and graphs of pathwidth one respectively. Here, Ki,j denotes the complete
bipartite graph with bipartitions of sizes i and j, and Ki denotes the complete graph on i
vertices. Further, a T2 is a star on three leaves, each of whose edges has been subdivided
exactly once. A T2 structure is depicted in the leftmost graph of Figure 1.
    Our interest in the p-F-Deletion problem is motivated by its generality and the
recent developments in kernelization or polynomial time preprocessing. The parameterized
            © F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh;
            licensed under Creative Commons License NC-ND
28th Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS’11).
Editors: Thomas Schwentick, Christoph Dürr; pp. 189–200
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
                                                                 We study a general from   a graph
                                                                                       class         G such called
                                                                                               of problems      that the  resulting
                                                                                                                        p-F -Deletiongraph   does not contain
                                                                                                                                          problems.    In an p-a
                                          Deletion problem,Deletion
                                                                we are asked  whether
                                                                         problem,  we   afamily
                                                                                    theare subset   ofof at
                                                                                             askedF whether  most
                                                                                                          forbidden   vertices
                                                                                                                    k minors.
                                                                                                                a subset        can
                                                                                                                           of atWe   be kdeleted
                                                                                                                                    obtain
                                                                                                                                 most       a number
                                                                                                                                          vertices  can of
                                                                                                                                                        be algor
                                                                                                                                                            delet
                                          from a graph G such   that
                                                             from    the resulting
                                                                   a graph G such graph
                                                                                    that    does
                                                                                          the
                                                                                    Deletion      not  contain
                                                                                               resulting
                                                                                                  problem   graph
                                                                                                              whenas a minor
                                                                                                                   does
                                                                                                                     F         anya graph
                                                                                                                         not contain
                                                                                                                        contains      as a from
                                                                                                                                    planar minor
                                                                                                                                             graph.any
                                                                                                                                                     Wegraph
                                                                                                                                                         give fro
                                                             the family
                                          the family F of forbidden     F of forbidden
                                                                     minors.  We obtain   minors.   We of  obtain a number    of algorithmic   results on the p-
                                                                                       • aa linear
                                                                                              number vertexalgorithmic     results
                                                                                                               kernel on graphs    on  the p-F-
                                                                                                                                   excluding   K1,t as an induc
                                          Deletion problemDeletion       problemawhen
                                                              when F contains      planar    contains
                                                                                         F graph.   We a planar
                                                                                           fixed integer.  give graph. We give
                                                  • a linear
                               • a linear vertex kernel       vertexexcluding
                                                         on graphs   kernel on K
                                                                          • an  graphs  excluding
                                                                                 1,t as an induced
                                                                                approximation        1,t as achieving
                                                                                                            an induced
                                                                                                   Ksubgraph,
                                                                                                algorithm        whereantsubgraph,
                                                                                                                          is a      whererati
                                                                                                                          approximation    t is
                                 fixed integer.      fixed integer.         OP T is the size of an optimal solution on general      undirecte
                                                                                                                               3/2
190                              an approximation• algorithm
      Hitting forbidden minors:• Approximation       an approximation
                                                      and      achievingalgorithm
                                                             Kernelization         achieving ratio
                                                                         an approximation
                                                                      Finally,  we obtain
                                                                                              an approximation
                                                                                                   of O(log
                                                                                          polynomial
                                                                                                            3/2 ratio of O(log
                                                                                                       kernels OPthe
                                                                                                               for      where
                                                                                                                   T ),case        OP T ), whe
                                                                                                                            when F contains
                                                     OP T is the size of an optimal   solution on general  undirected  graphs.
                                 OP T is the size of an optimal solution   on  general undirected  graphs.
                                                                      a fixed integer c. The graph θ consists of two vertices connected
                                                                  Finally, we obtain polynomial kernels for the case whenc F contains the θ graph as a minor
                                          Finally, we obtain polynomial kernels for the    case when
                                                                                        though    this mayF contains
                                                                                                               appearthe       c graph
                                                                                                                          to θbe        as restricted
                                                                                                                                  aconnected
                                                                                                                                     very   a minorcforclass of problem
                                                              a fixed integer c. The graph θc consists of two vertices                          by c parallel edges. Ev
                                          a fixed integer c. The  graph   θ   consists of two    vertices
                                                                                        well-studied       connected
                                                                                                         problems        by
                                                                                                                      such
                                                              though this may appear to be a very restricted class of problems
                                                                            c                                                 as
                                                                                                                              c parallel
                                                                                                                                  Vertex  edges.
                                                                                                                                             Cover, EvenFeedback
                                                                                                                                                   it already         Ve
                                                                                                                                                               encompas
                                          though this may appear       to be  a very  restricted
                                                              well-studied problems Hitting        class   of
                                                                                                    Set. The
                                                                                         such as Vertex        problems     it  already
                                                                                                                  genericFeedback
                                                                                                                Cover,       kernelizationencompasses
                                                                                                                                               algorithm
                                                                                                                                           Vertex      Setisand
                                                                                                                                                              based on a
                                                                                                                                                                 Diamo
                                          well-studied problems    such as
                                                              Hitting     Set.Vertex    Cover,
                                                                                        protrusion
                                                                                The generic         Feedback
                                                                                                      techniques,
                                                                                                kernelization      Vertex
                                                                                                                 algorithm     isSet
                                                                                                                      previously       and
                                                                                                                                    used
                                                                                                                                  based  on  Diamond
                                                                                                                                           only   for problems
                                                                                                                                              a non-trivial      on topo
                                                                                                                                                             application
                                          Hitting Set. Theprotrusion
                                                               generic kernelization     algorithm
                                                                                            T2
                                                                            techniques, previously     is based
                                                                                                       used   onlyonfora problems
                                                                                                                         non-trivial onapplication
                                                                                                                                         topological of graph classes.
                                          protrusion techniques, Tpreviously
                                                                    2
                                                                                used only for
                                                                                            K1,7problems on topological graph classes.
                                              T2                  K1,7                      θ7 .
                                              K1,7                θ7 .
                                              θ7 .
           Figure 1 Graphs T2 , t-claw K1,t with t = 7, and θc with c = 7
                                                                                    1      Introduction
                                                          1      Introduction
                                  1      Introduction                               Let F be a finite set of graphs. In an p-F-Deletion problem1 , w
                                             Let F be a finite set of graphs. In an p-F -Deletion problem1 , we are given an n-verte
                                                                     G and an integer k as input, and asked whether at most k vertice
                          Let F beproblem
      complexity of this general             Gis and
                                    a finite set well an  integer
                                                  of graphs.
                                                       understood.k as
                                                               In an    input,
                                                                        Bythe  and asked
                                                                            a resulting
                                                                               celebrated
                                                                      p-F-Deletion
                                                                     that
                                                                                           whether
                                                                                        problem
                                                                                             result
                                                                                         graph  does
                                                                                                      at are
                                                                                                 1 , we
                                                                                                      of  most  k vertices
                                                                                                             given
                                                                                                         Robertson
                                                                                                       not  contain an     can begraph
                                                                                                                       n-vertex
                                                                                                                     a graph
                                                                                                                                   deleted from
                                                                                                                             from F as a mino
      and Seymour, every    and an integer that
                          G p-F-Deletion     k as  the  resulting
                                                    input,
                                                 problem    and   graphwhether
                                                                 asked    does notatcontain
                                                              is non-uniformly        most  a vertices
                                                                                            k graph from
                                                                                     fixed-parameter
                                                                     is defined as follows.              canFbeasdeleted
                                                                                                                  a minor.from
                                                                                                           tractable        More
                                                                                                                               G  precisely
                                                                                                                                   such     the
                          that the resulting is  defined
                                             graph    doesasnot
                                                             follows.
                                                                contain a graph from F as a minor. More3 precisely the problem
      (FPT). That is, for every k there is an algorithm solving the problem in time O(f (k) · n ) [32].
      In this paper we studyis defined   as follows.from
                                  this problem         p-F -Deletion
                                                              the view point       p-F-Deletion
                                                                                       of polynomial time preprocessing
                                                               Instance:       A  graph    Instance:
                                                                                           G and             A graph Ginteger
                                                                                                      a non-negative          and a k.  non-negative integer k.
      and approximation, when        the
                               p-F-Deletion obstruction       set  F    satisfies     certain
                                                                                        Parameter:
                                                                                                  properties.k
                                                            Parameter: k
           Preprocessing as a strategy Instance:
                                            for copingA graph
                                                           with    G andproblems
                                                                   hard      a non-negative
                                                                                          is        integer k.
                                                                                              universally       applied     inexist
                                                                                                                                practice
                                                              Question: Does there             exist S ⊆Does
                                                                                          Question:           V (G), there
                                                                                                                        |S| ≤   k, S ⊆ V (G), |S| ≤ k,
                                    Parameter:        k
      and the notion of kernelization provides a mathematical                  such framework
                                                                                       that G \ S for        such nothat
                                                                                                            analyzing
                                                                                                       contains            the\ from
                                                                                                                        graph
                                                                                                                           G         contains
                                                                                                                                  SqualityF as ano    graph from F as
                                                                                                                                                   minor?
      of preprocessing strategies.Question:
                                         We consider  Doesparameterized
                                                               there exist S ⊆ Vproblems,
                                                                                        (G), |S| ≤where  k,       every instance I
                                                      such
                                                         referthat            contains
                                                                     G \ Ssubset
                                                                               WeadmitS asno
                                                                                     refer   tograph
                                                                                                 such     from     Sas
                                                                                                            set. FThe
                                                                                                         subset          aF-hitting
                                                                                                                           minor?
                                                                                                                       asp-F               set. problem
                                                                                                                                                The p-F-Deletion
      comes with a parameter k. Such aWe             problem    to is
                                                                    such
                                                                       said to               Fa-hitting
                                                                                                  polynomial         kernel    -Deletion
                                                                                                                                 if every                   is a generaliz
                                                   several fundamental several  problems.      For example,
                                                                                         fundamental              when FFor
                                                                                                              problems.        = {K    2 }, a complete
                                                                                                                                   example,     when    F  graph
                                                                                                                                                            = {Kon  2 },two
                                                                                                                                                                         a co
      instance (I, k) can beWereduced
                                 refer toin    polynomial
                                            such   subset       time    to an equivalent          instance with both            size and
                                                   this is S theasVertex
                                                                    F-hitting     set.
                                                                                Cover
                                                                               this   is The
                                                                                         the    p-F-Deletion
                                                                                           problem.
                                                                                               Vertex       When
                                                                                                              Cover F problem
                                                                                                                            {C3 }, is
                                                                                                                         =problem.     a aWhen
                                                                                                                                             generalization
                                                                                                                                          cycle  on
                                                                                                                                                  F three        of
                                                                                                                                                      = {Cvertices,       th
                                                                                                                                                               3 }, a cycle
      parameter value bounded
                            severalby   a polynomial
                                     fundamental             in k. The
                                                       problems.            study of when
                                                                      For example,       kernelization
                                                                                                   F = {K2is   }, aa major
                                                                                                                      complete  research
                                                                                                                                     graph on two vertices,
                                                       ∗
                                                         Department of Informatics,∗     University
                                                                                     Department        of  Bergen, N-5020     Bergen,    Norway.  fomin@ii.uib.no.
                            this is the
      frontier of Parameterized           Vertex †Cover
                                     Complexity          Universityproblem.
                                                        and    many      importantWhen
                                                                     of California,         F = of
                                                                                         recent         Informatics,
                                                                                                         3 }, aCA
                                                                                                      advances
                                                                                                     {C
                                                                                   † San Diego, La Jolla,
                                                                                                                     inUniversity
                                                                                                                 cycle    on three
                                                                                                                          the
                                                                                                                    92093-0404,
                                                                                                                                area  of vertices,
                                                                                                                                    USA,
                                                                                                                                         Bergen, N-5020
                                                                                                                                         are        this isBergen,
                                                                                                                                                              the Norwa
                                                                                                                                            dlokshtanov@cs.ucsd.edu
                                                                                     University of California,     San   Diego, La     Jolla, CA 92093-0404, USA, dlok
      on kernelization. These  ∗ include generalThe
                                                       ‡
                                                          resultsInstitute
                                                                    showing that
                                 Department of Informatics, University of Bergen,
                                                                                   ‡ of  certain
                                                                                     The N-5020
                                                                                                       classes of
                                                                                              Mathematical
                                                                                                Institute
                                                                                                      Bergen, Norway.
                                                                                                                      parameterized
                                                                                                                  of Sciences,
                                                                                                                           Mathematical   Chennai
                                                                                                                           fomin@ii.uib.no.
                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                    Sciences,     600113,
                                                                                                                                                                       Chenn
      problems have polynomial †      kernels
                                 University      [3,{neeldhara|gphilip|saket}@imsc.res.in.
                                                      10,
                                             of California,
                                                       1
                                                         We
                                                           22,
                                                             San
                                                             use
                                                                 26].
                                                                  Diego,
                                                                 prefix
                                                                        The
                                                                         p La
                                                                           to
                                                                                recent
                                                                               Jolla,  CA
                                                                              distinguish
                                                                                          development
                                                                                           92093-0404,
                                                                                            the
                                                                                                               of
                                                                                                            USA,
                                                                                                 parameterized
                                                                                                                   a
                                                                               {neeldhara|gphilip|saket}@imsc.res.in.  framework
                                                                                                                  dlokshtanov@cs.ucsd.edu
                                                                                                                   version   of the
                                                                                                                                          for
                                                                                                                                      problem.
                                                                                   1
                                                                                     We use Sciences,
                                                                                              prefix p to distinguish
                                                                                                                      [9,the
                                                                                                                           17,parameterized      version ofIndia.
                                                                                                                                                              the problem.
                               ‡
                                 The
      ruling out polynomial kernels        Institutecertain
                                          under             of complexity-theoretic
                                                                     Mathematical                assumptions     Chennai           -
                                                                                                                                  23]    has600113,
                            {neeldhara|gphilip|saket}@imsc.res.in.                                                    1
      added a new dimension    1 to the field and strengthened its connections to classical complexity.
                                 We use prefix p to distinguish the parameterized version of the problem.                                           1
      For overviews of kernelization we refer to surveys [8, 24] and to the corresponding chapters
                                                                                             1
      in books on Parameterized Complexity [21, 30].
           While the initial interest in kernelization was driven mainly by practical applications, the
      notion of kernelization turned out to be very important in theory as well. It is well known,
      see e.g. [18], that a parameterized problem is fixed parameter tractable, or belongs to the
      class FPT, if and only if it has a (perhaps exponential) kernel. Kernelization enables us to
      classify problems within the class FPT further, based on the sizes of the problem kernels. So
      far, most of the work done in the field of kernelization is still specific to particular problems
      and powerful unified techniques to identify classes of problems with polynomial kernels are
      still in their nascent stage. One of the fundamental challenges in the area is the possibility
      of characterising general classes of parameterized problems possessing kernels of polynomial
      sizes. From this perspective, the class of the p-F-Deletion problems is very interesting
      because it contains as special cases the p-Vertex Cover and p-Feedback Vertex Set
      problems which are the most intensively studied problems from the kernelization perspective.
      Our contribution and key ideas. One of the main conceptual contributions of this
      work is the extension of protrusion techniques, initially developed in [10, 22] for obtaining
      meta-kernelization theorems for problems on sparse graphs like planar and H-minor-free
      graphs, to general graphs. We demonstrate this by obtaining a number of kernelization
      results for the p-F-Deletion problem when F contains a planar graph. Our first result is
      the following theorem for graphs that do not contain K1,t (a star on t leaves, see Figure 1).

      I Theorem 1. Let F be an obstruction set containing a planar graph. Then p-F-Deletion
      admits a linear vertex kernel on graphs excluding K1,t as an induced subgraph, where t is a
      fixed integer.
F.V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh                                           191


Several well studied graph classes do not contain graphs with induced K1,t . Of course, every
graph with maximum vertex degree at most (t − 1) is K1,t -free. The class of K1,3 -free graphs,
also known as claw-free graphs, contains line graphs and de Bruijn graphs. Unit disc graphs
are known to be K1,7 -free [15].
    Our kernelization is a divide and conquer algorithm which finds large protrusions. A
protrusion is a subgraph of constant treewidth separated from the remaining part of the
graph by a constant number of vertices. Having found protrusions of substantial size, the
kernelization algorithm replaces them with smaller, “equivalent” protrusions. Here we use
the results from the work by Bodlaender et al. [10] that enable this step whenever the
parameterized problem in question “behaves like a regular language”. To prove that p-F-
Deletion has the desired properties for this step, we formulate the problem in monadic
second order logic and show that it exhibits certain monotonicity properties. As a corollary
we obtain that p-Feedback Vertex Set, p-Diamond Hitting Set, p-Pathwidth One
Deletion Set, and p-Outerplanar Deletion Set admit a linear vertex kernel on
graphs excluding K1,t as an induced subgraph. With the same methodology we also obtain
a O(k log k) vertex kernel for p-Disjoint Cycle Packing on graphs excluding K1,t as an
induced subgraph. We note that p-Disjoint Cycle Packing does not admit a polynomial
kernel on general graphs [11] unless coN P ⊆ N P/poly.
    Let θc be a graph with two vertices and c ≥ 1 parallel edges (see Figure 1). Our second
result is the following theorem on general graphs.
I Theorem 2. Let F be an obstruction set containing only θc . Then p-F-Deletion admits
a kernel of size O(k 2 log3/2 k).
A number of well-studied NP-hard combinatorial problems are special cases of p-θc -Deletion.
When c = 1, this is the classical Vertex Cover problem [29]. For c = 2, this is another
well studied problem, the Feedback Vertex Set problem [4]. When c = 3, this is the
Diamond Hitting Set problem [20]. Let us note that the size of the best known kernel for
c = 2 is O(k 2 ), which is very close to the size of the kernel in Theorem 2. Also, Dell and van
Melkebeek proved that no NP-hard vertex deletion problem based on a graph property that
is inherited by subgraphs can have kernels of size O(k 2−ε ) unless coN P ⊆ N P/poly [17] and
thus the sizes of the kernels in Theorem 2 are tight up to a polylogarithmic factor.
    The proof of Theorem 2 is obtained in a series of non-trivial steps. The very high level
idea is to reduce the general case to problem on graphs of bounded degree, which allows
us to use the protrusion techniques as in the proof of Theorem 1. However, vertex degree
reduction is not straightforward and requires several new ideas. One of the new tools is a
generic O(log3/2 OP T )-approximation algorithm for the p-F-Deletion problem when the
class of excluded minors for F contains at least one planar graph. More precisely, we obtain
the following result, which is of independent interest.
I Theorem 3. Let F be an obstruction set containing a planar graph, and let OP T be
the size of the smallest F-hitting set. Given a graph G, in polynomial time we can find
a subset S ⊆ V (G) such that G[V \ S] contains no element of F as a minor and |S| =
O(OP T · log3/2 OP T ).
While several generic approximation algorithms are known for problems of minimum vertex
deletion to obtain subgraphs with property P , like when P is a hereditary property with
a finite number of minimal forbidden subgraphs [28], or can be expressed as a universal
first order sentence over subsets of edges of the graph [25], we are not aware of any generic
approximation algorithm for the case when a property P is characterized by a finite set of
forbidden minors.



                                                                                                   S TA C S ’ 1 1
192   Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and Kernelization


          We then use the approximation algorithm as a subroutine in a polynomial time algorithm
      that transforms the input instance (G, k) into an equivalent instance (G0 , k 0 ) such that k 0 ≤ k
      and the maximum degree of G0 is bounded by O(k log3/2 k). An important combinatorial
      tool used in designing this algorithm is the q–Expansion Lemma. For q = 1 this lemma is
      Hall’s theorem and its usage is equivalent to the application of the Crown Decomposition
      technique [1, 14]. After obtaining an equivalent instance with bounded degree, we apply
      protrusion techniques and prove Theorem 2.
      Related work. All non-trivial p-F-Deletion problems are NP-hard [27]. By one of the
      most well-known consequences of the celebrated Graph Minor theory of Robertson and
      Seymour the p-F-Deletion problem is non-uniformly fixed parameter tractable. Whenever
      F is given explicitly, the problem is uniformly FPT because the excluded minors for the
      class of graphs that are YES-instances of the p-F-Deletion problem can by computed
      explicitly [2]. A special case of that problem, when the set F contains θc , has been studied from
      approximation and parameterized perspectives. In particular, the case of p-θ1 -Deletion
      or, equivalently, p-Vertex Cover, is the most well-studied problem in Parameterized
      Complexity. Different kernelization techniques were applied on the problem, eventually
      resulting in a 2k-sized vertex kernel [1, 13]. For the kernelization of p-Feedback Vertex
      Set, or p-θ2 -Deletion, there has been a sequence of dramatic improvements starting from
      an O(k 11 ) vertex kernel by Buragge et al. [12], improved to O(k 3 ) by Bodlaender [7], and then
      finally to O(k 2 ) by Thomassé [34]. Recently Philip et al. [31] and Cygan et al. [16] obtained
      polynomial kernels for p-Pathwidth One Deletion Set. Constant factor approximation
      algorithms are known for Vertex Cover and Feedback Vertex Set [4, 5]. Very recently,
      a constant factor approximation algorithm for the Diamond Hitting Set problem, or
      p-θ3 -Deletion, was obtained in [20]. Prior to our work, no polynomial kernels were known
      for p-Diamond Hitting Set or more general families of p-F-Deletion problems.


       2     Preliminaries

      In this section we give various definitions which we use in the paper. For n ∈ N, we use [n]
      to denote the set {1, . . . , n}. We use V (G) to denote the vertex set of a graph G, and E(G)
      to denote the edge set. The degree of a vertex v in G is the number of edges incident on v,
      and is denoted by d(v). We use ∆(G) to denote the maximum degree of G. A graph G0 is a
      subgraph of G if V (G0 ) ⊆ V (G) and E(G0 ) ⊆ E(G). The subgraph G0 is called an induced
      subgraph of G if E(G0 ) = {{u, v} ∈ E(G) | u, v ∈ V (G0 )}. Given a subset S ⊆ V (G) the
      subgraph induced by S is denoted by G[S]. The subgraph induced by V (G) \ S is denoted by
      G \ S. We denote by N (S) the open neighborhood of S, i.e. the set of vertices in V (G) \ S
      adjacent to S. Let F be a finite set of graphs. A vertex subset S ⊆ V (G) of a graph G is
      said to be a F-hitting set if G \ S does not contain any graphs in the family F as a minor.
          By contracting an edge (u, v) of a graph G, we mean identifying the vertices u and v,
      keeping all the parallel edges and removing all the loops. A minor of a graph G is a graph
      H that can be obtained from a subgraph of G by contracting edges. We keep parallel edges
      after contraction since the graph θc which we want to exclude as a minor itself contains
      parallel edges. Let G, H be two graphs. A subgraph G0 of G is said to be a minor-model
      of H in G if G0 contains H as a minor. The subgraph G0 is a minimal minor-model of H
      in G if no proper subgraph of G0 is a minor-model of H in G. A graph class C is minor
      closed if any minor of any graph in C is also an element of C. A minor closed graph class C is
      H-minor-free or simply H-free if H ∈    / C.
      Parameterized algorithms and Kernels. A parameterized problem Π is a subset of
F.V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh                                              193


Γ∗ × N for some finite alphabet Γ. An instance of a parameterized problem consists of
(x, k), where k is called the parameter. A central notion in parameterized complexity is fixed
parameter tractability (FPT) which means, for a given instance (x, k), solvability in time
f (k) · p(|x|), where f is an arbitrary function of k and p is a polynomial in the input size. A
kernelization algorithm for a parameterized problem Π ⊆ Σ∗ × N is an algorithm that, given
(x, k) ∈ Σ∗ × N, outputs, in time polynomial in (|x| + k), a pair (x0 , k 0 ) ∈ Σ∗ × N such that:
(a) (x, k) ∈ Π if and only if (x0 , k 0 ) ∈ Π and (b) |x0 |, k 0 ≤ g(k), where g is some computable
function. The output instance x0 is called the kernel, and the function g is referred to as the
size of the kernel. If g(k) = k O(1) , then we say that Π admits a polynomial kernel [21].
Tree-width and protrusions. We use standard notions of tree decompositions, tree-width,
and nice tree decompositions, which definitions can be found in [10, 22]. Whenever we use
nice tree decompositions, we will assume that the root bag is empty. The tree-width of a
graph G is denoted by tw(G). Given a graph G and S ⊆ V (G), we define ∂G (S) as the
set of vertices in S that have a neighbor in V (G) \ S. We say that a set X ⊆ V (G) is an
r-protrusion of G if tw(G[X]) ≤ r and |∂G (X)| ≤ r. In our paper, we also use concepts of
MSO, t-boundaried graphs and their properties, the notion of finite integer index, and strong
monotonicity. The definitions of these notions can be found in [10, 22]. Proofs of results
labeled with F have been omitted due to lack of space.

 3     Kernelization for p-F-Deletion on K1,t free graphs
In this section we show that if the obstruction set F contains a planar graph then the
p-F-Deletion problem has a linear vertex kernel on graphs excluding K1,t as an induced
subgraph. We start with the following lemma, which is crucial to our kernelization algorithms.

I Lemma 4 (F). Let F be an obstruction set containing a planar graph of size h. If G
has an F-hitting set S of size at most k, then tw(G \ S) ≤ d and tw(G) ≤ k + d, where
               5
d = 202(14h−24) .

The Protrusion Rule — Reductions Based on Finite Integer Index. We obtain our
kernelization algorithm for p-F-Deletion by applying a protrusion based reduction rule.
That is, any large r-protrusion for a fixed constant r that depends only on F (that is, only
on the problem) is replaced with a smaller equivalent r-protrusion. For this, we utilize the
following lemma of Bodlaender et al. [10].

I Lemma 5 ([10]). Let Π be a problem that has finite integer index. Then there exists
a computable function γ : N → N and an algorithm that given an instance (G, k) and an
r-protrusion X of G of size at least γ(r), runs in O(|X|) time and outputs an instance
(G∗ , k ∗ ) such that |V (G∗ )| < |V (G)|, k ∗ ≤ k, and (G∗ , k ∗ ) ∈ Π if and only if (G, k) ∈ Π.

Remark: Let us remark that if G does not have K1,t as an induced subgraph then the proof
of Lemma 5 also ensures that the graph G0 does not contain K1,t as an induced subgraph.
This ensures that the reduced instance belongs to the same graph class as the original.
    In order to apply Lemma 5 we need to be able to efficiently find large r-protrusions
whenever the instance considered is large enough. Also, we need to prove that p-F-Deletion
has finite integer index. The next lemma yields a divide and conquer algorithm for efficiently
finding large r-protrusions.

I Lemma 6. There is a linear time algorithm that given an n-vertex graph G and a set
X ⊆ V (G) such that tw(G \ X) ≤ d, outputs a 2(d + 1)-protrusion of G of size at least
  n−|X|
4|N (X)|+1 . Here d is some constant.




                                                                                                      S TA C S ’ 1 1
194   Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and Kernelization


      Proof. Let F = G \ X. The algorithm starts by computing a nice tree decomposition of F
      of width at most d. Notice that since d is a constant this can be done in linear time [6]. Let
      S be the vertices in V (F ) that are neighbors of X in G, that is, S = NG (X).
          The nice tree decomposition of F is a pair (T, B = {B` }`∈V (T ) ), where T is a rooted
      binary tree. We will now mark some of the nodes of T . For every v ∈ S, we mark the topmost
      node ` in T such that v ∈ B` . In this manner, at most |S| nodes are marked. Now we mark
      more nodes of T by exhaustively applying the following rule: if u and v are marked, mark
      their least common ancestor in T . Let M be the set of all marked nodes of T . Standard
      counting arguments on trees give that |M | ≤ 2|S|.
          Since T is a binary tree, it follows that T \ M has at most 2|M | + 1 connected components.
      Let the vertex sets of these connected components be C1 , C2 . . . Cη , η ≤ 2|M | + 1. For
      every i ≤ η, let Ci0 = NT (Ci ) ∪ Ci and let Pi = u∈C 0 Bu . By the construction of M ,
                                                              S
                                                                   i
      every component of T \ M has at most 2 neighbors in M . Also for every 1 ≤ i ≤ η and
      v ∈ S, we have that if v ∈ Pi , then v should be contained in one of the bags of NT (Ci ).
                                  S
      In other words, S ∩ Pi ⊆ u∈C 0 \Ci Bu . Thus every Pi is a 2(d + 1)-protrusion of G. Since
                                         i
      η ≤ 2|M | + 1 ≤ 4|S| + 1, the pigeon-hole principle yields that there is a protrusion Pi with
               n−|X|
      at least 4|S|+1 vertices. The algorithm constructs M and P1 . . . Pη and outputs the largest
      protrusion Pi . It is easy to implement this procedure to run in linear time.               J

         The following lemma follows from [10], where it is shown that every strongly monotone
      p-min-MSO problem has finite integer index.
      I Lemma 7 (F). p-F-Deletion has finite integer index.
      Analysis and Kernel Size – Proof of Theorem 1. Now we give the desired kernel for
      p-F-Deletion. We will use the following combinatorial lemma.
      I Lemma 8 (F). Let G be a graph excluding K1,t as an induced subgraph and S be an
      F-hitting set. If F contains a planar graph of size h, then |N (S)| ≤ g(h, t) · |S| for some
      computable function g of h and t.
      Proof of Theorem 1. Let (G, k) be an instance of p-F-Deletion and h be the size of a
      smallest planar graph in the obstruction set F. We first apply Theorem 3 (to be proved in
      next section), an approximation algorithm for p-F-Deletion with factor O(log3/2 OP T ),
      and obtain a set X such that G \ X contains no graph in F as a minor. If the size of the set
      X is more than O(k log3/2 k) then we return that (G, k) is a NO-instance to p-F-Deletion.
      This is justified by the approximation guarantee provided by the Theorem 3.
           Let d denote the treewidth of the graph after the removal of X, that is, d := tw(G \ S).
      Now we obtain the kernel in two phases: we first apply the protrusion rule selectively
      (Lemma 5) and get a polynomial kernel. Then, we apply the protrusion rule exhaustively on
      the obtained kernel to get a smaller kernel. This is done in order to reduce the running time
      complexity of the kernelization algorithm. To obtain the kernel we follow the following steps.
                                                                             5
           Applying the Protrusion Rule. By Lemma 4, d ≤ 202(14h−24) . We apply Lemma 6
                                                                        0
      and obtain a 2(d + 1)-protrusion Y of G of size at least |V4|N (G )|−|X|
                                                                       (X)|+1 . By Lemma 7, p-F-
      Deletion has finite integer index. Let γ : N → N be the function defined in Lemma 5.
             (G0 )|−|X|
      If |V4|N (X)|+1 ≥ γ(2d + 1), then using Lemma 5 we replace the 2(d + 1)-protrusion Y in
      G and obtain an instance (G∗ , k ∗ ) such that |V (G∗ )| < |V (G)|, k ∗ ≤ k, and (G∗ , k ∗ ) is a
      YES-instance of p-F-Deletion if and only if (G, k) is a YES-instance of p-F-Deletion .
      Recall that G∗ also excludes K1,t as an induced subgraph.
           Let (G∗ , k ∗ ) be a reduced instance with hitting set X. In other words, there is no
      (2d + 2)-protrusion of size γ(2d + 2) in G∗ \ X, and Protrusion Rule no longer applies. We
F.V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh                                            195


claim that the number of vertices in this graph is bounded by O(k log3/2 k). Indeed, since we
                                                     (G∗ )|−|X|
cannot apply the Protrusion Rule, we have that |V4|N                                  ∗
                                                       (X)|+1 ≤ γ(2d + 2). Because k ≤ k, we
                 ∗
have that |V (G )| ≤ γ(2d + 2)(4|N (X)| + 1) + |X|. By Lemma 8, |N (X)| ≤ g(h, d) · |X| and
thus |V (G∗ )| = O(γ(2d + 2) · k log3/2 k) = O(k log3/2 k). This gives us a polynomial time
algorithm that returns a vertex kernel of size O(k log3/2 k).
    Now we give a kernel of smaller size. We would like to replace every large (2d + 2)-
protrusion in graph by a smaller one. We find a (2d + 2)-protrusion Y of size at least γ(2d + 2)
by guessing the boundary ∂(Y ) of size at most 2d + 2. This could be performed in time
k O(d) . So let (G∗ , k ∗ ) be the reduced instance on which we cannot apply the Protrusion
Rule. If G is a YES-instance then there is a F-hitting set X of size at most k such that
tw(G \ X) ≤ d. Now applying the analysis above with this X yields that |V (G∗ )| = O(k).
Hence if the number of vertices in the reduced instance G∗ , to which we can not apply the
Protrusion Rule, is more than O(k) then we return that G is a NO-instance. This concludes
the proof of the theorem.                                                                     J

I Corollary 9. p-Feedback Vertex Set, p-Diamond Hitting Set, p-Pathwidth One
Deletion Set, p-Outerplanar Deletion Set admit linear vertex kernel on graphs
excluding K1,t as an induced subgraph.
The methodology used in proving Theorem 1 is not limited to p-F-Deletion. For example,
it is possible to obtain an O(k log k) vertex kernel on K1,t -free graphs for p-Disjoint Cycle
Packing, which is for a given graph G and positive integer k to determine if there are k
vertex disjoint cycles in G. It is iteresting to note that p-Disjoint Cycle Packing does not
admit a polynomial kernel on general graphs [11]. For our kernelization algorithm, we use
the following Erdős-Pósa property [19]: given a positive integer ` every graph G either has `
vertex disjoint cycles or there exists a set S ⊆ V (G) of size at most O(` log `) such that G \ S
is a forest. So given a graph G and an integer k, we first apply the factor 2 approximation
algorithm given in [4] and obtain a set S such that G \ S is a forest. If the size of S is more
than O(k log k) then we return that G has k vertex disjoint cycles. Else, we use the fact that
p-Disjoint Cycle Packing [10] has finite integer index and apply the protrusion reduction
rule in G \ S to obtain an equivalent instance (G∗ , k ∗ ), as in Theorem 1. The analysis for
kernel size used in the proof of Theorem 1 together with the observation that tw(G \ S) ≤ 1
shows that if (G, k) is a YES instance then the size of V (G∗ ) is at most O(k log k).
I Corollary 10. p-Disjoint Cycle Packing has O(k log k) vertex kernel on graphs excluding
K1,t as an induced subgraph.
    Next, we extend the methods used in this section for obtaining kernels for p-F-Deletion
on graphs excluding K1,t as an induced graph to all graphs, though for restricted F — we
consider the families F that contain θc . However, for this kernelization result, we need a
polynomial time approximation algorithm with a factor polynomial in optimum size and not
depending on the input size. For example, an approximation algorithm with factor O(log n)
would not serve our purpose. We obtain an approximation algorithm (Theorem 3) for
p-F-Deletion with a factor O(log3/2 OP T ) whenever the finite obstruction set F contains
a planar graph. Here OP T is the size of a minimum F-hitting set. This immediately implies
a factor O(log3/2 n) algorithm for all the problems that can categorized by p-F-Deletion.
The proof of Theorem 3 is crucially based on the following lemma.
I Lemma 11 (F). There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given a graph G and a positive
integer k, either reports that G has no F-hitting set of size at most k or finds an F-hitting
set of size at most O(k log3/2 k).




                                                                                                    S TA C S ’ 1 1
196   Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and Kernelization


       4     Kernelization for p-θc -Deletion
      In this section we obtain a polynomial kernel for p-θc -Deletion on general graphs. To
      obtain our kernelization algorithm we not only need the approximation algorithm mentioned
      before but also a variation of classical Hall’s theorem. We first present this combinatorial
      tool and other auxiliary results that we make use of.
      Combinatorial Lemma and some Linear-Time Subroutines.We need a variation of
      the celebrated Hall’s Theorem, which we call the q–Expansion Lemma. It is a generalization of
      a result due to Thomassé [34, Theorem 2.3], and captures a certain property of neighborhood
      sets in graphs that implicitly has been used by several authors to obtain polynomial kernels
      for many graph problems. For q = 1, the application of this lemma is exactly the well-known
      Crown Reduction Rule [1, 14].
      The Expansion Lemma. Consider a bipartite graph G with vertex bipartition A ] B.
      Given subsets S ⊆ A and T ⊆ B, we say that S has |S| q-stars in T if to every x ∈ S we can
      associate a subset Fx ⊆ N (x) ∩ T such that (a) for all x ∈ S, |Fx | = q; (b) for any pair of
      vertices x, y ∈ S, Fx ∩ Fy = ∅. Observe that if S has |S| q-stars in T then every vertex x
      in S could be thought of as the center of a star with its q leaves in T , with all these stars
      being vertex-disjoint. Further, a collection of |S| q-stars is also a family of q edge-disjoint
      matchings, each saturating S. We use the following result in our kernelization algorithm to
      bound the degrees of vertices.
      I Lemma 12 (F). [The q–Expansion Lemma] Let q be a positive integer, and let m be
      the size of the maximum matching in a bipartite graph G with vertex bipartition A ] B. If
      |B| > mq, and there are no isolated vertices in B, then there exist nonempty vertex sets
      S ⊆ A, T ⊆ B such that S has |S| q-stars in T and no vertex in T has a neighbor outside S.
      Furthermore, the sets S, T can be found in time polynomial in the size of G.
      I Observation 1 (F). For c ≥ 2, any minimal θc minor-model M of a graph G is a connected
      subgraph of G, and does not contain a vertex whose degree in M is less than 2, or a vertex
      whose deletion from M results in a disconnected graph (a cut vertex of M ).
      I Lemma 13 (F). Let G be a graph and v a vertex of G. Given a tree decomposition of width
      t ∈ O(1) of G, in O(n) time we can find both (1) a smallest set S ⊆ V of vertices of G such that
      the graph G \ S does not contain θc as a minor, and (2) a largest collection {M1 , M2 , . . . , Ml }
      of θc minor models of G such that for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ l, (V (Mi ) ∩ V (Mj )) = {v}.
           Now we describe the reduction rules used by the kernelization algorithm. In contrast to the
      reduction rules employed by most known kernelization algorithms, these rules cannot always
      be applied on general graphs in polynomial time. Hence the algorithm does not proceed
      by applying these rules exhaustively, as is typical in kernelization programs. We describe
      how to arrive at situations where these rules can in fact be applied in polynomial time, and
      prove that even this selective application of rules results in a kernel of size polynomial in the
      parameter k.
      Bounding the Maximum Degree of a Graph Now we present a set of reduction rules
      which, given an input instance (G, k) of p-θc -Deletion, obtains an equivalent instance
      (G0 , k 0 ) where k 0 ≤ k and the maximum degree of G0 is at most a polynomial in k. In the
      sequel a vertex v is irrelevant if it is not a part of any θc minor model, and is relevant
      otherwise. For each rule below, the input instance is (G, k).
      I Reduction Rule 1 (Irrelevant Vertex Rule). Delete all irrelevant vertices in G.
      Given a graph G and a vertex v ∈ V (G), an `-flower passing through v is a set of ` different
      θc minor-models in G, each containing v and no two sharing any vertex other than v.
F.V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh                                             197


I Reduction Rule 2 (Flower Rule). If a (k+1)-flower passes through a vertex v of G, then include
v in the solution and remove it from G to obtain the equivalent instance (G \ {v}, (k − 1)).
    The argument for the soundness of these reduction rules is simple and is hence omitted.
One can test whether a particular vertex v is part of any minimal minor-model corresponding
to θc using the rooted minor testing algorithm of Robertson and Seymour [32]. It is not clear,
however, that one might check whether a vertex is a part of (k + 1)-flower in polynomial
time. Hence we defer the application of these rules and apply them only when the vertices
are “evidently” irrelevant or finding a flower can be solved in polynomial time. Now we state
an auxiliary lemma which will be useful in bounding the maximum degree of the graph.

I Lemma 14 (F). Let G be a n-vertex graph containing θc as a minor and v be a vertex
such that G0 = G \ {v} does not contain θc as a minor and the maximum size of a flower
containing v is at most k. Then there exists a set Tv of size O(k) such that v ∈/ Tv and
G \ Tv does not contain θc as a minor. Moreover we can find the set Tv in polynomial time.

I Lemma 15. There exists a polynomial time algorithm that, given an instance (G, k)
of p-θc -Deletion returns an equivalent instance (G0 , k 0 ) such that k 0 ≤ k and that the
maximum degree of G0 is O(k log3/2 k). Moreover it also returns a θc -hitting set of G0 of size
O(k log3/2 k).

Proof. Given an instance (G, k) of p-θc -Deletion, we first apply Lemma 11 on (G, k). The
polynomial time algorithm described in Lemma 11, given a graph G and a positive integer k
either reports that G has no θc -hitting set of size at most k, or finds a θc -hitting set of size
at most k ∗ = O(k log3/2 k). If the algorithm reports that G has has no θc -hitting set of size
at most k, then we return that (G, k) is a NO-instance to p-θc -Deletion. So we assume
that we have a hitting set S of size k ∗ . Now we proceed with the following two rules.
Selective Flower Rule. To apply the Flower Rule selectively we use S, the θc -hitting set.
For a vertex v ∈ S let Sv := S \ {v} and let Gv := G \ Sv . By a result of Robertson et. al. [33]
                                                        5
we know that any graph of treewidth greater than 202c contains a c × c grid, and hence θc , as
                                                                            5
a minor. Since deleting v from Gv makes it θc -minor-free, tw(Gv ) ≤ 202c + 1 = O(1). Now
by Lemma 13, we find in linear time the size of the largest flower centered at v, in Gv . If for
any vertex v ∈ S the size of the flower in Gv is at least k + 1, we apply the Flower Rule and
get an equivalent instance (G ← G \ {v}, k ← k − 1). Furthermore, we set S := S \ {v}. We
apply the Flower Rule selectively until no longer possible. We abuse notation and continue
to use (G, k) to refer to the instance that is reduced with respect to exhaustive application
of the Selective Flower Rule. Thus, for every vertex v ∈ S the size of any flower passing
through v in Gv is at most k.
    Now we describe how to find, for a given v ∈ V (G), a hitting set Hv ⊆ V (G) \ {v} for all
minor-models of θc that contain v. Notice that this hitting set is required to exclude v, so
Hv cannot be the trivial hitting set {v}. If v ∈
                                               / S, then Hv = S. On the other hand, suppose
v ∈ S. Since the maximum size of a flower containing v in the graph Gv is at most k, by
Lemma 14, we can find a set Tv of size O(k) that does not contain v and hits all the θc
minor-models passing through v in Gv . Hence in this case we set Hv = Sv ∪ Tv . We denote
|Hv | by hv . Notice that Hv is defined algorithmically, that is, there could be many small
hitting sets in V (G) \ {v} hitting all minor-models containing v, and Hv is one of them.
q-expansion Rule with q = c. Given an instance (G, k), S, and a family of sets Hv , we
show that if there is a vertex v with degree more than chv + c(c − 1)hv , then we can reduce
its degree to at most chv + c(c − 1)hv by repeatedly applying the q–Expansion Lemma with
q = c. Observe that for every vertex v the set Hv is also a θc hitting set for G, that is, Hv



                                                                                                     S TA C S ’ 1 1
198   Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and Kernelization


      hits all minor-models of θc in G. Consider the graph G \ Hv . Let the components of this
      graph that contain a neighbor of v be C1 , C2 , . . . , Cr . Note that v cannot have more than
      (c − 1) neighbors into any component, else contracting the component will form a θc minor
      and will contradict the fact that Hv hits all the θc minors. Also note that none of the Ci ’s
      can contain a minor model of θc .
          We say that a component Ci is adjacent to Hv if there exists a vertex u ∈ Ci and w ∈ Hv
      such that (u, w) ∈ E(G). Next we show that vertices in components that are not adjacent to
      Hv are irrelevant in G. Recall a vertex is irrelevant if there is no minimal minor model of θc
      that contains it. Consider a vertex u in a component C that is not adjacent to Hv . Since
      G[V (C) ∪ {v}] does not contain any θc minor we have that if u is a part of a minimal minor
      model M ⊆ G, then v ∈ M and also there exists a vertex u0 ∈ M such that u0 ∈              / C ∪ {v}.
      Then the removal of v disconnects u from u0 in M , a contradiction to Observation 1 that for
      c ≥ 2, any minimal θc minor model M of a graph G does not contain a cut vertex. Applying
      the Irrelevant Vertex Rule to the vertices in all such components leaves us with a new set of
      components D1 , D2 , . . . , Ds , such that for every i, in Di , there is at least one vertex that is
      adjacent to a vertex in Hv .
          As before, we continue to use G to refer to the graph obtained after the Irrelevant Vertex
      Rule has been applied in the context described above. We also update the sets Hv for
      v ∈ V (G) by deleting all the vertices w from these sets those have been removed using
      Irrelevant Vertex Rule.
          Now, consider a bipartite graph G with vertex bipartitions Hv and D. Here D =
      {d1 , . . . , ds } contains a vertex di corresponding to each component Di . For every u ∈ Hv , we
      add the edge (u, di ) if there is a vertex w ∈ Di such that {u, w} ∈ E(G). Even though we
      start with a simple graph (graphs without parallel edges) it is possible that after applying
      reduction rules parallel edges may appear. However, throughout the algorithm, we ensure
      that the number of parallel edges between any pair of vertices is at most c. Now, v has at
      most chv edges to vertices in Hv . Since v has at most (c − 1) edges to each Di , it follows
      that if d(v) > chv + c(c − 1)hv , then the number of components |D| is more than chv . Now
      by applying q–Expansion Lemma with q = c, A = Hv , and B = D, we find a subset S ⊆ Hv
      and T ⊆ D such that S has |S| c-stars in T and N (T ) = S.
          The reduction rule involves deleting edges of the form (v, u) for all u ∈ Di , such that
      di ∈ T , and adding c edges between v and w for all w ∈ S. We add these edges only if they
      were not present before so that the number of egdes between any pair of vertices remains at
      most c. This completes the description of the q-expansion reduction rule with q = c. Let GR
      be the graph obtained after applying the reduction rule. The following lemma shows the
      correctness of the rule.

      I Lemma 16 (F). Let G, S and v be as above and GR be the graph obtained after applying
      the c-expansion rule. Then (G, k) is a YES instance of p-θc -Deletion if and only if (GR , k)
      is a YES instance of p-θc -Deletion.

          Observe that all edges that are added during the application of the q-expansion reduction
      rule have at least one end point in S, and hence S remains a hitting set of GR . We are now
      ready to summarize the algorithm that bounds the degree of the graph (see Algorithm 1).
          Let the instance output by Algorithm 1 be (G0 , k 0 , S). Clearly, in G0 , the degree of every
      vertex is at most chv + c(c − 1)hv ≤ O(k log3/2 k). The routine also returns S — a θc -hitting
      set of G0 of size at most O(k log3/2 k).
          We now show that the algorithm runs in polynomial time. For x ∈ V (G), let ν(x) be
      the number of neighbors of x to which x has fewer than c parallel edges. Observe that the
F.V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, N. Misra, G. Philip and S. Saurabh                                          199


Algorithm 1 Bound-Degree(G, k, S)
 1: Apply the Selective Flower Rule
 2: if ∃v ∈ V (G) such that d(v) > chv + c(c − 1)hv then
 3:   Apply the q-expansion reduction rule with q = c.
 4: else
 5:   Return (G, k, S).
 6: end if
 7: Return Bound-Degree(G, k, S).



application of q-expansion reduction rule never increases ν(x) for any vertex and decreases
ν(x) for at least one vertex. The other rules delete vertices, which can never increase ν(x)
for any vertex. This concludes the proof.                                                 J


 5     Conclusion
In this paper we gave the first kernelization algorithms for a subset of p-F-Deletion
problems and a generic approximation algorithm for the p-F-Deletion problem when the
set of excluded minors F contains at least one planar graph. Our approach generalizes and
unifies known kernelization algorithms for p-Vertex Cover and p-Feedback Vertex
Set. By the celebrated result of Robertson and Seymour, every p-F-Deletion problem
is FPT and our work naturally leads to the following question: does every p-F-Deletion
problem have a polynomial kernel? Can it be that for some finite sets of minor obstructions
F = {O1 , . . . , Op } the answer to this question is NO? Even the case F = {K5 , K3,3 }, vertex
deletion to planar graphs, is an interesting challenge. Another interesting question is if our
techniques can be extended to another important case when F contains a planar graph.


      References
 1    F. N. Abu-Khzam, M. R. Fellows, M. A. Langston, and W. H. Suters. Crown structures
      for vertex cover kernelization. Theory Comput. Syst., 41(3):411–430, 2007.
 2    I. Adler, M. Grohe, and S. Kreutzer. Computing excluded minors. In SODA, pages 641–650,
      2008.
 3    N. Alon, G. Gutin, E. J. Kim, S. Szeider, and A. Yeo. Solving max-r-sat above a tight
      lower bound. In SODA, pages 511–517. ACM-SIAM, 2010.
 4    V. Bafna, P. Berman, and T. Fujito. A 2-approximation algorithm for the undirected
      feedback vertex set problem. SIAM J. Discr. Math., 12(3):289–297, 1999.
 5    R. Bar-Yehuda and S. Even. A linear-time approximation algorithm for the weighted vertex
      cover problem. J. Algorithms, 2(2):198–203, 1981.
 6    H. L. Bodlaender. A linear-time algorithm for finding tree-decompositions of small
      treewidth. SIAM J. Comput., 25(6):1305–1317, 1996.
 7    H. L. Bodlaender. A cubic kernel for feedback vertex set. In STACS, volume 4393 of Lecture
      Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 320–331. Springer, 2007.
 8    H. L. Bodlaender. Kernelization: New upper and lower bound techniques. In IWPEC,
      volume 5917 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 17–37. Springer, 2009.
 9    H. L. Bodlaender, R. G. Downey, M. R. Fellows, and D. Hermelin. On problems without
      polynomial kernels. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 75(8):423–434, 2009.
10    H. L. Bodlaender, F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, E. Penninkx, S. Saurabh, and D. M.
      Thilikos. (Meta) Kernelization. In FOCS, pages 629–638. IEEE, 2009.




                                                                                                   S TA C S ’ 1 1
200   Hitting forbidden minors: Approximation and Kernelization


      11   H. L. Bodlaender, S. Thomassé, and A. Yeo. Kernel Bounds for Disjoint Cycles and Disjoint
           Paths. In ESA, volume 5757 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 635–646. Springer,
           2009.
      12   K. Burrage, V. Estivill Castro, M. R. Fellows, M. A. Langston, S. Mac, and F. A. Rosamond.
           The Undirected Feedback Vertex Set Problem Has a Poly(k) Kernel. In IWPEC, volume
           4169 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 192–202. Springer, 2006.
      13   J. Chen, I. A. Kanj, and W. Jia. Vertex cover: further observations and further improve-
           ments. J. Algorithms, 41(2):280–301, 2001.
      14   B. Chor, M. R. Fellows, and D. W. Juedes. Linear kernels in linear time, or how to save k
           colors in O(n2 ) steps. In WG, volume 3353 of LNCS, pages 257–269. Springer, 2004.
      15   B. N. Clark, C. J. Colbourn, and D. S. Johnson. Unit disk graphs. Discrete Math., 86(1-
           3):165–177, 1990.
      16   M. Cygan, M. Pilipczuk, M. Pilipczuk, and J. O. Wojtaszczyk. Improved fpt algorithm
           and quadratic kernel for pathwidth one vertex deletion. In IPEC, volume 6478 of Lecture
           Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 95–106. Springer, 2010.
      17   H. Dell and D. van Melkebeek. Satisfiability allows no nontrivial sparsification unless the
           polynomial-time hierarchy collapses. In STOC, pages 251–260. ACM, 2010.
      18   R. G. Downey and M. R. Fellows. Parameterized Complexity. Springer, 1998.
      19   P. Erdős and L. Pósa. On independent circuits contained in a graph. Canadian J. Math.,
           17:347–352, 1965.
      20   S. Fiorini, G. Joret, and U. Pietropaoli. Hitting diamonds and growing cacti. In IPCO
           2010, volume 6080 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 191–204. Springer, 2010.
      21   J. Flum and M. Grohe. Parameterized Complexity Theory. Texts in Theoretical Computer
           Science. An EATCS Series. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006.
      22   F. V. Fomin, D. Lokshtanov, S. Saurabh, and D. M. Thilikos. Bidimensionality and kernels.
           In SODA, pages 503–510. ACM-SIAM, 2010.
      23   L. Fortnow and R. Santhanam. Infeasibility of instance compression and succinct PCPs
           for NP. In STOC, pages 133–142. ACM, 2008.
      24   J. Guo and R. Niedermeier. Invitation to data reduction and problem kernelization. ACM
           SIGACT News, 38(1):31–45, 2007.
      25   P. G. Kolaitis and M. N. Thakur. Approximation properties of NP minimization classes.
           J. Comput. System Sci., 50:391–411, 1995.
      26   S. Kratsch. Polynomial kernelizations for MIN F+ pi1 and MAX NP. In STACS, volume 3
           of (LIPIcs), pages 601–612. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2009.
      27   J. M. Lewis and M. Yannakakis. The node-deletion problem for hereditary properties is
           NP-complete. J. of Comp. System Sci., 20(2):219 – 230, 1980.
      28   C. Lund and M. Yannakakis. The approximation of maximum subgraph problems. In
           ICALP, volume 700 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 40–51. Springer, 1993.
      29   G. L. Nemhauser and L. E. Trotter, Jr. Properties of vertex packing and independence
           system polyhedra. Math. Programming, 6:48–61, 1974.
      30   R. Niedermeier. Invitation to fixed-parameter algorithms, volume 31 of Oxford Lecture
           Series in Mathematics and its Applications. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006.
      31   G. Philip, V. Raman, and Y. Villanger. A quartic kernel for pathwidth-one vertex deletion.
           In WG, volume 6410 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 196–207, 2010.
      32   N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph minors. XIII. The disjoint paths problem. J.
           Comb. Theory Ser. B, 63:65–110, 1995.
      33   N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour, and R. Thomas. Quickly excluding a planar graph. J. Comb.
           Theory Ser. B, 62:323–348, 1994.
      34   S. Thomassé. A quadratic kernel for feedback vertex set. ACM Transactions on Algorithms,
           6(2), 2010.
