Proof Complexity and Its Relations to SAT Solving
Albert Atserias Ñ
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
Centre de Recerca Matemàtica, Bellaterra, Spain

      Abstract
Propositional proof complexity is the study of algorithms that recognize the set of tautologies in
propositional logic. Initially conceived as an approach to address the “P versus NP” problem in
computational complexity, the field has gradually expanded its focus to include new objectives.
Among these is the goal of providing a theoretical foundation for comparing the effectiveness of
heuristics for algorithms that exhaustively explore the solution spaces of combinatorial problems.
Dually, and complementarily, the methods of proof complexity can also be used to assess how to
certify that a given exploration path of such an algorithm ultimately leads to a dead end. A notable
challenge faced by this methodology lies in the fact that, despite the theoretically proved modelling
power of propositional logic, as established by the theory of NP-completeness, propositional logic is
not always the best specification language for all application domains. Addressing this challenge
involves studying the expressive power of various languages and their associated proof systems
through the lens of computational complexity.
    The first part of this talk will be a survey of how the emergence of these new objectives
for propositional proof complexity came to be, and what the theory’s methods offer in pursuing
them. The second part will review the current state of the art on the computational complexity of
automating the proof search problem for various proof systems for propositional logic and other
languages. While it is now known and well understood that fully automating propositional Resolution
as a proof system for propositional logic is NP-hard, it remains an open question whether it is
possible to distinguish satisfiable formulas from unsatisfiable ones with short Resolution proofs of
unsatisfiability in polynomial time. As of the time of writing, there is no consensus among experts
on whether this problem should be considered computationally intractable.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Proof complexity; Theory of computa-
tion → Automated reasoning

Keywords and phrases Propositional logic, proof systems, Resolution, cutting planes, integer linear
programming, automatability, NP-hardness, satisfiability, heuristics, search

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.STACS.2025.1

Category Invited Talk




             © Albert Atserias;
             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
42nd International Symposium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science (STACS 2025).
Editors: Olaf Beyersdorff, Michał Pilipczuk, Elaine Pimentel, and Nguyễn Kim Thắng;
Article No. 1; pp. 1:1–1:1
                     Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                     Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
