Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph
Markus Chimani∗ 1 and Petr Hliněný† 2

1       Theoretical Computer Science, University Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany
        markus.chimani@uni-osnabrueck.de
2       Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic
        hlineny@fi.muni.cz


        Abstract
Let G be a connected planar (but not yet embedded) graph and F a set of additional edges not
in G. The multiple edge insertion problem (MEI) asks for a drawing of G + F with the minimum
number of pairwise edge crossings, such that the subdrawing of G is plane. An optimal solution
to this problem is known to approximate the crossing number of the graph G + F .
    Finding an exact solution to MEI is NP-hard for general F , but linear time solvable for the
special case of |F | = 1 (SODA 01, Algorithmica) and polynomial time solvable when all of F are
incident to a new vertex (SODA 09). The complexity for general F but with constant k = |F |
was open, but algorithms both with relative and absolute approximation guarantees have been
presented (SODA 11, ICALP 11). We show that the problem is fixed parameter tractable (FPT)
in k for biconnected G, or if the cut vertices of G have bounded degrees. We give the first exact
algorithm for this problem; it requires only O(|V (G)|) time for any constant k.

1998 ACM Subject Classification F.2.2 [Nonnumerical Algorithms and Problems] Geometrical
problems and computations

Keywords and phrases crossing number; edge insertion; parameterized complexity; path homo-
topy; funnel algorithm

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2016.30


    1    Introduction
The crossing number cr(G) of a graph G is the minimum number of pairwise edge crossings
in a drawing of G in the plane. Finding the crossing number of a graph is one of the most
prominent difficult optimization problems in graph theory [18] and is NP-hard already in very
restricted cases, e.g., even when considering a planar graph with one added edge [6] (such
graphs are called almost-planar or near-planar). The problem has been vividly investigated
for over 60 years, but there is still surprisingly little known about it; see e.g. [32] for an
extensive reference. There exists a c > 1 such that cr(G) cannot be approximated within a
factor c in polynomial time [4], but we do not know whether cr(G) is approximable within
some constant ratio for general G.
    Several approximation algorithms arose for special graph classes. For general graphs with
bounded degree, there is an algorithm that approximates the quantity n + cr(G) instead,
giving an approximation ratio of O(log2 n) [2, 17]. A sublinear approximation factor of
Õ(n0.9 ) for cr(G) in the bounded-degree setting was given in an involved algorithm [13]. We
know constant factor approximations for bounded-degree graphs that are embeddable in


∗
    M. Chimani has been supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) project CH 897/2-1.
†
    P. Hliněný has been supported by the research center Institute for Theoretical Computer Science
    (CE-ITI); Czech Science foundation project No. P202/12/G061.
            © Markus Chimani and Petr Hliněný;
            licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY
32nd International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG 2016).
Editors: Sándor Fekete and Anna Lubiw; Article No. 30; pp. 30:1–30:15
                   Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                   Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
30:2   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


       some surface of higher genus [19, 26, 24], or that have a small set of graph elements whose
       deletion leaves a planar graph – removing and re-inserting these elements can give strong
       approximation bounds such as [25, 5, 12, 14].
          In this paper, we follow the latter idea and concentrate on the Multiple Edge Insertion
       problem MEI(G, F ). Intuitively, we are given a planar graph G, and ask for the best way (in
       terms of total crossing number) to draw G and insert a set of new edges F into G such that
       the final drawing of G + F (i.e., of the graph including the new edges of F ) restricted to G
       remains planar. The formal definitions follow in Section 2.
          This MEI problem is polynomial-time solvable for |F | = 1 [22] (unlike the crossing number
       problem of almost-planar graphs) or if all edges of F are incident to a common vertex [10],
       but NP-hard for general F [35]. An exact or at least approximate MEI solution constitutes
       an approximation for the crossing number of the graph G + F [12]; see Section 2. Considering
       general constant k := |F |, there have been two different approximation approaches [14]
       and [11]; the former one directly targets the crossing number and achieves only a relative
       approximation guarantee for MEI; the latter one first specifically attains an approximation
       of MEI with only an additive error term, and then uses [12] to deduce a crossing number
       approximation. While the former is not directly practical, the latter algorithm [11] in fact
       turns out to be one of the best choices to obtain strong upper bounds in practice [9].
          In this paper, we show that for every constant k and under mild connectivity assumptions,
       there is an exact linear time algorithm; till now, this was an open problem even for k = 2.

       I Theorem 1. Let G be a planar graph and F a set of k ≥ 1 new edges (vertex pairs, in
       fact). Assume G is biconnected, or G is connected and all cut vertices of G have degree
       bounded from above by 2p(k) where p is a polynomial. Then there is a polynomial function q
       such that the problem MEI(G, F ) is solvable to optimality in time O(2q(k) · |V (G)|). In terms
       of parameterized complexity, our algorithm is linear-time FPT with the parameter k = |F |.

           Note that the bounded-degree requirement for cut vertices compares favorably to existing
       approximation algorithms for the crossing number, all of which require a degree bound
       for all vertices. We also remark that while the crossing number problem is in FPT w.r.t.
       the objective value (cr(G)) [20, 28], already a planar graph with one added edge may have
       unbounded crossing number and so these two modes of parameterization are incomparable.
           Our high-level approach is a standard idea in this area, using dynamic programming on a
       decomposition (known as SP(Q)R-tree) of the planar graph; see Section 4. Similar ideas have
       been used, e.g., in aforementioned [22, 10, 14, 11]. However, this time it turns out that the
       most interesting and difficult case is the basic one of rigid components. The corresponding
       problem Rigid MEI, i.e., MEI under the restriction that a planar embedding of G is fixed
       beforehand, is still NP-hard [35]. An FPT algorithm for Rigid MEI is given in Section 3.
           On an informal level, the algorithm for Rigid MEI simultaneously searches for shortest
       dual paths corresponding to the edges of F in rigid G, while keeping track of their mutual
       crossings. Although this task may seem similar, in the dual, to the notoriously hard problem
       of shortest disjoint paths in planar graphs [15, 30], there is the crucial difference that our
       paths may share sections as long as they do not cross. Our algorithm utilizes the concept
       of path homotopy in the plane with obstacles, and uses a special structure which we call a
       trinet, to represent and search for shortest dual paths of a given homotopy.

       Organization. Due to restricted space, the proofs of some statements are left for the full
       version of this paper (see also http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.07952); these statements are
       marked with an asterisk *.
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                             30:3


 2     Definitions
We use the standard terminology of graph theory. By default, we use the term graph to
refer to a multigraph, i.e., we allow parallel edges (also self-loops are allowed but those can
be safely ignored in the context of crossing numbers in the plane). If there is no danger of
confusion, we denote an edge with the ends u and v chiefly by uv.

Drawing a graph. A drawing of a graph G = (V, E) is a mapping of the vertices V to
distinct points on a surface Σ, and of the edges E to simple (polygonal) curves on Σ,
connecting their respective end points but not containing any other vertex point. Unless
explicitly specified, we will always assume Σ to be the plane (or, equivalently, the sphere).
A crossing is a common point of two distinct edge curves, other than their common end
point. A drawing is plane if there are no crossings. Plane embeddings form equivalence
classes over plane drawings, in that they only define the cyclic order of the edges around
their incident vertices (and, if desired, the choice of the outer, infinite face). A planar graph
is one that admits a plane embedding. A plane graph is an embedded graph, i.e., a planar
graph together with a plane embedding.
    Given a plane embedding G0 of G, we define its geometric dual G∗0 as the embedded
multigraph that has a (dual) vertex for each face in G0 ; (dual) vertices are joined by a (dual)
edge for each (primal) edge shared by their respective (primal) faces. The cyclic order of the
(dual) edges around any common incident (dual) vertex v ∗ , is induced by the cyclic order of
the (primal) edges around the (primal) face corresponding to v ∗ .
    We refer to a path/walk in G∗0 as a dual path/walk in G0 , and we speak about a dual
path/walk π in G0 between vertices u, v if the π starts in a face incident with u and ends in a
face incident with v. We shortly say a route from u to v (a u–v route) to mean a dual walk
between vertices u, v (recall that a walk, unlike a path, may repeat vertices and edges).

Crossing numbers and edge insertion. Given a drawing D of G, let cr(D) denote the
number of pairwise edge crossings in D. The crossing number problem asks for a drawing
D◦ of a given graph G with the least possible number cr(D◦ ) =: cr(G). By saying “pairwise
edge crossings” we emphasize that we count a crossing     point x separately for every pair of
edges meeting in x (e.g., ` edges meeting in x give 2` crossings).
   It is well established that the search for optimal solutions to the crossing number problems
can be restricted to so-called good drawings: any pair of edges crosses at most once, adjacent
edges do not cross, and there is no point that is a crossing of three or more edges.
   In this paper we especially consider the following variant of the crossing number problem:

I Definition 2 (Multiple edge insertion, Rigid MEI and MEI).
Consider a planar, connected graph G and a set of edges (vertex pairs, in fact) F not in E(G).
We denote by G + F the graph obtained by adding F to the edge set of G.
   Let G0 be a plane embedding of G. The Rigid Multiple Edge Insertion problem, denoted
by r-MEI(G0 , F ), is to find a drawing D of the graph G + F with minimal cr(D) such that
the restriction of D to G is the plane embedding G0 . The attained number of crossings is
denoted by r-ins(G0 , F ).
   The Multiple Edge Insertion problem MEI(G, F ) is to find an embedding G1 of G (together
with the subsequent drawing D as above), for which r-MEI(G1 , F ) attains the minimum
number of crossings. The latter is denoted by ins(G, F ).




                                                                                                    SoCG 2016
30:4   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


          As mentioned above, a solution of a MEI(G, F ) instance – which is a trivial upper bound
       on cr(G + F ), readily gives an approximate solution of the crossing number problem of G + F
       by the following inequality:

       I Theorem 3 (see [12]). Consider a planar     graph G and a set of edges F not in E(G). Then
       ins(G, F ) ≤ |F | · ∆(G) · cr(G + F ) + |F2 | , where ∆(G) is the maximum degree in G.


        3     Rigid MEI
       We first give an FPT algorithm for solving the rigid version r-MEI(G, F ), parameterized by
       k = |F |. G is hence a plane graph (i.e., with a fixed embedding) throughout this section.
           We first illustrate the simple cases. Solving r-MEI(G, {uv}), the fixed embedding edge
       insertion problem with k = 1, is trivial. Augment dual G∗ with edges of length 0 between
       the terminals u, v and their respective incident faces (vertices in G∗ ), to suit the definition of
       a u–v route in G. Then, simply compute the shortest u–v route in this graph. Realizing a
       route for uv means to draw uv along it within G. If the shortest route has length `, realizing
       it attains r-ins(G, {vw}) = `, the smallest number of crossings in the Rigid MEI setting.
           For k ≥ 2, the situation starts to be more interesting: not every collection of shortest
       routes gives rise to an optimal solution of r-MEI(G, F ) since there might arise crossings
       between edges of F . While for k = 2, the only question is whether some pair of shortest
       routes of the two edges in F can avoid crossing each other, for larger values of k we can
       encounter situations in which all the optimal solutions of r-MEI(G, F ) draw some edges of F
       quite far from their individual shortest routes (in order to avoid crossings with other edges
       of F ), and a more clever approach is needed.
           On a very high level, our approach to finding a drawing D of G + F that is an optimal
       solution to r-MEI(G, F ), can be described as follows:
       1. We guess, for each pair f, f 0 ∈ F , whether f and f 0 will cross each other in D. Since
           k = |F | is a parameter, all the possibilities can be enumerated in FPT time.
       2. Let X ⊆ F2 be a (guessed) set of pairs of edges of F . We find a collection of shortest
                        

           routes for the edges of F in G under the restriction that exactly the pairs in X cross;
           Drawing DX is obtained by inserting the edges of F along their computed routes. As we
           will see, we may restrict our attention to routes pairwise crossing at most once.
       3. We select D := DX which minimizes the sum of |X| and of the lengths of the routes.

       3.1    Handling path homotopy of routes
       Obviously, the core task of the scheme (1)–(3) is to solve the point (2) of finding a collection
       of shortest routes under the restriction that every route avoids crossing certain other routes
       (note; none of these routes are fixed in advance). The key to this is the concept of path
       homotopy in the plane with point obstacles. Due to the nature of our arguments, in this
       paper we choose to deal with path homotopy in a combinatorial setting of T -sequences
       as in Definition 5. This new setting is closely inspired by the discrete-geometry view of
       boundary-triangulated 2-manifolds by Hershberger and Snoeyink [23]:
           First, we “triangulate” the point set V (F ) (our obstacles) using transversing paths in
       the embedding G. A transversing path between vertices x, y of G is a path whose ends
       are x, y and whose internal vertices subdivide some edges of G. Let T be the union of these
       transversing paths and G0 denote the corresponding subdivision of G. In order to avoid a
       terminology clash with graph triangulations, we will call T in the pair (G0 , T ) a trinet of G.
       This is illustrated in Figure 1 and formally given here (where V (F ) = N ):
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                                                 30:5



                                                                               s


                                                                         r                             v



                                                                                      q

                                                                                          p




                                                                                                  u




    Figure 1 An example of a trinet of a plane                   Figure 2 An example (see Definition 5): the
graph G (see Definition 4): underlying G is in              T -sequence of the u–v route depicted in red is
thin black, the trinodes in red, and the triedges           (p, q, r, s) from u to v. It is a proper T -sequence
in blue with square blue nodes subdividing edges            from u to v (Definition 7); its corresponding
of G.                                                       alley is shaded in light red.


I Definition 4 (Trinet). Let G be a connected plane graph and N ⊆ V (G), |N | ≥ 4. A plane
graph T such that V (T ) ∩ V (G) = N is called a trinet of G if the following holds:
(a) T is a subdivision of a 3-connected plane triangulation on the vertex set N (in particular,
    every face of T is incident with precisely three vertices of N ), and
(b) there exists a subdivision G0 of G such that V (G0 )\V (G) = V (T )\N , E(G0 )∩E(T ) = ∅
    and the union G0 ∪ T is a plane embedding.
Pair (G0 , T ) is a full trinet of G. The vertices in N (T ) := N are called trinodes of T , the
maximal paths in T internally disjoint from N are triedges and their set is denoted by I(T ),
and the faces of T are tricells. Note that the triedges of T are transversing paths of G.
     We need to introduce terms related to (and describing) a path homotopy in a full trinet
(G0 , T ) of a plane graph G. See also Figure 2 for an illustration of this definition.
I Definition 5 (Alley and T -sequence). Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of a plane graph G. Consider
a route π between u, v ∈ V (G) in the graph G0 ∪ T . Then V (π) = {φ0 , φ1 , . . . , φm } where
each dual vertex φi of π is an open face of G0 ∪ T . Let these faces (φ0 , φ1 , . . . , φm ) be ordered
along π such that φ0 is incident to u and φm incident to v. Let (e1 , e2 , . . . , em ) ⊆ E(G0 ∪ T )
be the sequence of the primal edges of the dual edges of π, ordered from φ0 to φm . As a
point set, each edge ei is considered without the endpoints.
                                 Sm               Sm
(a) The union {u, v} ∪ i=0 φi ∪ i=1 ei is called the alley of π (or, an alley between u, v).
(b) Let (e01 , . . . , e0` ) ⊆ (e1 , e2 , . . . , em ) be the restriction to E(T ), and let (p1 , p2 , . . . , p` ) ⊆
    I(T ) be the sequence of triedges such that pi contains the edge e0i for i = 1, . . . , `. Then
    (p1 , p2 , . . . , p` ) is called the T -sequence of π from u to v (or, of the corresponding alley
    from u to v).
    The purpose of introducing an alley is to describe a topological corridor for all u–v arcs of
a similar kind (and same number of crossings) in the embedding G0 ∪ T . The correspondence
is clear: a route π crosses a triedge p if the alley of π contains one of the G0 -edges forming p.
The T -sequence of π hence describes the unique order (with repetition) in which π crosses
the triedges of T . Usually, we shall consider only the case of u, v ∈ N (T ).
    A route may, in general, cross the same triedge many times (even in one place), but we
aim to prove that for “reasonable” routes there is an explicit upper bound; see Lemma 9.



                                                                                                                        SoCG 2016
30:6   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


       3.2    Refined approach to Rigid MEI
       We slightly generalize the shortest route setting to allow for a connected plane graph G with
       integer edge weights w : E(G) → N+ ∪ {∞}. For a full trinet (G0 , T ) of G, we define the edge
       weights of G0 ∪ T as follows: w0 (p) := 0 for all p ∈ E(T ) and w0 (e0 ) := w(e) where e0 ∈ E(G0 )
       is obtained by subdividing e ∈ E(G). This w0 is the weight induced by w in the trinet (G0 , T ).
       We give the same weights w0 also to the edges of the geometric dual of G0 ∪ T . If α is the
       alley of a route π between vertices x, y in G0 ∪ T , then the length of α equals the length of π,
       i.e., the sum of the w0 -weights of the dual edges of π.
            For any weighted graph G0 with w : E(G0 ) → N+ ∪ {∞}, as above, we correspondingly
       generalize the notion of a crossing number to weighted crossing number as follows: a crossing
       between two edges e1 , e2 ∈ E(G0 ) accounts for the amount of w(e1 ) · w(e2 ) in cr(G0 ). For
       MEI(G, F ) problem variants with weighted G, we shall always assume that the weight of
       each edge f ∈ F is w(f ) = 1, and so the (sum of) weighted crossings of f in a drawing of
       G + f are naturally determined by the weights of the edges crossed by f .
            With the help of the framework developed in the previous section, we can now give an
       (again informal) high-level refinement of our solution steps of r-MEI(G, F ) as follows:
       4. Consider a trinet T of G on the trinodes V (F ). If we fix a (realizable) T -sequence S,
            then we can use established tools, namely an adaptation of the idea of the funnel
            algorithm [7, 31], to efficiently compute a shortest alley among those having the same
            T -sequence S. For uv ∈ F , if we compute an alley α between u, v of length `, then we
            can easily draw the new edge uv as an arc in α with ` weighted crossings in G.
       5. Suppose that, for i = 1, 2, αi is a shortest alley between xi and yi having the T -sequence Si .
            Then, as detailed later in Lemma 14, we can decide from only S1 , S2 whether there exist
            arcs from x1 to y1 in α1 and from x2 to y2 in α2 , which do not cross (note that α1 ∩ α2
            may be nonempty and yet there may exist such a pair of non-crossing arcs). Moreover, if
            the two arcs cross then it should be only once.
       6. Consequently, it will be enough to loop through all “suitable” T -sequences for every edge
            of F and independently perform the steps (4), (5) for each combination of them, in order
            to get an optimal solution of r-MEI(G, F ) as in (3). The point is to bound the number
            of considered T -sequences in terms of only the parameter k = |F |.

       3.3    T -sequences of potential shortest routes
       Considering the outline (4)–(6), we first resolve the last point which is a purely mathematical
       question. In order to achieve the goal, we shall build a special trinet of G along shortest
       dual paths between the trinodes in G (Definition 6), and then we will be able to restrict our
       attention to special T -sequences (Definition 7) of bounded length. The latter is formulated
       in Lemma 9 whose proof presents the main piece of technical work in this paper.

       I Definition 6 (Shortest-spanning trinet). Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of a plane graph G, and
       let the weights w0 in (G0 , T ) be induced by weights w in G. For a triedge q ∈ I(T ), every
       internal vertex t of q is incident with two edges e, e0 of G0 of weight w0 (e) = w0 (e0 ) which
       we call the weight of t. The transversing weight of q equals the sum of the weights of the
       internal vertices of q.
           A triedge q ∈ I(T ) between trinodes x, y is locally-shortest if the transversing weight
       of q is equal to the length of a shortest dual path π in G0 ∪ T between x, y, such that π is
       contained in(!) the union of the two tricells incident with q (including the points of q itself).
       Similarly, q is globally-shortest if the transversing weight of q is equal to the dual distance
       between x, y in G0 ∪ T .
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                                30:7


   We say that T has the shortest-spanning property if every triedge in I(T ) is locally-
shortest, and there exists a subset of triedges J ⊆ I(T ) forming a connected subgraph of T
spanning all the trinodes such that every triedge in J is globally-shortest.

I Definition 7 (Proper T -sequence). Consider a trinet T and trinodes u 6= v ∈ N (T ). A
nonempty sequence S = (p1 , p2 , . . . , pm ) ⊆ I(T ) of triedges of T (repetition allowed) is a
proper T -sequence from u to v if the following holds: u is disjoint from p1 but there exists
a tricell θ0 incident with both u and p1 , v is disjoint from pm but there exists a tricell
θm incident with both v and pm , and each two consecutive triedges pi , pi+1 are distinct
and incident to a common tricell θi for 1 ≤ i < m. Finally, the empty sequence S = ∅ is
considered a proper T -sequence from u to v if u, v are incident to a common tricell θ0 .

   Since T is a subdivision of a graph triangulation and u, v are nodes of this triangulation,
we immediately obtain the following fact complementing Definition 7:

I Claim 8. For every proper nonempty T -sequence S, the sequence of tricells (θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θm )
as in Definition 7 is uniquely determined by T and S. If S = ∅, then uv is a triedge of T
and there are two choices of θ0 incident with uv; we simply make an arbitrary deterministic
choice of θ0 among those two in each case.

   Now the main technical finding, necessary for our algorithm, comes in:

I Lemma 9 (*). Consider an instance r-MEI(G, F ) where G is a connected plane graph.
Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of G having the shortest-spanning property. There exists a set
{πf : f ∈ F } where πf for f = uv is a route in G0 ∪ T between the trinodes u, v, such that
the following hold:
 (a) There exists an optimal drawing D of G + F with r-ins(G, F ) crossings such that each
     edge f ∈ F is drawn in the alley of πf , and no two edges of F cross each other more
     than once.
(b) The T -sequence Sf of each πf is a proper T -sequence, and no triedge occurs in Sf more
     than 8k 4 times where k = |F |.

   The full proof of Lemma 9 is rather long and cannot fit into the restricted short paper,
but due to great importance of the statement we at least provide here a brief informal sketch:
   We show by local modifications of the routes for F that there exists an optimal solution
   which fulfills (a) and determines only proper T -sequences in the considered trinet.
   If some triedge repeats too many times in the T -sequence of some edge f ∈ F , then also
   one of the globally-shortest triedges of T , say p, repeats many times in this sequence.
   Hence, by the globally-shortest property, re-routing f partly “along” p does not increase
   crossings of f with E(G). Though, there may be no strict improvement either. Even
   worse, re-routing of f may incur new crossings with F which is difficult to handle locally.
   A careful analysis of the situations in which the T -sequence of f crosses many times the
   same globally-shortest triedge of T then gives the desired conclusion; that either the local
   situation contradicts optimality of the whole solution, or a strict improvement (in terms
   of the lengths of T -sequences) can be achieved by a local move in the drawing.

3.4    Shortest routes in a sleeve
Next, we consider point (4) of the above outline. To recapitulate, for trinodes u, v of a
trinet T of G and a given proper T -sequence S from u to v, the task is to find a shortest
route from u to v among those having the same T -sequence S (and independently of other



                                                                                                       SoCG 2016
30:8   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


       searched routes). Since we cannot, in general, avoid repeating triedges in S and tricells in
       the sequence (θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θm ) in Definition 7, we use a similar workaround as in [23]; “lifting”
       the respective sequence of tricells into a universal cover as follows.

       I Definition 10 (Sleeve of a T -sequence). Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of a plane graph G,
       and consider a proper T -sequence S = (p1 , p2 , . . . , pm ) from u to v determining the sequence
       of tricells (θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θm ) by Claim 8. For i = 0, 1, . . . , m, let Li be a disjoint copy of the
       embedded subgraph of G0 ∪ T induced by θi . Construct a plane graph L from the union
       L0 ∪ · · · ∪ Lm by identifying, for j = 1, . . . , m, the copy of the triedge pj in Lj−1 with the
       copy of pj in Lj . We call L the sleeve of S in the trinet (G0 , T ), and we identify u and v with
       their copies in L0 and Lm , respectively. We make the unique face of L that is not covered by
       a copy of any tricell of T the outer face of L.

           Observe that every route from u to v in G0 ∪ T having its T -sequence equal to S can be
       easily lifted into a corresponding u–v route in the sleeve L of S. Conversely, any u–v route
       in L avoiding the outer face and crossing the copies of triedges in L at most once each, can
       be obviously projected down to G0 ∪ T to make a route with the T -sequence equal to S. In
       fact, we can routinely prove that some shortest u–v route in L must be of the latter kind,
       under the shortest-spanning property (cf. Definition 6).

       I Lemma 11 (*). Let (G0 , T ) be a shortest-spanning full trinet of an edge-weighted plane
       graph G, S a proper T -sequence between trinodes u, v of T , and let L be the sleeve of S. Let
       ` be the length of a shortest route from u to v among those having the T -sequence S. Then,
       ` is equal to the dual distance from u to v in L without the outer face, and at least one of
       the u–v routes of length ` in L crosses the copy of each triedge from S in L exactly once.

          Hence we can straightforwardly compute desired shortest routes using established linear
       time shortest path algorithms, such as the algorithm of Klein et al. [29] since L is planar, or
       Thorup’s algorithms [33] since we have integral weights. In fact, since we are fine with edge
       weights of G given in unary, a simple adaptation of BFS can do the job for us, too.

       I Corollary 12 (*). Let (G0 , T ) be a shortest-spanning full trinet of a plane graph G with
       integer edge weights, and S a proper T -sequence between trinodes u, v of T . A shortest u–v
       route among those having the T -sequence S can be found in O(|S| · |N (T )| · |V (G)|) time.
       Observe that in our case, by Lemma 9, we have |S| · |N (T )| ≤ (6k · 8k 4 ) · 2k = 96k 6 .

       3.5     Crossing of routes
       Finally, it remains to address point (5). Consider a 4-tuple of distinct trinodes u, v, u0 , v 0 .
       Let π be a u–v route and π 0 be a u0 –v 0 route. We say that an arc b follows the route π if
       b is contained in the alley of π and b intersects the faces forming the alley exactly in the
       order given by π (recall that a route is technically a dual walk and hence, possibly, some face
       might repeat in π). We say that the pair of routes π, π 0 is non-crossing, if there exist a u–v
       arc b following π and a u0 –v 0 arc b0 following π 0 such that b ∩ b0 = ∅. In order to characterize
       possible non-crossing pairs of routes in terms of their T -sequences, we bring the following:

       I Definition 13 (Crossing certificate). Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of a plane graph G, and
       let π be a route from u to v and π 0 be a route from u0 to v 0 in G0 ∪ T , where u, v, u0 , v 0 are
       distinct trinodes of T . Assume the T -sequences S = (p1 , . . . , pn ) of π and S 0 = (p01 , . . . , p0` )
       of π 0 are proper and let (θ0 , . . . , θn ) and (θ00 , . . . , θ`0 ) be their tricell sequences by Claim 8.
       For technical reasons, let p0 := u, pn+1 := v and p00 := u0 , p0`+1 := v 0 .
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                                30:9


    A crossing certificate for S, S 0 is a triple of indices (c, d, m) where c, d, m ≥ 0, c + m ≤ n,
d + m ≤ `, such that the following holds:
               0
(a) θc+j = θd+j    for 0 ≤ j ≤ m, but pc 6= p0d and pc+m+1 6= p0d+m+1 ,
(b) the triple pc , p0d , pc+1 occurs around the tricell θc = θd0 in the same cyclic orientation as
     the triple pc+m+1 , p0d+m+1 , pc+m occurs around θc+m = θd+m     0
                                                                         .
Furthermore, a crossing certificate for the same sequence S and the reversal of S 0 from v 0 to
u0 is also called a crossing certificate for S, S 0 .

      Definition 13 deserves a closer explanation. Assume that a crossing certificate satisfies
0 < c < n and 0 < d < `. Then all four elements pc , p0d , pc+1 , p0d+1 are triedges of the same
tricell θc = θd0 , and since pc+1 6= pc 6= p0d 6= p0d+1 , we get pc+1 = p0d+1 . Hence m > 0 and the
situation is such that S and S 0 “merge” at θc where (up to symmetry) S comes on the left of
S 0 , and they again “split” at θc+m where S leaves on the right of S 0 , thereby “crossing it”.
The full definition, though, covers also the boundary cases of crossing certificates for which
c ∈ {0, n} or d ∈ {0, `} (or both), and when S and S 0 may have no triedge in common; those
can be easily examined case by case.

I Lemma 14 (*). Let (G0 , T ) be a full trinet of an edge-weighted plane graph G, and ui , vi ,
i = 1, 2, be four distinct trinodes. Assume that Si from ui to vi are proper T -sequences. In
G0 ∪ T , for i = 1, 2, there exist routes πi from ui to vi having the the T -sequence Si , such
that π1 , π2 are non-crossing, if and only if there exists no crossing certificate for S1 , S2 .


3.6    Summary of the r-MEI algorithm
We can now summarize the overall algorithm to solve Rigid MEI, see Algorithm 1. Based
thereon, together with Lemmas 9, 11, Corollary 12, and Lemma 14 we obtain:

I Theorem 15 (*). Let G be a connected plane graph with edge weights w : E(G) → N+ ∪{∞},
and F a set of k ≥ 1 new edges (vertex pairs, in fact) such that w(f ) = 1 for all f ∈ F .
Algorithm 1 finds an optimal solution to the w-weighted r-MEI(G, F ) problem, if a finite
solution exists, in time O 2p(k) · |V (G)| , where p(k) is a polynomial function in k.

In fact, one can see that p(k) = O(k 6 log k) in Theorem 15.


 4     General MEI
Now, we turn our attention to the general MEI(G, F ) problem, in which the embedding
of a planar graph G is not pre-specified. Recall that triconnected planar graphs have a
unique embedding (up to mirroring), but already biconnected graphs can have an exponential
number of embeddings in general. As it is commonly done in insertion problems since [22],
we will use the SPR-tree datastructure (sometimes also known as SPQR-tree) to encode and
work with all these possible embeddings. The structure was first defined in a slightly different
form in [16], based on prior work of [3, 34]. It can be constructed in linear time [27, 21] and
only requires linear space.

I Definition 16 (SPR-tree, cf. [8]). Let G be a biconnected graph with at least three vertices.
The SPR-tree T of G is the unique smallest tree satisfying the following properties:
(a) Each node ν in T holds a specific (small) graph Sν = (Vν , Eν ), with Vν ⊆ V (G),
    called a skeleton. Each edge e of Eν is either a real edge e ∈ E(G), or a virtual edge
    e = xy 6∈ E(G) (while still, x, y ∈ V (G)).



                                                                                                       SoCG 2016
30:10   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


           In: a plane graph G, edge weights w : E(G) → N+ ∪ {∞}, new edge set F s.t. w(f ) = 1
               for f ∈ F .
          Out: an optimal solution to (w-weighted) r-MEI(G, F ).
            1. Compute a full trinet (G0 , T ), N (T ) := V (F ), with the shortest-spanning property of T .
               a. Pick any trinode x ∈ N (T ) and greedily compute globally-shortest triedges (Def. 6)
                  from x to all other trinodes, using a simple shortest path computation.
               b. The remaining triedges can be greedily computed as locally-shortest, one after another.
            2. For each f = uv ∈ F :
               a. Compute Sf as the set of all its possible and relevant proper T -sequences from u to v.
                  The size of Sf is bounded due to Lemma 9(b) by 2s(|F |) where s(k) = O(k5 log k).
               b. For each S ∈ Sf , compute a shortest u–v route πS in G0 ∪ T among those having the
                  T -sequence S (where the length function is induced by w), using Corollary 12.
            3. For each possible system of representatives P = {Sf }f ∈F with Sf ∈ Sf :
               a. Check, for each pair f, f 0 ∈ F , whether there exists a crossing certificate for Sf , Sf 0
                  (e.g., using brute force by Def. 13).
                  Let XP be the set of pairs {f, f 0 } for which such a certificate has been found.
               b. If any pair {f, f 0 } ∈ XP requires more than a single crossing (which can be found by
                  checking again for two “independent”
                                                    P         ( *) crossing certificates of Sf , Sf 0 ), let crP := ∞.
               c. Otherwise, let crP := |XP | + f ∈F lenw (πSf ), where πSf is the shortest route for f
                  and Sf computed in step (2) and lenw (πSf ) is the length.
            4. Among all P considered in (3), pick one with smallest crP < ∞. Let this be P◦ = {Sf◦ }f ∈F .
            5. In the plane graph G, realize each edge f ∈ F following its respective route πSf◦ , such that
               the overall resulting weighted number of crossings is crP◦ :
               a. By the minimality setup in (4), no πSf◦ is self-intersecting.
               b. A standard postprocessing argument – removing consecutive crossings between any pair
                  f, f 0 (within a section of Sf◦ ∩ Sf◦0 ) by re-routing f 0 partially along f – prevents multiple
                  crossings in the pairs from XP and makes the pairs of F not in XP crossing-free.

           Algorithm 1 Algorithm to solve the (weighted) Rigid MEI problem.



        (b) T has three different node types with the following skeleton structures: (S) Sν is a
            simple cycle; (P) Sν consists of two vertices and at least three multiple edges between
            them; (R) Sν is a simple triconnected graph on at least four vertices.
        (c) For every edge νµ in T we have |Vν ∩ Vµ | = 2. These two common vertices, say x, y,
            form a vertex 2-cut in G. The skeleton Sν contains a specific virtual edge eµ ∈ E(Sν )
            that represents the node µ and, symmetrically, some specific eν ∈ E(Sµ ) represents ν.
            Both eν , eµ have the ends x, y; the two virtual edges may refer to one another as twins.
        (d) For an edge νµ ∈ E(T), let eµ ∈ Eν , eν ∈ Eµ be the pair of virtual edges as in (c) connect-
            ing the same x, y. The operation of merging at νµ creates a graph (Sν ∪ Sµ ) − {eµ , eν }
            obtained by gluing the two skeletons Sν , Sµ at x, y and removing eµ , eν .
            Consider the tree T rooted at any node. For ν ∈ V (T) we define the pertinent graph Pν
            of ν by recursively merging the skeletons at every tree-edge of the subtree rooted at ν,
            and removing the parent virtual edge of ν (if not the root itself). Then the pertinent
            graph of the root of T is G.

            We again start with an illustration of the “simple” case of |F | = 1. The central theorem
        of [22] states that an optimal solution of MEI(G, {uv}) for biconnected G can be obtained
        by looking only at the shortest path in the SPR-tree T of G between a node whose skeleton
        contains u and a node whose skeleton contains v. For each skeleton Sν along this path, one
        simply finds an optimal embedding and a shortest partial route in this embedding between
        the virtual edge representing u (or u itself) and the virtual edge representing v (or v itself).
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                           30:11


In the case of S- and P-nodes this route requires no crossings. For an R-node, one is looking
for a shortest route in the rigid setting. Thereby, each virtual edge eµ in Sν with ends x, y is
assigned its pertinent weight w(eµ ): the size of a minimum x–y edge-cut in the pertinent
graph Pµ . See [22] for more details.
    We return to the general MEI(G, F ) problem for biconnected planar graphs G. Considering
an arbitrarily rooted SPR-tree T of G, we devise a dynamic programming procedure to solve
MEI bottom-up over T. The core is to describe which subproblems we are going to solve at
each node ν of T, assuming we know the solutions of the corresponding subproblems at the
child nodes of ν. For better understanding, this task is illustrated and described in Figure 3.
We say a virtual edge eµ in Sν representing a child node µ of ν, is dirty if its pertinent graph
Pµ contains an end vertex of f ∈ F other than one of the ends of eµ .
    On a high level, we describe our procedure as follows:

I Algorithm 17. A dynamic programming scheme to solve MEI bottom-up over an SPR-tree.
1. We compute the pertinent weights w(eµ ) for all non-dirty virtual edges that appear in
   skeletons used in the following step (2).
2. For each dirty child virtual edge eµ in the skeleton Sν , we assume to know the optimal
   number of crossings for every “reasonable” scheme of routing new edges of F to, from,
   or across eµ (we stress that we speak about all edges of F , including those not having
   an end in Pµ ). We exhaustively process, over all possible embeddings of Sν in case of a
   P-node, all the subproblems stated by every admissible combination of routing schemes
   for the dirty child virtual edges in Sν and for the parent virtual edge of Sν . For each
   “reasonable” routing scheme of the parent virtual edge, we then select and store the best
   obtained solution in terms of minimal overall crossing number.
3. Each particular subproblem of the exhaustive processing in (2) can be formulated as a
   weighted r-MEI(H, F 00 ) instance. The plane graph H is constructed from Sν by inserting
   special gadgets at the dirty virtual edges (see the colored digons in Figure 3), and the
   new edges F 00 are suitable segments of the edges of F (their ends are either an end of the
   original F -edge or a vertex on such a gadget). All non-virtual edges of Sν and all of F 00
   have weight 1. Each non-dirty virtual edge eµ gets weight w(eµ ), computed in (1), and
   all dirty virtual edges get weight ∞. See Figure 3 for closer details.
   This r-MEI(H, F 00 ) instance can then be solved using Theorem 15.
4. If ν is the root node of T, then there is no parent virtual edge and the exhaustive
   processing in (2) selects a single optimal solution. Realizing this solution, together with
   the corresponding subsolutions at the descendants, gives an optimal solution to the
   original MEI(G, F ) instance.                                                            J

    We first give a more precise definition regarding step (2). For a dirty virtual edge eµ = xy
in the skeleton Sν with its pertinent graph Pµ , let M be the set of those ends of the edges
of F that belong to V (Pµ ) \ {x, y}. A routing scheme of eµ is an arbitrary pair of disjoint
sequences Q1 , Q2 , where (Q1 ∪ Q2 ) ∩ V (G) = ∅, together with a perfect matching on the set
M ∪ Q1 ∪ Q2 (the cardinality of which must be even). The matching edges are meant to
represent segments of edges of F drawn across the pertinent graph Pµ , but on this level we
do not need to distinguish which segment belongs to which of the F -edges.
    If ϕ is the parent node of ν then a routing scheme of eϕ in Sν , as dealt with in step (2),
is formally not the same as the corresponding routing scheme of the twin virtual edge eν in
Sϕ ; these two are of course actually “complementary”. We neglect this technical difference in
a high-level description of our dynamic programming scheme.
    Second, we informally outline three claims which make Algorithm 17 run in FPT time:



                                                                                                   SoCG 2016
30:12   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph




                                                                                                  e2



               e0
                                                     e1
                          e 00

                    e'




                                                                                         e4
                                                                     e3




            Figure 3 One of the possible r-MEI instances considered at a rigid R-node ν in Algorithm 17.
        The mostly black graph shows the skeleton Sν , whereby the red virtual edge eϕ corresponds to
        ν’s parent, the blue virtual edges e1 , . . . , e4 to ν’s dirty children, and the thick black edges to the
        non-dirty children with their implicit pertinent weights. The new edges of F are depicted in green.
        For each dirty virtual edge ei , including eϕ , we consider a fixed (by the processing in step (2))
        routing scheme that externally encodes at which points segments of edges of F enter and leave the
        pertinent subgraph of ei . This is depicted with a blue or red digon of ei and solid green segments
        of the F -edges within it. Consequently, we do not have to care for internal details of the digonal
        parts (they are, in fact, not part of our r-MEI instance and only visualized for the reader’s context),
        as they are either already resolved in the subproblems of the children or are going to be resolved
        in the ancestor nodes. Likewise, for an r-MEI instance at ν, the only relevant information for any
        non-dirty virtual edge is its pertinent weight and no subembedding details are necessary.
        The gadget (see step (3)) used to enforce the aforementioned routing schemes at every dirty virtual
        edge ei , is composed of the edge ei itself (solid blue or red), and two new edges e0i , e00i parallel to ei
        (dotted) which are subdivided by the prescribed entry/exit terminals (green dots) of the segments
        of F -edges. The gadget edges are weighted ∞ and their embedding is rigid. Possible end vertices
        of F -edges in V (Sν ) are also counted as the terminals. By a combination of the routing schemes
        we mean an arbitrary perfect matching (the green dashed segments) on these terminals. It is an
        admissible combination (cf. step (2)) if the union of the prescribed solid green and the matching
        dashed green segments forms an actual “realization” of the new edges of F .
        An admissible combination then gives rise to the depicted r-MEI instance, as described in step (3),
        which can be solved using Theorem 15.


            A skeleton Sν may contain arbitrarily more than k virtual edges, but only at most 2k of
            them may be dirty (containing an end vertex of F ). The computation of the pertinent
            weights of non-dirty virtual edges can be done in linear overall time.
            A P-node skeleton Sν may have an unbounded number of inequivalent embeddings
            (precisely (q − 1)! where q is the number of parallel edges in Sν ). However, if two non-
            dirty edges e1 , e2 appear non-consecutively within the embedding of Sν , there exists an
            alternative solution with the same number of crossings where e2 is rerouted alongside e1
            (by optimality, both edges encounter the same number of crossings either way). Thus we
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                            30:13


    can restrict our attention to only those at most (2k)! embeddings in which all non-dirty
    virtual edges are consecutive (in any internal order) within the embedding of Sν .
    In contrast to the single edge insertion, an edge of F may easily be forced to cross the
    same virtual edge eµ multiple times (a number depending only on k). However, the
    complexity of any “reasonable” routing of the edges of F across eµ is bounded by a
    function of k = |F |, as shown in Lemma 9.
As a corollary we see that the number of subproblems generated in step (2), as well as the
amount of information stored at any SPR-tree node, are bounded by a function of k.
    The solution of each one subproblem in step (3) can be obtained using the algorithm for
r-MEI in Theorem 15 in linear time for constant k, and there are at most O(|V (G)|) nodes
in the tree T. Instead of the naïve quadratic runtime bound, we even achieve a linear overall
runtime bound by observing that the union of all skeletons is still only of O(|V (G)|) size.
We obtain, as given in the introduction:

I Theorem 18 (The biconnected case of Theorem 1 – *). Let G be a planar biconnected graph
and F a set of k ≥ 1 new edges (vertex pairs, in fact). An optimal solution of the problem
MEI(G, F ) can be found in O(2q(k) · |V (G)|) time, where q(k) is a polynomial function in k.

    For essentially all known insertion algorithms (in particular the single edge insertion [22],
the vertex insertion [10], and the MEI approximation [11]), one typically first resolves the
case of biconnected graphs (using SPR-trees as above). Then, it is relatively straightforward
to lift the algorithms to connected graphs, by considering BC-trees (see below). Interestingly,
this step seems much more complicated in the case of exact MEI.
    Consider the well-known block-cut tree (BC-tree) decomposing any connected graph into
its blocks (biconnected components). Using analogous techniques as in [11], we extend
our dynamic programming approach by amalgamating the BC-tree of G with respective
SPR-trees of the blocks, to obtain a linear-sized con-tree – with an additional node type C,
for the cut vertices. The outline in Algorithm 17 is completed with the following:

2+. If ν is a C-node representing a cut vertex c of G, then we exhaustively process all
   possibilities to combine the dirty blocks of G incident to c (while non-dirty blocks can be
   safely ignored).

    Unfortunately, although we can again bound the number of dirty blocks by 2k, there is
now no easy “external description of routing” with respect to a cut vertex available (analogous
to a routing scheme of a virtual edge). Consequently, the number of possibilities to consider
in (2+ ) depends on k and the degree of the cut vertex c. We conclude:

I Theorem 19 (The connected case of Theorem 1 – *). Let G be a planar connected graph
and F a set of k ≥ 1 new edges (vertex pairs, in fact). Let ∆c be the maximum degree
over cut vertices of G. Then an optimal solution of the problem MEI(G, F ) can be found in
     0
O 2q (k) · ∆ck · |V (G)| time, where q 0 (k) is a polynomial function in k.


 5     Conclusion
In this paper, we have affirmatively answered the long standing open question, floating around
ever since [1, 22], whether there is a polynomial-time algorithm to insert a constant-sized set
of edges into a planar graph in a crossing minimal way. Previously, this has only been known
for single edges; the problem with multiple edges could only be approximated. Our result
also induces a new approximation algorithm for the general crossing number of graphs with



                                                                                                    SoCG 2016
30:14   Inserting Multiple Edges into a Planar Graph


        bounded number of edges beyond planarity. While the original problem was defined over
        unweighted graphs, we considered weighted graphs in our subproblems but only to limited
        extent.

        I Open Problem 20. Is MEI fixed-parameter tractable if both G and F are weighted?

        In fact, we can straight-forwardly answer this question affirmatively for weighted G but
        unweighted F , as should be clear from the above proofs. We may also assume weighted F ,
        if the weights are bounded by k, by simply adding multiple copies of an edge to F . For
        generally weighted F , we observe that the dynamic programming part of solving MEI would
        be capable of achieving this feat. However, the required r-MEI subproblems are not, due to
        a technical rerouting argument in the proof of Lemma 9. It is not easy to circumvent this
        argument and the problem seems surprisingly related to that of decidability of string graphs
        – a connection that deserves future investigation.
            As our final open question we include:

        I Open Problem 21. Is there a polynomial-time algorithm to solve MEI for simply-connected
        graphs independent of ∆c ?

        Such a dependency on ∆c does not show up when inserting a single edge or a star into
        planar G [22, 10]. On the other hand, even more restrictive degree dependencies are very
        common and seemingly unavoidable in the known general crossing number approximations.

        Acknowledgments. We thank Sergio Cabello and Carsten Gutwenger for helpful discussions.


             References
         1   C. Batini, M. Talamo, and R. Tamassia. Computer aided layout of entity relationship
             diagrams. Journal of Systems and Software, 4:163–173, 1984.
         2   S. N. Bhatt and F. T. Leighton. A framework for solving VLSI graph layout problems. J.
             Comput. Syst. Sci., 28(2):300–343, 1984.
         3   D. Bienstock and C. L. Monma. On the complexity of embedding planar graphs to minimize
             certain distance measures. Algorithmica, 5(1):93–109, 1990.
         4   S. Cabello. Hardness of approximation for crossing number. Discrete & Computational
             Geometry, 49(2):348–358, 2013.
         5   S. Cabello and B. Mohar. Crossing number and weighted crossing number of near-planar
             graphs. Algorithmica, 60(3):484–504, 2011.
         6   S. Cabello and B. Mohar. Adding one edge to planar graphs makes crossing number and
             1-planarity hard. SIAM J. Comput., 42(5):1803–1829, 2013.
         7   B. Chazelle. A theorem on polygon cutting with applications. In Proc. FOCS’82, pages
             339–349. IEEE Computer Society, 1982.
         8   M. Chimani. Computing Crossing Numbers. PhD thesis, TU Dortmund, Germany, 2008.
             URL: http://hdl.handle.net/2003/25955.
         9   M. Chimani and C. Gutwenger. Advances in the planarization method: effective multiple
             edge insertions. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 16(3):729–757, 2012.
        10   M. Chimani, C. Gutwenger, P. Mutzel, and C. Wolf. Inserting a vertex into a planar graph.
             In Proc. SODA’09, pages 375–383, 2009.
        11   M. Chimani and P. Hliněný. A tighter insertion-based approximation of the crossing number.
             In Proc. ICALP’11, volume 6755 of LNCS, pages 122–134. Springer, 2011.
        12   M. Chimani, P. Hliněný, and P. Mutzel. Vertex insertion approximates the crossing number
             for apex graphs. European Journal of Combinatorics, 33:326–335, 2012.
M. Chimani and P. Hliněný                                                                           30:15


13   J. Chuzhoy. An algorithm for the graph crossing number problem. In Proc. STOC’11,
     pages 303–312. ACM, 2011.
14   J. Chuzhoy, Y. Makarychev, and A. Sidiropoulos. On graph crossing number and edge
     planarization. In Proc. SODA’11, pages 1050–1069. ACM Press, 2011.
15   É. Colin de Verdière and A. Schrijver. Shortest vertex-disjoint two-face paths in planar
     graphs. ACM Transactions on Algorithms, 7(2):19, 2011.
16   G. Di Battista and R. Tamassia. On-line planarity testing. SIAM Journal on Computing,
     25:956–997, 1996.
17   G. Even, S. Guha, and B. Schieber. Improved approximations of crossings in graph drawings
     and VLSI layout areas. SIAM J. Comput., 32(1):231–252, 2002.
18   M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. Crossing number is NP-complete. SIAM J. Alg. Discr.
     Meth., 4:312–316, 1983.
19   I. Gitler, P. Hliněný, J. Leanos, and G. Salazar. The crossing number of a projective graph
     is quadratic in the face-width. Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 15(1):#R46, 2008.
20   M. Grohe. Computing crossing numbers in quadratic time. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 68(2):285–
     302, 2004.
21   C. Gutwenger and P. Mutzel. A linear time implementation of SPQR trees. In Proc. GD’00,
     volume 1984 of LNCS, pages 77–90. Springer, 2001.
22   C. Gutwenger, P. Mutzel, and R. Weiskircher. Inserting an edge into a planar graph.
     Algorithmica, 41(4):289–308, 2005.
23   J. Hershberger and J. Snoeyink. Computing minimum length paths of a given homotopy
     class. Comput. Geom., 4:63–97, 1994.
24   P. Hliněný and M. Chimani. Approximating the crossing number of graphs embeddable in
     any orientable surface. In Proc. SODA’10, pages 918–927, 2010.
25   P. Hliněný and G. Salazar. On the crossing number of almost planar graphs. In Proc.
     GD’05, volume 4372 of LNCS, pages 162–173. Springer, 2006.
26   P. Hliněný and G. Salazar. Approximating the crossing number of toroidal graphs. In Proc.
     ISAAC’07, volume 4835 of LNCS, pages 148–159. Springer, 2007.
27   J. E. Hopcroft and R. E. Tarjan. Dividing a graph into triconnected components. SIAM
     Journal on Computing, 2(3):135–158, 1973.
28   K-I. Kawarabayashi and B. Reed. Computing crossing number in linear time. In Proc.
     STOC’07, pages 382–390, 2007.
29   P. Klein, S. Rao, M. Rauch, and S. Subramanian. Faster shortest-path algorithms for
     planar graphs. In Proc. STOC’94, pages 27–37, 1994.
30   Y. Kobayashi and C. Sommer. On shortest disjoint paths in planar graphs. Discrete
     Optimization, 7(4):234–245, 2010.
31   D.-T. Lee and F. P. Preparata. Euclidean shortest paths in the presence of rectilinear
     barriers. Networks, 14(3):393–410, 1984.
32   M. Schaefer. The graph crossing number and its variants: A survey. Electronic Journal of
     Combinatorics, #DS21, May 15, 2014.
33   M. Thorup. Undirected single source shortest paths with positive integer weights in linear
     time. Journal of the ACM, 46:362–394, 1999.
34   W. T. Tutte. Connectivity in graphs, volume 15 of Mathematical Expositions. University
     of Toronto Press, 1966.
35   T. Ziegler. Crossing Minimization in Automatic Graph Drawing. PhD thesis, Saarland
     University, Germany, 2001.




                                                                                                   SoCG 2016
