Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast
in the Failure Case
Thomas Locher #
DFINITY, Zurich, Switzerland

      Abstract
Reliable broadcast is a fundamental primitive in distributed computing that is widely used in various
applications. Several new reliable broadcast algorithms have been presented in recent years, primarily
focusing on reducing the communication complexity, which is the total number of exchanged bits in
the worst case. While significant progress has been achieved, all proposed algorithms share a common
weakness. Executions may fail, i.e., no message is ever delivered, while incurring a communication
complexity equal or nearly equal to the communication complexity of executions where a message is
delivered. In fact, a single Byzantine node, acting as the dedicated sender, is sufficient to trigger
such executions, causing all nodes to consume bandwidth in vain.
    This paper introduces the novel concept of a reliable broadcast detector, a distributed algorithm
that can be coupled with a reliable broadcast algorithm to minimize the communication complexity
of failed executions. Two concrete detectors are presented with different requirements and properties.
Additionally, reliable broadcast algorithms that utilize detectors are introduced, the main algorithm
guaranteeing an overhead factor, compared to an ideal failure-free execution, that tends to 2 as
the network size increases. Furthermore, a lower bound is proven that an overhead factor of 5/3 is
inevitable when the sender initially broadcasts the message, as is the case for the proposed algorithm.
Therefore, it achieves a bound that is close to optimal for any algorithm with this property.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Computer systems organization → Fault-tolerant network topolo-
gies; Theory of computation → Distributed algorithms

Keywords and phrases asynchronous networks, reliable broadcast, communication complexity

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.OPODIS.2025.12


 1      Introduction
Numerous applications require the dissemination of certain messages to all nodes in a
distributed system. In contrast to a regular broadcast, where all nodes are only guaranteed
to receive the message if the sender does not fail, a reliable broadcast provides stronger
guarantees. In particular, only one message may be broadcast and either no honest (i.e., non-
faulty) node receives it or all of them eventually do, despite the presence of Byzantine nodes,
which may behave in arbitrary ways to interfere with the protocol execution. Applications
of reliable broadcast include asynchronous atomic broadcast [14, 17, 19, 24, 28, 29, 31],
distributed key generation [2, 11, 20], secure data replication [7], and secret sharing [30].
Reliable broadcast can further be used to improve throughput in Byzantine fault-tolerant
consensus protocols that treat message dissemination and ordering separately [9].
    In his seminal paper, Bracha showed that the reliable broadcast problem can be solved
in an asynchronous network comprising n nodes, out of which at most t < n/3 nodes
may be Byzantine [6]. The communication complexity, i.e., the number of bits that need
to be exchanged in the worst case, of the proposed algorithm is O(n2 |m|), where |m|
denotes the size of the broadcast message. Nearly two decades later, Cachin and Tessaro [8]
presented the first reliable broadcast algorithm with an improved communication complexity
of 3n|m| + O(κn2 log(n)) bits using erasure coding, where κ is the output size of a collision-
resistant hash function, which is asymptotically optimal for large messages as every node
must receive at least |m| bits. Subsequently, several studies have focused on narrowing the
gap to the lower bound of Ω(n|m| + n2 ) [1, 3, 10, 26, 27].
             © Thomas Locher;
             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
29th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2025).
Editors: Andrei Arusoaie, Emanuel Onica, Michael Spear, and Sara Tucci-Piergiovanni; Article No. 12;
pp. 12:1–12:20
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
12:2   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


           While reliable broadcast algorithms with nearly optimal communication complexity are
       known, all proposed algorithms effectively exhibit the same complexity whether or not the
       broadcast is successful. In other words, the nodes may not receive any message as the
       outcome of the broadcast and yet send almost as many bits as in the worst-case execution
       where a message is delivered. As shown in §4, a Byzantine sender can cause such wasteful
       executions, even if all other nodes are honest. In any system where each node has an equal
       chance of becoming the next sender or where a simple round-robin scheme determines the
       next sender, up to a third of all consumed bandwidth can be wasted.
           This problem is addressed in this paper. In §3, reliable broadcast detectors are introduced,
       which are distributed algorithms that serve to inform a reliable broadcast algorithm whether
       or not it is safe to start executing the main routine, with the guarantee that all honest nodes
       will eventually obtain one and the same message. Apart from specifying the requirements
       that such a detector must meet, two concrete detectors are presented. The second detector
       has the advantage that the condition to trigger the main reliable broadcast algorithm is
       reached faster when the sender is honest but requires a more complex setup due to its use of
       threshold cryptography. The communication complexity of both detectors is O(κn2 ), where
       κ is a security parameter of constant size, and thus independent of the message size.
           Reliable broadcast algorithms that make use of detectors are provided in §4. The first
       algorithm showcases the simplicity of defining a reliable broadcast algorithm when given a
       detector, which demonstrates the power of this abstraction. The second and main algorithm
       aims to minimize the communication complexity when a message is delivered, while keeping
       the communication complexity independent of the message size when no message is delivered.
       In the former case, the overhead factor is only 2 + O(1/n), i.e., roughly 2n|m| bits are sent
       in total for large n and |m|. This bound is slightly worse than the best known bound of
       3/2, but the algorithm is significantly more efficient in the failure case. We argue that it
       is quite natural for any algorithm optimizing for the failure case to first have the sender
       broadcast the message. For any such algorithm, at least 5/3n|m| bits must be exchanged in
       total as shown in Appendix A.2, which implies that the proposed algorithm is nearly optimal.
       Related work on reliable broadcast is summarized in §5 and §6 concludes the paper.


        2     Model

       We consider a network comprising n ≥ 3t + 1 nodes, where t denotes the maximum number
       of Byzantine nodes, which may exhibit arbitrary faulty behavior, ranging from simple crash
       failures to malicious behavior including collusion. By contrast, the other n−t nodes, which we
       call honest, always execute any given protocol correctly and never fail. The set of all n nodes
       is denoted by V . Any pair of nodes can communicate directly by exchanging messages over an
       authenticated channel. Throughout this paper, we consider the asynchronous communication
       model, where all messages are guaranteed to be received but after an unbounded delay, i.e.,
       nodes cannot expect that a sent message will arrive, nor can they expect to receive a certain
       message, after a certain amount of time. When a node v sends a message m to all nodes,
       including itself, we say that node v broadcasts message m. If v is honest, all nodes will
       eventually receive the broadcast message. However, a Byzantine node may send a message
       that is to be broadcast only to a subset of the nodes, possibly not sending the message at all.
           A reliable broadcast protocol ensures that either all honest nodes eventually deliver the
       sender’s message, i.e., accept the message as the outcome of the reliable broadcast, or no
       honest node delivers it. Formally, reliable broadcast is defined as follows.
T. Locher                                                                                            12:3


▶ Definition 1 (Reliable broadcast). A reliable broadcast protocol is a distributed protocol
to send a message m from a specific node called the sender to all nodes with the following
properties.
   Validity: If the sender is honest and broadcasts m, then every honest node eventually
   delivers m.
   Agreement: If two honest node deliver m and m′ , then m = m′ .
   Integrity: Every honest node delivers at most one message.
   Totality: If an honest node delivers a message, then all honest nodes eventually deliver a
   message.

    Naturally, there can be multiple instances of reliable broadcast executions running in
parallel, each with a specific sender that is known a priori to all nodes. We assume that
every message carries information that identifies a particular instance but do not explicitly
specify such unique identifiers as we focus on a single execution.
    The sender has a message m that it aims to disseminate to all nodes. The size of m
in bits is denoted by |m|. In addition to the message itself, nodes can send other pieces of
data such as hashes, signatures, and the aforementioned identifiers. The used hash functions
and signature schemes are assumed to be cryptographically strong in that it is infeasible to
find hash collisions or spoof signatures, except with negligible probability. Since hashes and
signatures are considered secure for a certain minimum length, we introduce the security
parameter κ, upper bounding the size of hashes and signatures by O(κ).
    State-of-the-art reliable broadcast algorithms make extensive use of erasure codes, which
can handle missing data, or error-correcting codes, which can correct erroneous data. The
novel algorithm introduced in §4.2 employs (n, k)-erasure codes with parameters k < n
defined in that section.
    An execution E of a reliable broadcast algorithm is characterized by the send and receive
events occurring at all nodes. If the execution results in a message being delivered, we call
the execution successful. On the contrary, an execution where no message is delivered is
called a failed execution. The validity property implies that all executions where the sender
is honest must be successful. In other words, an execution may only fail if the sender is
Byzantine. A Byzantine sender, together with other Byzantine nodes, may also prevent the
delivery of a message for some time and then transmit more messages which will cause the
honest nodes to deliver a message after all. Formally, we can define the point of guaranteed
eventual delivery as the inflection point τ ∗ for which it holds that there must eventually be
an honest node that delivers a message at some time τ ≥ τ ∗ but delivery is not guaranteed
at any time τ < τ ∗ . If there is such a point in time τ ∗ , the agreement and totality property
together imply that all honest nodes will eventually deliver the same message. Thus, a
successful (failed) execution E is an execution for which it holds that τ ∗ < ∞ (τ ∗ = ∞). As
argued before, the validity property implies that for any execution E with an honest sender
starting at time τ0 it must hold that τ0 = τ ∗ .
    The primary complexity measure for reliable broadcast algorithms is their communication
complexity, which is the maximum number of bits exchanged by all honest nodes together
over all possible executions. When defining C E (n, ℓ) as the communication complexity in a
network of n nodes, disseminating a message of size ℓ in execution E when running algorithm
A, the communication complexity of algorithm A is C(n, ℓ) := maxE∈E C E (n, ℓ), where E
denotes the set of all possible executions. If a Byzantine sender happens to send messages
with different sizes – or parts of messages with different sizes – in some execution, we define
ℓ as the maximum size of all sent messages.



                                                                                                   OPODIS 2025
12:4   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


           Since all nodes must receive the sender’s message in a successful execution, at least nℓ
       bits must be transmitted overall.1 The overhead factor of a reliable broadcast algorithm is
       defined as L(n) := limℓ→∞ C(n,ℓ)
                                     ℓn . The goal is to get L(n) as close as possible to 1. However,
       we distinguish between successful and failed executions: While LE (n) ≈ 1 is the best possible
       result for any successful execution E, it should hold that LĒ (n) = 0 for any failed execution
       Ē because no message is delivered at all. Rather than specifying LE (n) with respect to an
       execution E that may be successful or failed, we slightly abuse our notation and simply
       state the goal as minimizing L(n) for successful executions while ensuring that L(n) = 0
       for all failed executions. Note that for any reliable broadcast algorithm that meets these
       requirements it holds that LE (n) = 0 at any time τ < τ ∗ for any execution E.
           The second relevant complexity measure is an algorithm’s time complexity, defined as
       the maximum duration of any execution, i.e., the time between the start of the execution
       and the time when the last honest node delivers the message, normalizing the maximum
       message delay to 1 and defining that all local computation takes 0 time. As an execution
       may never terminate given a Byzantine sender, we specify the time complexity for the good
       case with an honest sender. It is easy to see that honest nodes also engage in only a few
       rounds of communication for successful executions with a Byzantine sender for all considered
       algorithms.

           3     Detectors
       3.1       Definition
       Ensuring that LE (n) = 0 at any time τ < τ ∗ in any execution E requires a mechanism to
       detect whether the point τ ∗ has been reached, in which case the nodes can start disseminating
       the message (or parts thereof). We introduce the notion of a reliable broadcast detector D,
       which is itself a distributed algorithm. A detector D offers the following functionality:
          D.ready() returns true if the point τ ∗ of guaranteed eventual delivery has been reached
          for a unique message m.
          D.validators() returns the set of all nodes that claim to have successfully validated
          message m.
           Any detector only signals readiness for a message from the designated sender. If D.ready()
       returns true, we say that D signals readiness for message m to the reliable broadcast algorithm.
       Note that D may signal readiness even if only a unique identifier of message m is locally
       available. The constructions of detectors in the subsequent sections show that it is possible to
       deduce locally that the point of guaranteed eventual delivery has been reached for message m
       when receiving sufficiently many confirmations that a certain number of nodes have validated
       m. As shown in §4, the set D.validators() of nodes that claim to have validated the
       sender’s message is useful to reduce the communication complexity because it is not necessary
       to send any parts of the message to nodes in this set.
           The following properties must hold in the asynchronous communication model with
       t < n/3 Byzantine nodes as defined in §2. The first property ensures that honest nodes
       eventually agree that the point of guaranteed eventual delivery has been reached.
       ▶ Property 1. If D signals readiness at honest node v, then D eventually signals readiness
       at any honest node w.


       1
           Technically, (n − 1)ℓ bits suffice, not counting the sender itself, but the relative difference tends to zero
           as n → ∞.
T. Locher                                                                                           12:5


   It is further important that there is agreement as to which message may be broadcast in
order to avoid wasteful transmissions.

▶ Property 2. If D signals readiness at honest nodes v and v ′ for messages m and m′ ,
respectively, then m = m′ .

   We say that a detector is correct if it satisfies both properties. Given the lower bound of
Ω(n2 ) on the communication complexity of reliable broadcast [13], it is desirable to guarantee
an asymptotically tight upper bound on the communication complexity of detectors.

▶ Property 3. Given the security parameter κ, the communication complexity of an efficient
detector D is C(n, ℓ) ∈ O(κn2 ).

    Note that the communication complexity of an efficient detector is independent of the
message size ℓ. Naturally, a detector D can only operate meaningfully in conjunction with a
reliable broadcast algorithm A with certain properties. The following two properties specify
the required interplay between the two components.

▶ Property 4. If the honest sender executes algorithm A, then detector D will eventually
signal readiness at some honest node.

   Property 4 and Property 1 together imply that all honest nodes will eventually reach the
same state. Since the honest sender first broadcasts m when executing the algorithms in §4,
the following property implies Property 4 for the considered algorithms and detectors.

▶ Property 5. If the honest sender executes algorithm A, broadcasting m in the first step,
then detector D will eventually signal readiness for message m at some honest node.

   The last property ties the actions of A to the output of D in the sense that readiness
implies delivery and vice versa.

▶ Property 6. Any honest node executing algorithm A eventually delivers m if and only if
detector D signals readiness for message m.

   Under the assumption that these properties hold for algorithm A and detector D, we get
the following result.

▶ Theorem 2. If algorithm A and detector D have Properties 1-6, then algorithm A
implements reliable broadcast in the asynchronous communication model with t < n/3
Byzantine nodes.

Proof. Each property of reliable broadcast is proved separately.
Validity: Property 4 implies that detector D will eventually signal readiness at the some
   honest node v. The detectors of all honest nodes will eventually signal readiness due to
   Property 1. Finally, Property 6 implies that all honest nodes will deliver the message.
Agreement: If an honest node v delivers m, its detector must have signaled readiness for
   m due to Property 6. Property 2 states that any other honest node w can only signal
   readiness for m as well, in which case w delivers m eventually due to Property 6.
Integrity: Since readiness can only be signaled for one message due to Property 2 and a
   message can only be delivered if readiness is signaled for this message according to
   Property 6, at most one message can be delivered.
Totality: If honest node v delivers m, its detector must have signaled readiness for m before
   due to Property 6. Property 1 then implies that detectors at every honest node will
   eventually signal readiness, causing the delivery of m due to Property 6.               ◀



                                                                                                  OPODIS 2025
12:6   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


          Thus, it suffices to show that algorithms and detectors have these properties to ensure
       that they implement reliable broadcast. Let a detector-triggered algorithm be an algorithm
       that only sends messages when the detector signals readiness, apart from the sender, which
       may send some data to other nodes to initiate the execution. The following result holds for
       such algorithms when paired with an efficient detector.

       ▶ Lemma 3. For any detector-triggered algorithm A using an efficient detector it holds that
       L(n) = 0 for failed executions.

       Proof. In any failed execution, the sender must be Byzantine and therefore its messages do
       not contribute to the communication complexity. By definition, no messages are sent when
       executing algorithm A as the detectors never signal readiness. Since the communication
       complexity of an efficient detector is O(κn2 ) due to Property 3, the result follows.   ◀

       3.2    Basic Construction
       There is a straightforward construction of a basic detector, denoted by Db , that shares
       similarities with Bracha’s reliable broadcast algorithm itself [6]. The designated sender is
       supposed to broadcast message m. When receiving the first message m from the sender,
       the detector Db verifies the validity of the message and then broadcasts an attest message
       containing h = H(m), a hash value of size O(κ) derived using a hash function H. The reliable
       broadcast algorithm determines the concrete hash function to be used.
           The first attest(h) message received from w is processed by adding w to the map
       A : H → 2V , which stores the set of nodes from which attest messages have been received
       for a certain hash. The set H denotes the set of all possible hashes. Once at least n−t attest
       messages for a certain hash h have been obtained, confirm(h) is broadcast, confirming that
       sufficiently many attest messages have been received. Information about such confirmations
       are collected in the map C : H → 2V , storing the set of nodes from which confirm messages
       have been received for a certain hash. Again, only the first such message is processed from
       any node in order to bound the space complexity. A node v also broadcasts confirm(h) after
       receiving at least n − 2t ≥ t + 1 confirm messages for h, i.e., v broadcasts a confirmation
       when assured that at least one honest node must have broadcast a confirm message.
           Let hmax denote the hash for which the most confirmations have been obtained, i.e.,
       hmax := arg maxh∈H |C(h)|, breaking ties arbitrarily. The detector Db signals readiness when
       it has received at least n − 2t attest messages and at least n − t confirm messages for hmax .
       The set of validators returned when calling Db .validators() is simply the set A(hmax ).
       The entire algorithm of detector Db is given in Algorithm 1. We now proceed to show the
       correctness of Db .

       ▶ Lemma 4. All confirm messages from honest nodes contain the same hash h.

       Proof. Let v be the first honest node to broadcast a confirm message for some hash h.
       Since it is the first such message, v must have received n − t attest messages containing h.
       Let v ′ be the first honest node to broadcast a confirm message for some hash h′ =    ̸ h. As
       v ′ is the first such node, it cannot have sent it because it received n − 2t ≥ t + 1 confirm
       messages containing h′ . Hence it follows that it must have received n − t attest messages
       containing h′ . However, this implies that an honest node must have sent two (conflicting)
       attest messages, a contradiction.                                                           ◀

          Note that the lemma implies that any honest node sends at most one confirm message.
       The following result states that detector Db is both correct and efficient.
T. Locher                                                                                            12:7


    Algorithm 1 Detector Db at node v given hash function H. Initially, A = C = {}. hmax :=
arg maxh∈H |C(h)|.
  if first m received from sender and is_valid(m) then
      broadcast attest(H(m))

  if first attest(h) received from w then
      A(h) := A(h) ∪ {w}

  if first confirm(h) received from w then
      C(h) := C(h) ∪ {w}

  if (|A(hmax )| ≥ n − t or |C(hmax )| ≥ n − 2t) and not sent confirm(hmax ) then
      broadcast confirm(hmax )

  function ready()
     return |A(hmax )| ≥ n − 2t and |C(hmax )| ≥ n − t

  function validators()
     return A(hmax )


▶ Lemma 5. Detector Db is a correct and efficient detector.
Proof. The two correctness properties and the efficiency property are proved separately.
Property 1: Assume that Db signals readiness at node v for some message m with hash
   h = H(m). Let w be the first honest node to send a confirm message containing h. As it
   is the first such message, w must have received n − t attest(h) messages. At least n − 2t
   of these messages must have come from honest nodes having broadcast attest(h). Thus,
   |A(h)| ≥ n − 2t will eventually hold at all honest nodes. Node v received at least n − t
   confirm messages, which implies that all honest nodes will eventually receive at least
   n − 2t confirm messages from honest nodes. Since honest nodes only send one confirm
   message, all containing h due to Lemma 4, it must eventually hold that |C(h)| ≥ n − 2t.
   Hence it follows that all honest nodes broadcast confirm(h) and it eventually holds that
   |C(h)| ≥ n − t at all honest nodes.
Property 2: If readiness is signaled at node v and v ′ for messages m and m′ ̸= m, respectively,
   it must hold that |C(H(m))| ≥ n − t at node v and |C(H(m′ ))| ≥ n − t at node v ′ . However,
   these inequalities imply that there must be an honest node that has sent two different
   confirm messages, a contradiction to Lemma 4.
Property 3: Each honest node broadcasts at most one attest message by definition and at
   most one confirm message due to Lemma 4, each of size O(κ), i.e., O(κn2 ) bits are sent
   in total.                                                                                 ◀
   The next lemma states that detector Db eventually signals readiness given an honest
sender that initially broadcasts the message.
▶ Lemma 6. Detector Db satisfies Property 5.
Proof. Since the honest sender broadcasts m, all honest nodes will eventually broadcast
attest(h) for h := H(m). Consequently, all honest nodes will eventually receive at least
n − t attest(h) messages and broadcast confirm(h). When n − t confirm(h) messages
have been received, the readiness condition is reached.                               ◀


                                                                                                   OPODIS 2025
12:8   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


          As far as time complexity is concerned, if the honest sender broadcasts the message at
       the start, it takes 3 rounds of communication until readiness is signaled at all honest nodes.

       ▶ Theorem 7. If the honest sender broadcasts m, the time complexity until Db signals
       readiness for message m is 3.

       Proof. All honest nodes receive m after at most 1 time unit, causing them to broadcast the
       corresponding attest message. After at most 2 time units, |A(H(m))| ≥ n − t holds at all
       honest nodes, triggering the transmission of confirm messages. Thus, after at most 3 time
       units, |C(H(m))| ≥ n − t holds at all honest nodes and Db signals readiness.            ◀

       3.3    Construction with Threshold Signatures
       In this section, an alternative construction based on threshold cryptography is presented.
       Every node must be equipped with a private key share that enables it to threshold-sign a
       message, i.e., it can generate a signature share that can be combined with sufficiently many
       other signature shares to obtain a signature that is valid under some globally known public
       key. Specifically, our setup requires n − t signature shares to construct a signature using
       the function compute_signature. It is possible for the nodes to verify the validity of both
       signatures and signature shares. The key idea is for each node to attach a signature share
       to its attest message. If a node receives a signature, derived from n − t valid signature
       shares, the signature acts as proof that at least n − 2t ≥ t + 1 honest nodes have validated
       the message. As a result, there is no need for confirm messages, which effectively serve to
       convince the nodes that at least one honest node attests to the validity of the message.
           The detector based on threshold signatures, denoted by Dt , is given in Algorithm 2.
       Every node v locally stores the map A : H → 2S , where S is the set of all possible signatures,
       plus a signature σ and a hash hσ , both uninitialized (i.e., set to ⊥) at first.
           After validating the sender’s message m, node v computes h := H(m), which it then
       threshold-signs to produce a signature share σv . The hash h is broadcast together with the
       threshold signature σv in the attest message. When receiving an attest(h, σw ) message,
       the threshold signature σw is validated and then added to the set A(h). Given n − t signature
       shares for some hash h, σ and hσ are set to the computed signature and the corresponding
       hash, respectively. The signature σ, once set, is broadcast in a sig message, which contains
       hσ as well. Alternatively, σ can be set when a sig message with a valid signature is received.
           The function ready() is adapted to return true if and only if |A(hσ )| ≥ n − 2t and a
                                       ̸ ⊥. It is important to note that hmax := arg maxh∈H |A(h)|
       signature has been set, i.e., σ =
       cannot be used because an honest node may receive more assert messages for a hash h ̸= hσ
       when the Byzantine sender and other Byzantine nodes equivocate. For the same reason, the
       function validators() returns the set A(hσ ), guaranteeing that the validators are returned
       from which assert messages containing hσ have been received.
           It remains to prove that detector Dt has the necessary properties as well. Lemma 8 is
       useful in those proofs, stating that the hash for which a signature is derived is unique.

       ▶ Lemma 8. All broadcast sig messages contain a signature for the same hash.

       Proof. Every honest node only broadcasts a signature share for one message from the sender.
       Since n − t signature shares are required to generate a signature, there cannot be enough
       signature shares for two distinct signatures as any two sets of n − t signature shares intersect
       in at least n − 2t ≥ t + 1 nodes.                                                             ◀

          The lemma is used to prove the following result.
T. Locher                                                                                         12:9


   Algorithm 2 Detector Dt at node v given hash function H. Initially, A = {}, σ = hσ = ⊥.
hmax := arg maxh∈H |A(h)|.
  if first m received from sender and is_valid(m) then
      h := H(m)
      σv := threshold_sign(h)
      broadcast attest(h, σv )

  if first attest(h, σw ) received from w and is_valid(h, σw ) then
      A(h) := A(h) ∪ {σw }

  if |A(hmax )| ≥ n − t and σ = ⊥ then
      σ := compute_signature(A(hmax ))
      hσ := hmax

  if sig(h′ , σ ′ ) received and σ = ⊥ and is_valid(h′ , σ ′ ) then
      σ := σ ′
      hσ := h′

  if σ ̸= ⊥ not sent then
      broadcast sig(hσ , σ)

  function ready()
     return |A(hσ )| ≥ n − 2t and σ ̸= ⊥

  function validators()
     return A(hσ )


▶ Lemma 9. Detector Dt is a correct and efficient detector.

Proof. As before, each property is proved separately.
Property 1: Assume that Dt signals readiness at honest node v, i.e., |A| ≥ n − 2t and σ ̸= ⊥.
   Since v broadcasts σ, it eventually holds at all nodes that σ ̸= ⊥. Due to Lemma 8,
   there can only be one such signature. Moreover, σ ̸= ⊥ implies that some node must
   have received n − t valid signature shares to compute σ. Since at least n − 2t of these
   signature shares must have come from honest nodes, which all broadcast attest messages,
   it eventually holds that |A| ≥ n − 2t at all honest nodes.
Property 2: The property follows from Lemma 8.
Property 3: Each honest node broadcasts at most one attest and sig message of size O(κ)
   for a total of O(κn2 ) bits.                                                            ◀

   If the honest sender starts the execution by broadcasting the message, detector Dt signals
readiness eventually.

▶ Lemma 10. Detector Dt satisfies Property 5.

Proof. All honest nodes broadcast an attest message and thus eventually receive at least
n − t signature shares. Subsequently, they compute the signature unless it is received in a
sig message. In either case, the readiness condition is reached.                         ◀



                                                                                                OPODIS 2025
12:10   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


           Lastly, if we assume again that the honest sender initiates the execution by broadcasting
        the message, then 2 rounds of communication suffice for all honest nodes to signal readiness.

        ▶ Theorem 11. If the honest sender broadcasts m, the time complexity until Dt signals
        readiness for message m is 2.

        Proof. Every honest node receives m after 1 time unit. Subsequently, every honest node
        broadcasts its attest message, which is received after 2 time units. Since all honest nodes
        have at least n − t signature shares, they compute a signature σ, unless they received a
        signature earlier, which must be a signature for the same hash due to Lemma 8. Thus, after
        2 time units, |A(hσ )| ≥ n − t and σ ̸= ⊥ holds at all honest nodes.                     ◀

            The primary advantage of Dt compared to Db is its lower time complexity at the expense
        of a more complex setup with private key shares securely deployed on all nodes.

            4    Algorithms
        4.1      Simple Algorithm
        In Bracha’s reliable broadcast algorithm [6], every node broadcasts the message m (at most)
        twice in a successful execution. Including the sender’s initial broadcast to all other nodes,
        the communication complexity is (n − 1)|m| + 2n(n − 1)|m| ≈ 2n2 |m|.
            There are failed executions where the communication complexity is nearly as large, even
        if only the sender is Byzantine: Consider the scenario where the Byzantine sender sends
        message m to 2t nodes and message m′ ̸= m to the remaining t nodes. The honest nodes
        broadcast an echo message containing the message received from the sender. However, the
        Byzantine sender merely sends an echo message containing m to t other nodes, i.e., there
        are t nodes that receive 2t + 1 echo messages for m and hence broadcast ready messages
        containing m. Since honest nodes solely receive t ready messages, none of them delivers
        m and the execution does not terminate. Assuming that |m| = |m′ |, the communication
        complexity of this execution is (n − 1)2 |m| + t(n − 1)|m| ≈ 43 n2 |m|.
            Armed with a detector such as Db and Dt introduced in §3, a simple reliable broadcast
        algorithm, denoted by As , can be constructed easily, illustrating the effectiveness of the
        detector abstraction. In this algorithm, the sender first broadcasts m. If D signals readiness
        for m and m is locally available, m is forwarded to the nodes not in D.validators() before
        delivering m. The nodes cache received messages until the execution terminates. The space
        complexity can be bounded by only caching at most one message per node.2 The detector
        can use any cryptographically strong hash function H. Algorithm As , given in Algorithm 3,
        is a correct reliable broadcast algorithm with the desired properties.

        ▶ Theorem 12. Algorithm As using detector Db or Dt implements reliable broadcast in the
        asynchronous communication model with t < n/3 Byzantine nodes.

        Proof. Since an honest sender broadcasts m as the first step, Property 5 holds when pairing
        As with either detector. Clearly, m is only delivered when readiness is signaled. On the
        other hand, readiness implies that some honest nodes have message m, which they transmit
        to all nodes not in D.validators() when ready, leading to the eventual delivery of m at all
        nodes. Thus, Property 6 holds as well.                                                   ◀


        2
            In practice, a message may only be cached if it carries the dedicated sender’s signature. In this case,
            equivocation can be detected and penalized.
T. Locher                                                                                          12:11


   Algorithm 3 Algorithm As using detector D executed at node v.
  if reliable_broadcast(m) invoked and v = sender then
      broadcast m

  ▷ Any received message is cached.

  if D.ready() and (the corresponding) m ̸= ⊥ and not delivered m then
     for w ∈ V \ D.validators() do
         send m to w
     deliver(m)


In comparison to Bracha’s algorithm, the communication complexity of As is lower by a
factor of 3. Moreover, As is clearly superior in the case of failed executions.

▶ Theorem 13 (Communication complexity). It holds for algorithm As using detector Db or
Dt that L(n) < 32 n for successful executions and L(n) = 0 for failed executions.

Proof. If the execution is successful, an honest sender’s initial broadcast of m contributes
(n − 1)|m| bits. Every honest node sends m to all nodes not in the set D.validators() of
cardinality at least n − 2t, resulting in a communication complexity of
                                            2 2
   (n − 1)|m| + 2t(n − 1)|m| + O(κn2 ) <      n |m| + O(κn2 )
                                            3
and thus L(n) < 23 n.
   Since algorithm As is a detector-triggered algorithm and both Db or Dt are efficient,
L(n) = 0 holds for failed executions due to Lemma 3.                                  ◀

Lastly, As paired with Dt achieves a lower time complexity than Bracha’s algorithm.

▶ Theorem 14 (Time complexity). If the sender is honest, then the time complexity of As
corresponds to the time complexity of the used detector Db or Dt .

Proof. All honest nodes receive m after at most 1 time unit if the sender is honest. Since the
time complexity of both detectors is greater than 1 and As delivers m when m is available
and readiness is signaled without waiting for any further messages, the claim follows.      ◀

4.2    Coding-Based Algorithm
Algorithm As has a communication complexity that grows quadratically with the number of
nodes, which is far from optimal. The goal is to devise a reliable broadcast algorithm that
has a communication complexity in the order of n|m| for successful executions but wastes
little bandwidth in the case of failed executions.
     All known reliable broadcast algorithms with a communication complexity of O(n|m|)
make use of erasure (or error-correcting) codes, disseminating fragments of m of size inversely
proportional to n. While these algorithms are more efficient, it is usually trivial for a
Byzantine sender to trigger executions that are bound to fail but cause as many bits to be
sent as in successful executions. The problem is that, given a fragment alone, it cannot be
determined if it is part of a valid encoding. Merkle proofs can be used, e.g., to efficiently
check if a received fragment is consistent with some root hash but that does not guarantee
that the fragments themselves have been constructed using an erasure (or error-correcting)



                                                                                                  OPODIS 2025
12:12   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


        code. A Byzantine sender can exploit this fact, creating a valid Merkle tree over random
        pieces of data instead of using a coding procedure and trigger the execution. Every node that
        receives enough fragments can then deduce that the fragments have not been constructed
        correctly and abort the execution. However, this check typically happens at the end of the
        algorithm, i.e., as many bits as in a successful execution have already been transmitted.
            Detectors can remedy this situation as the following sketch of an algorithm using an
        (n, n − 2t)-erasure code illustrates: When readiness is signaled at a node that has received m
        from the sender, it constructs all n fragments and broadcasts its own fragment. As readiness
        implies that there must be at least n − 2t honest nodes that have received m from the sender
        when using either Db or Dt , each node receives at least n − 2t valid fragments and is thus
        able to reconstruct m. Given m, each node can then derive and broadcast its own fragment
        before delivering m. Since t < n/3, the communication complexity of this algorithm is

                                     |m|
           (n − 1)|m| + n(n − 1)           + O(κn2 log(n)) < 4n|m| + O(κn2 log(n)).
                                    n − 2t
            In the following, a more complex algorithm, denoted by Ac , is introduced that achieves a
        lower communication complexity. Algorithm Ac uses an (n, n − t)-erasure code, encoding
        fragments f1 , . . . , fn of the message m in such a way that any n − t out of n fragments can
        be used to recover the message m. The size of a fragment is

                     |m|
           |f | :=       + O(log(n)),                                                                  (1)
                     n−t
        where the O(log(n)) stems from the fact that erasure codes work with a field of cardinality
        at least n. Additionally, algorithm Ac uses an (n, n − 2t)-erasure code, encoding fragments
        of the fragments, called mini-fragments [23]. A fragment can be recovered using any n − 2t
        out of n mini-fragments of size

                           |m|
           |µ| :=                    + O(log(n)).                                                      (2)
                     (n − t)(n − 2t)

            As algorithm Ac works with (mini-)fragments, the hash function H used by the detector is
        evaluated over the (mini-)fragments instead of the message m itself. For any i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n},
        let πi and πij denote the (integrity) proof of fragment fi and the j th mini-fragment of fi ,
        respectively. Merkle proofs are commonly used to prove the integrity of (mini-)fragments,
        with a size of |π| ∈ O(κ log(n)). In this case, the hash function H returns the Merkle root
        hash. An alternative would be to use a commitment scheme such as KZG [18], reducing the
        size to |π| ∈ O(κ) for an improved communication complexity. The disadvantage is that it
        requires a trusted setup and introduces an additional cryptographic assumption [4]. Since Ac
        is also a detector-triggered algorithm, there is only one valid hash h for a specific message m
        that must be considered. Thus, we assume that received fragments and mini-fragments for
        any other hash are silently discarded. Each node vi stores any received fragment fj together
        with πj in the set F . Similarly, received mini-fragments µij of its own fragment fi are stored
        in the set M alongside πij and πi .
            Algorithm Ac utilizes several functions: Given message m and index i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, the
        function get_fragment returns the fragment-proof pair (fi , πi ). In a similar manner, given m
        and indices i and j, the function get_mini_fragment returns the tuple (µij , πij , πi ). Once at
        least n − t fragments are collected in the set F , the message m is derived from the fragments
        using the function recover_message, whereas node vi ’s fragment fi can be recovered using
        the function recover_fragment after collecting at least n − 2t mini-fragments in the set M .
T. Locher                                                                                                  12:13


   Algorithm 4 Algorithm Ac at node vi using detector D. initially, F = M = {}, and m = ⊥.
  if reliable_broadcast(m) invoked and vi = sender then
      broadcast m

  ▷ Received and verified tuples (fj , πj ) and (µij , πij , πj ) are stored in F and M , respectively.

  if D.ready() then
     if m ̸= ⊥ and not sent mini-fragments before then
         for vj ∈ V \ D.validators() do
            (µji , πji , πj ) := get_mini_fragment(m, j, i)
            send mini-fragment(µji , πji , πj ) to vj

     if (fi , πi ) ∈ F and not sent (fi , πi ) before then
         for vj ∈ V \ D.validators() do
              send fragment(fi , πi ) to vj

     if (fi , πi ) ∈
                   / F and m ̸= ⊥ then
         (fi , πi ) := get_fragment(m, i)
         F := F ∪ {(fi , πi )}

     if (fi , πi ) ∈
                   / F and |M | ≥ n − 2t then
         (fi , πi ) := recover_fragment(M )
         F := F ∪ {(fi , πi )}

     if m = ⊥ and |F | ≥ n − t then
        m := recover_message(F )

     if sent fi and sent mini-fragments and m ̸= ⊥ and not delivered m then
         deliver(m)


    The sender starts the execution by broadcasting m. Once readiness is signaled, the
following actions may occur. An honest node vi sends messages in two situations: First,
if m is available locally, vi sends mini-fragment(µji , πji , πj ) to vj for all j where vj ∈
                                                                                            /
D.validators(). Second, if fi is available, it sends fragment(fi , πi ) to all nodes not in
the set D.validators() as well. Node vi can obtain fragment fi by invoking the function
get_fragment when m is available. Alternatively, fi can be recovered from n − 2t mini-
fragments in the set M using the function recover_fragment. The message itself can
be recovered after collecting n − t fragments in F . Lastly, once m is available and the
fragment and mini-fragments are sent as stated before, m is delivered. Algorithm Ac , given
in Algorithm 4, is a correct reliable broadcast algorithm.
▶ Theorem 15. Algorithm Ac using detector Db or Dt implements reliable broadcast in the
asynchronous communication model with t < n/3 Byzantine nodes.
Proof. Property 5 holds when using either detector because an honest sender initially
broadcasts the message. It follows from the specification of the algorithm that a message
is only delivered when readiness was signaled beforehand. Thus, it remains to show that
readiness implies delivery to show that Property 6 holds.



                                                                                                          OPODIS 2025
12:14   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


            Assume that readiness is signaled at some node. Due to Property 1, the detectors at all
        honest nodes eventually signal readiness. Since there must be an honest node that received
        at least n − t attest messages if either Db or Dt is used, there are n − 2t honest nodes that
        have received m. As soon as these n − 2t honest nodes receive m and reach the readiness
        condition, they will send mini-fragments as defined in Algorithm 4. For any honest node v
        that did not receive m, it holds that v is not in the validators() set of any honest node
        because it never broadcasts an attest message. Hence it follows that every honest node
        receives at least n − 2t mini-fragments and is able to recover and send its fragment. As a
        result, every honest node that did not get m will eventually obtain at least n − t fragments
        and reconstruct the message. Thus, m ̸= ⊥ holds at all honest nodes eventually, which leads
        to the delivery of m after sending the fragments and mini-fragments.                       ◀

           Algorithm Ac indeed achieves a lower communication complexity than the coding-based
        algorithm sketched before.
                                                                                            1
        ▶ Theorem 16 (Communication complexity). It holds for algorithm Ac that L(n) < 2 + 2n
        for successful executions and L(n) = 0 for failed executions.

        Proof. In addition to the sender’s initial broadcast, each honest node sends one fragment
        message and mini-fragment message each to every node in the set V \ D.validators() of
        cardinality at most 2t ≤ n − t − 1 for a communication complexity of

          C(n, |m|) = (n − 1)|m| + n(n − t − 1)(|µ| + |f | + O(|π|))
                                                                         
                  (1),(2)                            |m|           |m|
                                                                            + O n2 (|π| + log(n))
                                                                                                  
                    ≤ (n − 1)|m| + n(n − t − 1)            +
                                                    n − t (n − t)(n − 2t)
                                                                      
                                               |m|           |m|
                    < (n − 1)|m| + n(n − t)         +
                                              n − t (n − t)(n − 2t)
                           n
                              |m| + O n2 (|π| + log(n))
                                                        
                       −
                          n−t
                                                   
                                   n        n
                                                − 1 |m| + O n2 (|π| + log(n))
                                                                              
                    = 2n|m| +          −
                                 n − 2t n − t
                   n>3t         |m|
                                    + O n2 (|π| + log(n)) ,
                                                           
                    < 2n|m| +
                                 2
                                         1
        which implies that L(n) < 2 + 2n   .
           The result L(n) = 0 for failed executions follows from the fact that Db and Dt are efficient
        and Ac is a detector-triggered algorithm.                                                    ◀

        Regarding the time complexity of Ac , the same result as for algorithm As holds.

        ▶ Theorem 17 (Time complexity). If the sender is honest, then the time complexity of Ac
        corresponds to the time complexity of the used detector Db or Dt .

        Proof. If the sender is honest, all nodes obtain m after 1 time unit. The time complexity of
        both detectors is greater than 1. As soon as readiness is signaled, every honest node can
        compute and send its fragment and mini-fragments before delivering m without delay. ◀

         5     Related Work
        As discussed in §1, Bracha presented the first reliable broadcast algorithm with a communica-
        tion complexity of O(n2 |m|) [6]. While the communication complexity is high, the algorithm
        is error-free, i.e., it does not depend on any cryptographic assumptions. The algorithm
T. Locher                                                                                           12:15


based on erasure coding by Cachin and Tessaro improved the communication complexity to
O(n|m| + κn2 log(n)), which is asymptotically optimal for |m| ∈ Ω(κn log(n)) [8]. However,
it is not error-free as it uses cryptographically strong hash functions.
    With respect to error-free reliable broadcast, the time complexity has been reduced
successively from O(n|m| + n4 log(n)) [27] to O(n|m| + n3 log(n)) [26] and then to O(n|m| +
n2 log(n)) [3]. It has further been shown how to achieve the bound O(n|m| + n2 log(n3 /ε))
using a probabilistic algorithm, guaranteeing validity but agreement and totality only hold
with probability 1 − ε [1].
    As far as algorithms are concerned that make use of cryptographic primitives, an algorithm
has been presented with a communication complexity of O(n|m| + κn2 ) using only collision-
resistant hash functions [10], improving upon the algorithm by Cachin and Tessaro. The
downside of this algorithm is that it has a higher computational cost and is not balanced. As
stated in §4.2, when using a commitment scheme such as KZG [18] instead of Merkle proofs
in the algorithm by Cachin and Tessaro, the same communication complexity can be attained
without sacrificing the balanced nature of the algorithm and without inducing a higher
computational cost. The downside is that a trusted setup and an additional cryptographic
assumption is required. Alternatively, the same bound can be achieved using a public key
infrastructure and cryptographic accumulators [26]. Threshold signatures can be used to
obtain an improved bound on the communication complexity of O(n|m| + κn + n2 ) [3].
   The constant in the O(n|m|) term is at least 3 in all of these algorithms. In an effort to
improve efficiency for large messages, algorithms have been proposed to bring this constant
down, first to 2 [21] and then to 3/2 [22, 23], which is conjectured to be optimal. Thus, the
best known algorithms come close to the lower bound of Ω(n|m| + n2 ) [13].
    The reliable broadcast problem has been studied in a variety of models. It has been
shown how stochastic sampling can be used to obtain a probabilistic algorithm violating
each property with a fixed probability [16]. Moreover, reliable broadcast has also been
considered in a model with dynamic membership [15]. The efficacy when combining Bracha’s
algorithm with Dolev’s reliable communication protocol [12] to broadcast messages reliably
in partially connected networks has been analyzed using simulations [5]. Lastly, the problem
that composing n parallel reliable broadcast instances can lead to non-termination has also
been addressed, proposing quit-resistant reliable broadcast enabling parties to quit early [25].



 6     Conclusion

Existing reliable broadcast algorithms are not efficient in failed executions in the worst case.
In this paper, the concept of detectors is introduced, supporting reliable broadcast algorithms
in keeping the communication complexity low in the failure case. Detectors further have
powerful properties that facilitate the design of reliable broadcast algorithms. Moreover,
they can reduce or even eliminate redundant transmissions in the absence of faults, which
may prove to be relevant in practice. A reliable broadcast algorithm has been presented that
makes use of a detector, achieving an overhead factor of 2 + O(1/n), which is nearly optimal
when considering algorithms where the sender broadcasts the message first. However, there
is still a gap between the achieved bound and the lower bound of 5/3 that can be explored.
Another open question is whether a lower overhead factor can be obtained when the sender
disperses the message to a strict subset of the nodes. Since fewer nodes obtain the message
in this step, this modification increases the onus on the honest nodes to ensure that every
node obtains the message eventually. These questions may be addressed in future research.




                                                                                                   OPODIS 2025
12:16   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


             References
         1   Ittai Abraham and Gilad Asharov. Gradecast in Synchrony and Reliable Broadcast in
             Asynchrony with Optimal Resilience, Efficiency, and Unconditional Security. In Proc. 43rd
             ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 392–398, 2022.
             doi:10.1145/3519270.3538451.
         2   Ittai Abraham, Philipp Jovanovic, Mary Maller, Sarah Meiklejohn, Gilad Stern, and Alin
             Tomescu. Reaching Consensus for Asynchronous Key Generation. In Proc. 42nd ACM
             Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), pages 363–373, 2021.
         3   Nicolas Alhaddad, Sourav Das, Sisi Duan, Ling Ren, Mayank Varia, Zhuolun Xiang, and
             Haibin Zhang. Balanced Byzantine Reliable Broadcast with Near-Optimal Communication
             and Improved Computation. In Proc. 43rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed
             Computing (PODC), pages 399–417, 2022. doi:10.1145/3519270.3538475.
         4   Dan Boneh and Xavier Boyen. Short Signatures Without Random Oracles. In Proc. 23rd
             Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques
             (Eurocrypt), pages 56–73, 2004. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24676-3_4.
         5   Silvia Bonomi, Jérémie Decouchant, Giovanni Farina, Vincent Rahli, and Sébastien Tixeuil.
             Practical Byzantine Reliable Broadcast on Partially Connected Networks. In Proc. 41st
             International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pages 506–516, 2021.
             doi:10.1109/ICDCS51616.2021.00055.
         6   Gabriel Bracha. Asynchronous Byzantine Agreement Protocols. Information and Computation,
             75(2):130–143, 1987. doi:10.1016/0890-5401(87)90054-X.
         7   Christian Cachin and Jonathan A Poritz. Secure Intrusion-tolerant Replication on the Internet.
             In Proc. International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN), pages 167–176,
             2002. doi:10.1109/DSN.2002.1028897.
         8   Christian Cachin and Stefano Tessaro. Asynchronous Verifiable Information Dispersal. In
             Proc. 24th IEEE Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS), pages 191–201, 2005.
             doi:10.1109/RELDIS.2005.9.
         9   George Danezis, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, Alberto Sonnino, and Alexander Spiegelman. Narwhal
             and Tusk: A DAG-based Mempool and Efficient BFT Consensus. In Proc. 17th European
             Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys), pages 34–50, 2022. doi:10.1145/3492321.
             3519594.
        10   Sourav Das, Zhuolun Xiang, and Ling Ren. Asynchronous Data Dissemination and its
             Applications. In Proc. 28th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
             (CCS), pages 2705–2721, 2021. doi:10.1145/3460120.3484808.
        11   Sourav Das, Thomas Yurek, Zhuolun Xiang, Andrew Miller, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, and Ling
             Ren. Practical Asynchronous Distributed Key Generation. In Proc. IEEE Symposium on
             Security and Privacy (S&P), pages 2518–2534, 2022. doi:10.1109/SP46214.2022.9833584.
        12   Danny Dolev. Unanimity in an Unknown and Unreliable Environment. In Proc. 22nd
             Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 159–168, 1981.
             doi:10.1109/SFCS.1981.53.
        13   Danny Dolev and Rüdiger Reischuk. Bounds on Information Exchange for Byzantine Agreement.
             Journal of the ACM (JACM), 32(1):191–204, 1985. doi:10.1145/2455.214112.
        14   Sisi Duan, Michael K. Reiter, and Haibin Zhang. BEAT: Asynchronous BFT Made Practical.
             In Proc. 25th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), pages
             2028–2041, 2018. doi:10.1145/3243734.3243812.
        15   Rachid Guerraoui, Jovan Komatovic, Petr Kuznetsov, Yvonne-Anne Pignolet, Dragos-Adrian
             Seredinschi, and Andrei Tonkikh. Dynamic Byzantine Reliable Broadcast. In Proc. 24th
             International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS), pages 23:1–23:18,
             2020. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2020.23.
        16   Rachid Guerraoui, Petr Kuznetsov, Matteo Monti, Matej Pavlovic, Dragos-Adrian Seredinschi,
             and Yann Vonlanthen. Scalable Byzantine Reliable Broadcast. In Proc. 33rd International
             Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), 2019.
T. Locher                                                                                            12:17


17   Bingyong Guo, Zhenliang Lu, Qiang Tang, Jing Xu, and Zhenfeng Zhang. Dumbo: Faster Asyn-
     chronous BFT Protocols. In Proc. 27th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
     Security (CCS), pages 803–818, 2020. doi:10.1145/3372297.3417262.
18   Aniket Kate, Gregory M Zaverucha, and Ian Goldberg. Constant-Size Commitments to
     Polynomials and Their Applications. In Proc. 16th International Conference on the Theory
     and Application of Cryptology and Information Security (Asiacrypt), pages 177–194, 2010.
     doi:10.1007/978-3-642-17373-8_11.
19   Idit Keidar, Eleftherios Kokoris-Kogias, Oded Naor, and Alexander Spiegelman. All You Need
     is DAG. In Proc. 42nd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC),
     pages 165–175, 2021. doi:10.1145/3465084.3467905.
20   Eleftherios Kokoris-Kogias, Dahlia Malkhi, and Alexander Spiegelman. Asynchronous Dis-
     tributed Key Generation for Computationally-Secure Randomness, Consensus, and Threshold
     Signatures. In Proc. 27th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS),
     pages 1751–1767, 2020. doi:10.1145/3372297.3423364.
21   Thomas Locher. Byzantine Reliable Broadcast with Low Communication and Time Complexity.
     In Proc. 28th International Conference on Principles of Distributed Systems (OPODIS), volume
     324, pages 16:1–16:17, 2024. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2024.16.
22   Thomas Locher and Victor Shoup. Improving the Round Complexity of MiniCast. Cryptology
     ePrint Archive, Paper 2025/779, 2025. URL: https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/779.
23   Thomas Locher and Victor Shoup. MiniCast: Minimizing the Communication Complexity
     of Reliable Broadcast. In Proc. 44th Annual International Conference on the Theory and
     Applications of Cryptographic Techniques (Eurocrypt), 2025.
24   Andrew Miller, Yu Xia, Kyle Croman, Elaine Shi, and Dawn Song. The Honey Badger of
     BFT Protocols. In Proc. 23rd ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
     (CCS), pages 31–42, 2016. doi:10.1145/2976749.2978399.
25   Mose Mizrahi Erbes and Roger Wattenhofer. Quit-Resistant Reliable Broadcast and Efficient
     Terminating Gather. In Proc. 28th International Conference on Principles of Distributed
     Systems (OPODIS), volume 324, pages 15:1–15:22, 2024. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.OPODIS.2024.
     15.
26   Kartik Nayak, Ling Ren, Elaine Shi, Nitin H Vaidya, and Zhuolun Xiang. Improved Extension
     Protocols for Byzantine Broadcast and Agreement. In Proc. 34th International Symposium on
     Distributed Computing (DISC), 2020.
27   Arpita Patra. Error-free Multi-valued Broadcast and Byzantine Agreement with Optimal Com-
     munication Complexity. In Proc. 15th International Conference on Principles of Distributed
     Systems (OPODIS), pages 34–49, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-25873-2_4.
28   Victor Shoup. Sing a song of Simplex. In Proc. 38th International Symposium on Distributed
     Computing (DISC), pages 37:1–37:22, 2024. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.DISC.2024.37.
29   Alexander Spiegelman, Neil Giridharan, Alberto Sonnino, and Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias. Bull-
     shark: DAG BFT Protocols Made Practical. In Proc. 29th ACM Conference on Computer and
     Communications Security (CCS), pages 2705–2718, 2022. doi:10.1145/3548606.3559361.
30   Thomas Yurek, Licheng Luo, Jaiden Fairoze, Aniket Kate, and Andrew Miller. hbACSS:
     How to Robustly Share Many Secrets. In Proc. 29th Annual Network and Distributed System
     Security Symposium (NDSS), 2022.
31   Haibin Zhang and Sisi Duan. PACE: Fully Parallelizable BFT from Reproposable Byzantine
     Agreement. In Proc. 29th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS),
     pages 3151–3164, 2022. doi:10.1145/3548606.3559348.




                                                                                                    OPODIS 2025
12:18   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case



                                                                             Msg m
                                                                             assert
                                                                             confirm




           Figure 1 Fault-free execution of Db , each node receiving n assert messages before receiving
        n − t confirm messages.


         A     Appendix
        A.1    Discussion and Practical Considerations
        It is worth noting that the presented algorithms are not only of theoretical interest. Under
        benign network conditions, the delay until the detector signals readiness can be sufficient
        for all nodes to report that they received the sender’s message in a fault-free execution. As
        an example, Figure 1 depicts an execution of detector Db where every node receives not
        only m but also all n = 4 assert messages (marked with a white circle) before receiving
        n − t = 3 confirm messages (marked with a black circle). In this execution, |A(hmax )| = V
        holds at every node, and thus neither As nor Ac sends any additional messages, implying
        that L(n) = 1, i.e., there is no overhead with respect to the message distribution itself.
            If each node sends the same amount of data up to a constant factor, the algorithm is
        called balanced [3]. Formally, let bmin and bmax denote the minimum and maximum number
        of bits sent by honest nodes in any (successful or failed) execution. If bmax ≤ c · bmin for
        some constant c ≥ 1, then the algorithm is called balanced. The analysis of algorithm Ac in
        §4.2 shows that the sender effectively sends as many bits as all other nodes combined, i.e.,
        Ac is not balanced, as opposed to algorithm As . The lack of balance may not be an issue
        in practice, in particular when all nodes frequently initiate instances of reliable broadcast
        at nearly the same time. Naturally, having a balanced algorithm is preferable when there
        are only a few instances at any time and the latency must be kept small when broadcasting
        large messages. An obvious question is whether a balanced algorithm exists that guarantees
        that L(n) = 0 for failed executions. Unfortunately, this is only possible if every node sends
        many bits as the following argument shows. Assuming that the entire message m must be
        known in order to determine its validity, an honest node will only send m or parts of it if m
        is available locally or it received sufficient assurance that m is a valid message. Obviously,
        t Byzantine nodes may erroneously report that m is valid, which implies that an honest
        node must receive an assurance from at least t + 1 nodes in the absence of m. Hence, an
        honest sender must send m to at least t + 1 honest nodes, i.e., the sender must send at
        least Ω(n|m|) bits. A consequence of this result is that any algorithm that guarantees that
        L(n) = 0 for failed executions where some nodes send o(n|m|) bits cannot be balanced. It
        further implies that algorithms that guarantee that L(n) ∈ o(n) cannot be balanced or they
        cannot guarantee that L(n) = 0 for failed executions.
T. Locher                                                                                            12:19


A.2        Lower Bound
In this section, we consider the class A of algorithms where the sender sends m to all other
nodes in the first step and prove the following result in the asynchronous communication
model.

▶ Theorem 18. If communication is asynchronous and there are t < n/3 Byzantine nodes,
it holds that L(n) ≥ 53 for every reliable broadcast algorithm A ∈ A.

Proof. We consider the following three scenarios, each having a specific set V, |V| = t,
excluding the sender denoted by vs :
1. The sender vs is honest but the nodes in V are Byzantine.
2. The sender vs is Byzantine and sends m to the nodes in V \ V. All nodes other than the
   sender are honest.
3. The sender vs is Byzantine and sends m to the honest nodes in V \ V. There are t
   Byzantine nodes in V \ V.

    The nodes in V may send messages indicating that they did not receive m from the sender
to all other nodes except the sender but any other message from these nodes is scheduled to
arrive after the delivery of m. Note that a message must be delivered in Scenario (1) due to
the validity condition.
    Let V̄ denote the complement of V excluding the sender, i.e., V̄ := V \V \{vs }. Scenario (1)
and Scenario (2) are indistinguishable for any node v ∈ V̄ because it is impossible to
differentiate between the sender or the nodes in V being dishonest.
    Moreover, Scenario (2) and Scenario (3) are indistinguishable for any node v ∈ V̄ that is
honest in both executions if the Byzantine nodes behave correctly toward the honest nodes
in V̄. indistinguishability holds even if the Byzantine nodes exhibit faulty behavior toward
the nodes in V because no such information is received from nodes in V. Consequently,
Scenario (1) and Scenario (3) are also indistinguishable for nodes in V̄ that are honest in
both executions.
    Since the nodes in V̄ deliver m in Scenario (1) and Scenario (2) is indistinguishable
for these nodes, they deliver m in Scenario (2) as well. However, the totality condition
implies that the nodes in V must also deliver m. Let bi denote the number of bits that
vi ∈ V \ V sends to nodes in V before delivering m, excluding the sender’s initial message, in
Scenario (1).
                                                                                 P
    Assume that there is a subset S ⊂ V \V, vs ∈ S and |S| = n−2t, such that vi ∈S bi < t|m|.
In this case, we define that the nodes in V̄ \ S are the (n − t − 1) − (n − 2t − 1) = t Byzantine
nodes in Scenario (3). Since Scenario (1) and Scenario (3) are indistinguishable for the honest
nodes in V \ V, they send the same messages to nodes in V as in Scenario (1). However, the
nodes in V receive fewer than t|m| bits if the Byzantine nodes refuse to send any bits. Thus,
there must be an honest node in V that does not deliver m, violating the totality condition.
It follows that we must have that
                                             X
    ∀S ⊂ V \ V, vs ∈ S and |S| = n − 2t :         bi ≥ t|m|,
                                                  vi ∈S


and therefore the average number of bits sent must be at least

              1        X                t|m|
   b̄ :=                        bi ≥          .                                              (3)
           |V \ V|                     n − 2t
                     vi ∈V \V




                                                                                                    OPODIS 2025
12:20   Efficient Byzantine Reliable Broadcast in the Failure Case


        Thus, for n = 3t + 1, it must hold that
             X                     (3)    t|m|
                      bi = b̄|V \ V| ≥          |V \ V|
                                         n − 2t
           vi ∈V \V

                            |m|t(n − t) n→∞ 2
                        =                =    n|m|.
                              n − 2t        3
            Since Scenario (3) is indistinguishable from Scenario (1) irrespective of how the t Byzantine
        nodes are chosen among the nodes in V̄, at least 23 n|m| bits are sent in Scenario (1) as well.
        As the honest sender broadcasts m first, the total communication complexity must be at
        least n|m| + 32 n|m| = 53 n|m|.                                                                ◀

           This theorem shows that algorithm Ac is nearly optimal for algorithms in class A.
        Moreover, the result is interesting in that the lower bound exceeds the upper bound of L(n) ≤
        3
        2 of the best known balanced algorithm that does not aim to minimize the communication
        complexity for failed executions. It is an open question whether any algorithm where the
        sender sends αn|m| bits, for some α ∈ (0, 1), can achieve a better communication complexity.
        We conjecture that little can be gained by choosing α < 1 if L(n) = 0 must hold for all failed
        executions.
