                                         Maximum Weight Independent Set in Graphs with no Long Claws
                                                         in Quasi-Polynomial Time∗
                                               Peter Gartland†         Daniel Lokshtanov‡           Tomáš Masařík§           Marcin Pilipczuk¶
                                                                      Michał Pilipczuk‖              Paweł Rzążewski∗∗
arXiv:2305.15738v4 [cs.DS] 23 Sep 2025




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                   We show that the Maximum Weight Independent Set problem (MWIS) can be solved
                                               in quasi-polynomial time on H-free graphs (graphs excluding a fixed graph H as an induced
                                               subgraph) for every H whose every connected component is a path or a subdivided claw (i.e.,
                                               a tree with at most three leaves). This completes the dichotomy of the complexity of MWIS
                                               in F-free graphs for any finite set F of graphs into NP-hard cases and cases solvable in quasi-
                                               polynomial time, and corroborates the conjecture that the cases not known to be NP-hard are
                                               actually polynomial-time solvable.
                                                   The key graph-theoretic ingredient in our result is as follows. Fix an integer t ⩾ 1. Let
                                               St,t,t be the graph created from three paths on t edges by identifying one endpoint of each path
                                               into a single vertex. We show that, given a graph G, one can in polynomial time find either an
                                               induced St,t,t in G, or a balanced separator consisting of O(log |V (G)|) vertex neighborhoods in
                                               G, or an extended strip decomposition of G (a decomposition almost as useful for recursion for
                                               MWIS as a partition into connected components) with each particle of weight multiplicatively
                                               smaller than the weight of G. This is a strengthening of a result of Majewski, Masařík, Novotná,
                                               Okrasa, Pilipczuk, Rzążewski, and Sokołowski [ICALP 2022] which provided such an extended
                                               strip decomposition only after the deletion of O(log |V (G)|) vertex neighborhoods. To reach
                                               the final result, we employ an involved branching strategy that relies on the structural lemma
                                               presented above.




                                           ∗
                                              Pe. G. and Da. L. were supported by NSF award CCF-2008838. This work is a part of the project BOBR (Mi. P.
                                         and P. Rz.) that has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
                                         Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 948057). T. M. was supported by Polish
                                         National Science Centre SONATA-17 grant number 2021/43/D/ST6/03312. Ma. P. was supported by Polish National
                                         Science Centre SONATA BIS-12 grant number 2022/46/E/ST6/00143. Ma. P. is also part of BARC, supported by
                                         the VILLUM Foundation grant 16582.
                                            †
                                              University of California, Santa Barbara, USA, petergartland@ucsb.edu.
                                            ‡
                                              University of California, Santa Barbara, USA, daniello@ucsb.edu.
                                            §
                                              Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland, masarik@mimuw.edu.pl.
                                            ¶
                                              Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland and IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark,
                                         marcin.pilipczuk@mimuw.edu.pl.
                                            ‖
                                              Institute of Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland, michal.pilipczuk@mimuw.edu.pl.
                                           ∗∗
                                              Faculty of Mathematics and Information Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Poland and Institute of
                                         Informatics, University of Warsaw, Poland, pawel.rzazewski@pw.edu.pl.
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                        1
  1.1 Our techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
       1.1.1 The key structural result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
       1.1.2 Branching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6

2 Preliminaries                                                                                      11

3 Extended Strip Lemma                                                                              15
  3.1 Turning separations in H into separators in G . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
  3.2 Locally cleaning an extended strip decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
  3.3 A wall avoiding N [v] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  3.4 Finding a {t, t, t}-pyramid in a v-safe wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
  3.5 The case of Π being well-connected to a v-pure wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
  3.6 Cleaning the backdoors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
  3.7 Applying three-in-a-tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

4 Algorithm                                                                                       35
  4.1 Definitions and Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
  4.2 Preliminary Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
      4.2.1 Cannot Pack Many Balanced Separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
      4.2.2 Cannot Pack Many Boosted Balanced Separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
  4.3 Presentation of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
  4.4 Correctness and Runtime Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

5 Conclusion                                                                                         55
1    Introduction
The Maximum Weight Independent Set (MWIS) problem takes as input a graph G with ver-
tex weights w : V (G) → Z⩾0 and asks for a set X ⊆ V (G) of maximum possible weight that is
independent (sometimes also called stable): no two vertices of X are adjacent. This classic combina-
torial problem plays an important role as a central hard problem in several areas of computational
complexity: it appears as one of the NP-hard problems on the celebrated list of Karp [Kar72], it is
the archetypical W[1]-hard problem in parameterized complexity [DF95], and is one of the classic
problems difficult to approximate [Hås99].
    In the light of the hardness of MWIS within multiple paradigms, one may ask what assumptions
on the input make the problem easier. More formally, we can ask for which graph classes G, the
assumption that the input graph comes from G allows for faster algorithms for MWIS. For example,
if G is the class of planar graphs, MWIS remains NP-hard, but the classic layering approach of
Baker [Bak94] yields a polynomial-time approximation scheme and simple kernelization arguments
give a parameterized algorithm [CFK+ 15].
    This motivates a more methodological study of the complexity of MWIS depending on the
graph class G the input comes from. As the space of all graph classes is too wide and admits strange
artificial examples, the arguably simplest regularization assumption is to restrict the attention to
hereditary graph classes, i.e., graph classes closed under vertex deletion. Every hereditary graph
class G can be characterized by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs: the (possibly infinite) set F
of minimal (under vertex deletion) graphs that are not members of G. Then, we have G ∈ G if and
only if no member of F is an induced subgraph of G; when we want to emphasize the set F, we
refer to the graph class G as the class of F-free graphs and shorten it to H-free graphs if F = {H}.
    If a problem turns out to be easier in a class of F -free graphs, in many cases it is a single
forbidden induced subgraph H ∈ F that is responsible for tractability, and the problem at hand is
already easier in H-free graphs. A prime example of this phenomenon are the classes of line graphs
and claw-free graphs. Recall that a line graph of a graph H is a graph G with V (G) = E(H) where
two vertices of G are adjacent if their corresponding edges in H are incident to the same vertex.
Observe that MWIS in a line graph G of a graph H becomes the Maximum Weight Matching
problem in the pre-image graph H; a problem solvable in polynomial time by deep combinatorial
techniques [Edm65]. It turns out that the tractability of MWIS in line graphs can be explained
solely by one of the minimal forbidden induced subgraphs for the class of line graphs, namely the
claw S1,1,1 . (For integers a, b, c ⩾ 1, by Sa,b,c we denote the tree with exactly three leaves, within
distance a, b, and c from the unique vertex of degree 3.) As proven in 1980, MWIS is polynomial-
time solvable already in the class of S1,1,1 -free graphs [Sbi80,Min80], called also the class of claw-free
graphs (for recent fast algorithms, see [FOS11, NS21]).
    Together with the vastness of the space of all hereditary graph classes, this motivates us to
focus on F-free graphs for finite sets F , in particular on the case |F | = 1. This turned out to
be particularly interesting for MWIS. As observed by Alekseev [Ale82], for the “overwhelming
majority” of finite sets F , MWIS remains NP-hard on F -free graphs. More precisely Alekseev
observed that MWIS remains NP-hard on F-free graphs unless, for at least one graph in F, every
connected component is a path or an Sa,b,c for some integers a,b,c. Since the original NP-hardness
proof of Alekseev [Ale82] in 1982, no new finite sets F have been discovered such that MWIS
remains NP-hard on F-free graphs. We conjecture that this is because all of the remaining cases
are actually solvable in polynomial time.

Conjecture 1.1. For every H that is a forest whose every component has at most three leaves, Max-
imum Weight Independent Set is polynomial-time solvable when restricted to H-free graphs.


                                                    1
    To the best of our knowledge, the first place Definition 1.1 appeared explicitly is [Loz17]. Let
us remark that Conjecture 1.1, if true, would yield a dichotomy for the computational complexity
of MWIS on F-free graphs for all finite sets F. Consider any F such that NP-hardness of MWIS
on F-free graphs does not follow from Alekseev’s proof. It follows that the class of F-free graphs is
contained in the class of H-free graphs for some graph H for which polynomial time solvability of
MWIS is conjectured in Definition 1.1.
    From the positive side, as already mentioned, we know that MWIS is polynomial-time solvable
in S1,1,1 -free graphs since 1980. Around the same time, it was shown that the class of P4 -free graphs
(by Pt we denote the path on t vertices) coincides with the class of cographs and has very strong
structural properties (in modern terms, has bounded cliquewidth) thus allowing efficient algorithms
for MWIS and many other combinatorial problems. Over the years, we have witnessed a few scat-
tered results for some special cases of H-free graphs, such as S1,1,2 -free graphs [Ale04, LM08], 2K2 -
free graphs [Far89], tK2 -free graphs [FHT93], ℓP3 -free graphs [Loz17], ℓS1,1,1 -free graphs [BM18b],
tK2 + P 5-free or tK2 + S1,1,2 -free graphs [Mos22], as well as progress limited to various subclasses
(see [LBS15, BM18a, GHL03, LR03, MP16, Mos08, LMP14, LMR15, HLLM20, BM18a, LM05, Mos99,
Mos09, Mos13, Mos21] for older and newer results of this kind).
    The research in the area got significant momentum in the last decade. The progress can be
partitioned into two main threads. The first one focuses on the framework of potential maximal
cliques, introduced by Bouchitté and Todinca [BT01], and focuses on providing polynomial-time
algorithms for Pt -free graphs for small values of t. A landmark result here is due to Lokshtanov,
Vatshelle, and Villanger [LVV14] who were the first to show the usability of the framework in the
context of Pt -free graphs by providing a polynomial-time algorithm for MWIS in P5 -free graphs.
This has been later extended to P6 -free graphs [GKPP22] and related graph classes [ACP+ 21]. A
notable property of this framework is that in most cases it not only provides algorithms for MWIS,
but for a wide range of problems asking for large induced subgraph of small treewidth, for example
Feedback Vertex Set.
    The second thread attempts at treating Pt -free or St,t,t -free graphs in full generality, but relaxing
the requirements on either the running time (by providing subexponential or quasi-polynomial-
time algorithms) or the accuracy (by providing approximation algorithms, such as approximation
schemes). Here, the starting point is the theorem of Gyárfás [Gyá75, Gyá87] (see also [BLM+ 19]).

Theorem 1.2. Every vertex-weighted graph G contains an induced path Q such that every connected
component of G − N [V (Q)] has weight at most half of the weight of G.

    As an induced path in a Pt -free graph has less than t vertices, a Pt -free graph admits a balanced
separator (in the sense of Theorem 1.2) consisting of neighborhood of at most t − 1 vertices. In
other words, Pt -free graphs admit a balanced separator dominated by t − 1 vertices. Chudnovsky,
Pilipczuk, Pilipczuk, and Thomassé [CPPT20] observed that this easily gives a quasi-polynomial-
time approximation scheme (QPTAS) for MWIS in Pt -free graphs, and they designed an elaborate
argument involving the celebrated three-in-a-tree theorem of Chudnovsky and Seymour [CS10] to
extend the result to the St,t,t -free case and H-free case where H is a forest of trees with at most
three leaves each. Abrishami, Chudnovsky, Dibek, and Rzążewski [ACDR22] used also the three-in-
a-tree theorem to obtain a polynomial-time algorithm for MWIS for St,t,t -free graphs of bounded
degree. Gartland and Lokshtanov showed how to use the theorem of Gyárfás to design exact quasi-
polynomial-time algorithm for MWIS in Pt -free graphs [GL20], for every fixed t. This algorithm
was later simplified by Pilipczuk, Pilipczuk, and Rzążewski [PPR21] and the union of the authors
of these two papers showed that the approach works for a much wider class of problems and a
slightly wider graph class [GLP+ 21]. Last year, Majewski, Masařík, Novotná, Okrasa, Pilipczuk,


                                                    2
Rzążewski, and Sokołowski [MMM+ 24] gave a cleaner argument for an existence of a QPTAS for
MWIS in St,t,t -free graphs.
   This work provides the pinnacle of the second thread by showing that MWIS is quasi-polynomial-
time solvable in all cases treated by Conjecture 1.1.

Theorem 1.3. For every H that is a forest whose every component has at most three leaves, there
is an algorithm for Maximum Weight Independent Set in H-free graphs running in time
        19
nOH (log n) .

    Here OH denotes constants depending on |H| being repressed. Theorem 1.3 provides strong
evidence in favor of Conjecture 1.1, as it refutes the existence of an NP-hardness proof for MWIS
for H-free graphs as in Conjecture 1.1, unless all problems in NP can be solved in quasi-polynomial
time.

1.1     Our techniques
As discussed in [GL20] (in particular Theorem 2), to show Theorem 1.3 it suffices to focus on the
case H = St,t,t for a fixed integer t ⩾ 1. Together with a simple self-reducibility argument, it is
enough to prove the following.

Theorem 1.4. For every integer t ⩾ 1, the maximum possible weight of an independent set in a
                                                          16
given n-vertex St,t,t -free graph can be found in nOt (log (n)) time.

   Here Ot denotes constants depending on t being repressed.

1.1.1    The key structural result
While Theorem 1.2 provides a balanced separator consisting of a few neighborhoods in a Pt -free
graph, it does not seem to be directly usable for St,t,t -free graphs. The example of G being a line
graph of a clique (which is S1,1,1 -free) shows that we cannot hope for merely a balanced separator
consisting of a few neighborhoods in S1,1,1 -free graphs.
    However, if G is a line graph, MWIS is solvable in polynomial-time by a very different reason
than Theorem 1.2: because it corresponds to a matching problem in the preimage graph. Luckily,
there is a known formalism capturing decompositions of a graph that are “like a line graph”: extended
strip decompositions.
    For a graph G, a strip decomposition consists of a graph H (called the host) and a function
η that assigns to every edge e ∈ E(H) a subset η(e) ⊆ V (G) such that {η(e) | e ∈ E(H)} is a
partition of V (G) and a subset η(e, x) ⊆ η(e) for every endpoint x ∈ e such that the following holds:
for every v1 , v2 ∈ V (G) with v1 ∈ η(e1 ), v2 ∈ η(e2 ) and e1 ̸= e2 we have v1 v2 ∈ E(G) if and only if
there is a common endpoint x ∈ e1 ∩ e2 with v1 ∈ η(e1 , x) and v2 ∈ η(e2 , x). Note that if G is the
line graph of H, then G has a strip decomposition with host H and η(e, x) = η(e, y) = {e} for every
xy = e ∈ E(H) = V (G). The crucial observation is that if one provides a strip decomposition (H, η)
of a graph G together with, for every xy ∈ E(H), the maximum possible weight of an independent
set in G[η(xy)], G[η(xy) \ η(xy, x)], G[η(xy) \ η(xy, y)], and G[η(xy) \ (η(xy, x) ∪ η(xy, y)] (these
graphs are henceforth called particles), then we can reduce computing the maximum weight of
an independent set in G to the maximum weight matching problem in the graph H with some
gadgets attached [CPPT20].
    An extended strip decomposition also allows vertex sets η(x) for x ∈ V (H) and triangle sets
η(xyz) for triangles xyz in H; a precise definition can be found in preliminaries, but is irrelevant for
this overview. We refer to Figure 3 for an example. Importantly, the notion of a particle generalizes

                                                   3
and the property that one can solve MWIS in G knowing the answers to MWIS in the particles is
still true. Extended strip decompositions come from the celebrated solution to the three-in-a-tree
problem by Chudnovsky and Seymour. The task is to determine if a graph contains an induced
subgraph which is a tree connecting three given vertices. The following theorem says that The
three-in-a-tree problem can be solved in polynomial time:

Theorem 1.5 ([CS10, Section 6], simplified version). Let G be an n-vertex graph and Z be a
subset of vertices with |Z| ⩾ 2. There is an algorithm that runs in time O(n5 ) and returns one of
the following:

   • an induced subtree of G containing at least three elements of Z,

   • an extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G where for every z ∈ Z there exists a distinct
     degree-1 vertex xz ∈ V (H) with the unique incident edge ez ∈ E(H) and η(ez , xz ) = {z}.

    In a sense, an extended strip decomposition as in Theorem 1.5 is a certificate that no three
vertices of Z can be connected by an induced tree in G.
     [CPPT20] combined Theorem 1.2 with Theorem 1.5 in a convoluted way to show a QPTAS
for MWIS in St,t,t -free graphs; Thereom 1.5 is used here to construct an induced St,t,t in the
argumentation. [MMM+ 24] provided a simpler argument for the existence of a QPTAS: they derived
from Theorem 1.5 the following structural result.

Theorem 1.6 ( [MMM+ 24, Theorem 2] in a weighted setting). For every fixed integer t, there
exists a polynomial-time algorithm that, given an n-vertex graph G with nonnegative vertex weights,
either:

   • outputs an induced copy of St,t,t in G, or

   • outputs a set P consisting of at most 11 log n + 6 inducedSpaths in G, each of length at most
     t + 1, and a rigid extended strip decomposition of G − N [ P] with every particle of weight at
     most half of the total weight of V (G).

    (Here, rigid means that the extended strip decomposition does not have some unnecessary empty
sets; in a rigid decomposition the size of H is bounded linearly in the size of G. The formal statement
of Theorem 1.6 in [MMM+ 24] is only for uniform weights in G, but as observed in the conclusions
of [MMM+ 24], the proof works for arbitrary vertex weights.)
     [MMM+ 24] showed that Theorem 1.6 easily gives a QPTAS for MWIS in St,t,t -free graphs,
along the same lines as how [CPPT20] showed that Theorem 1.2 easily gives a QPTAS for MWIS
in Pt -free graphs.
    However, it seems that the outcome of Theorem 1.6 is not very useful if one aims for an exact al-
gorithm faster than a subexponential one. Our main graph-theoretic contribution is a strengthening
of Theorem 1.6 to the following.

Theorem 1.7. For every fixed integer t, there exists an integer ct and a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an n-vertex graph G and a weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞), returns one of the
following outcomes:

  1. an induced copy of St,t,t in G;

  2. a subset X ⊆ V (G) of size at most ct · log(n) such that every component of G − N [X] has
     weight at most 0.99w(G);


                                                  4
  3. a rigid extended strip decomposition of G where no particle is of weight larger than 0.5w(G).

    That is, we either provide an extended strip decomposition of the whole graph (not only after
deleting a neighborhood of a small number of vertices as in Theorem 1.6) or a small number of
vertices such that deletion of their neighborhood breaks the graph into multiplicatively smaller (in
terms of weight) components.
    The proof of Theorem 1.7 is provided in Section 3. Let us briefly sketch
                                                                        S it. We start by applying
Theorem 1.6 to G; we are either already done or we have a set Z := P ∈P V (P ) of size O(log n)
and an extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G − N [Z] with small particles. Our goal is now to
add the vertices of N [Z] one by one back to (H, η), possibly exhibiting one of the other outcomes
of Theorem 1.7 along the way. That is, we want to prove the following lemma:

Lemma 1.8. For every fixed integer t there exists an integer ct and a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an n-vertex graph G, a weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞), a real τ ⩾ w(G), a vertex
v ∈ V (G), and a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G − v with every particle of weight at
most 0.5τ , returns one of the following:

  1. an induced copy of St,t,t in G;

  2. a set Z ⊆ V (G) of size at most ct such that every connected component of G−N [Z] has weight
     at most 0.99τ ;

  3. a rigid extended strip decomposition of G where no particle is of weight larger than 0.5τ .

    A simple Syet important observation for Lemma 1.8 is that for x ∈ V (H) of degree at least
two, the set y∈NH (x) η(xy, x) can be dominated by at most two vertices, as the sets η(xy, x) for
y ∈ NH (x) are complete to each other. Consequently, if (A, B) is a separation in H of small order,
then the part of G that is placed by η in H[A] and the part of G that is placed by η in H[B] can be
separated by deleting at most 2|A ∩ B| vertex neighborhoods in G. Hence, if there is a separation
(A, B) in H of constant order where both sides of this separation have substantial weight (at least
0.01τ ), we can provide the second outcome of Lemma 1.8.
    As N [v] is just one neighborhood, the same observation holds if, instead of looking at (H, η), we
look at the inherited extended strip decomposition (H ′ , η ′ ) of G − N [v]. Here, (H ′ , η ′ ) is obtained
from (H, η) by first deleting vertices of N (v) from sets η(·) and then performing a cleanup operation
that trims unnecessary empty sets and ensures that for every xy ∈ E(H ′ ) there is a path in G[η ′ (xy)]
between η ′ (xy, x) and η ′ (xy, y). Hence, we can take all separations (A, B) in H ′ of order bounded
by a large constant (depending on t) and orient them from the side that contains less than 0.01τ
weight to the side containing almost all the weight of G. This orientation defines a tangle in H ′ . By
classic results from the theory of graph minors, this tangle implies the existence of a large wall W
in H ′ which is always mostly on the “large weight” side of any separation (A, B) of constant order.
The cleaning operation ensures that the wall W is also present in (H, η).
    An important observation now is that, because (H ′ , η ′ ) is cleaned as described below, any family
of vertex-disjoint paths in H ′ projects down to a family of induced, vertex-disjoint, and anti-adjacent
paths in G of roughly the same length (or longer): for a path P in H, just follow paths from η(xy, x)
to η(xy, y) in G[η(xy)] for consecutive edges xy on P . Furthermore, a wall W is an excellent and
robust source of long vertex-disjoint paths.
    This allows us to prove that if the neighbors of v are well-connected to the wall W in (H, η) —
either they are spread around the wall itself, or one can connect them to W via three vertex-disjoint
paths in H — then G contains an induced St,t,t . Otherwise, we show that there is a separation (A, B)
in H with the neighbors of v essentially all contained in the sets of H[A], while W lies on the B-side

                                                     5
                             v




                            A




                                                 B


        Figure 1: Extending a subdivided claw in GA to an St,t,t using the large wall W in B.


of the separation. (Here, a large number of technical details are hidden in the phrase “essentially
contained”.) We construct a graph GA being the subgraph of G induced by the        S vertices contained
in the η sets of H[A], augmented with a set Z of artificial vertices attached to y∈NH (x)∩A η(xy, x)
for x ∈ A ∩ B; vertices of Z signify possible “escape paths” to the wall W . These “escape paths”
allow us to show that any induced tree in GA that contains at least three vertices of Z lifts to an
induced St,t,t in G, see Figure 1. Hence, the algorithm of Theorem 1.5 applied to GA and Z can be
used to rebuild H[A] to accommodate v there as well, or to expose an induced St,t,t . This finishes
the sketch of the proof of Lemma 1.8 and of Theorem 1.7.
    We would like to highlight a significant difference between previous works [ACDR22, CPPT20,
MMM+ 24] and our use of the three-in-a-tree theorem to exhibit an St,t,t in a graph or obtain an
extended strip decomposition. All aforementioned previous works essentially picked three anti-
adjacent paths P1 , P2 , P3 of length t each, with endpoints say xi and yi for i = 1, 2, 3, removed their
neighborhood except for the neighbors of yi s, and called three-in-a-tree for the set Z = {x1 , x2 , x3 };
note that any induced tree in the obtained graph that contains Z contains also an induced St,t,t .
This method inherently produced extended strip decompositions not for the entire graph, but only
for after removal of a number of neighborhoods. Furthermore, it used the assumption of being St,t,t -
free only in a very local sense: there is no St,t,t with paths extendable to the given three vertices of
Z. In this work, in contrast, we apply the three-in-a-tree theorem to a potentially much bigger set
Z, and use a subdivided wall in the host graph of the extended strip decomposition to extend any
induced tree found to an induced St,t,t . In this way, we used the assumption of being St,t,t -free in a
more global way than just merely asking for three particular leaves.

1.1.2    Branching
We now proceed with a sketch of our recursive branching algorithm. On a very high level, it is
based on techniques used in the quasi-polynomial time algorithm for independent set on Pk -free
graphs found in [GL20], though multiple new ideas are required to make the reasoning work in the
setting of St,t,t -free graphs, making both the algorithm and its running time analysis quite a bit
more technical. We will soon sketch the algorithm found in [GL20] and describe how to extend it
to St,t,t -free graphs, but first we must address a major barrier. The fact that Pk -free graphs have
balanced separators dominated by k vertices, as discussed after Theorem 1.2, is a crucial fact used
in the algorithm of [GL20]. But, as mentioned previously, St,t,t -free graphs have no such property

                                                     6
(take for instance the line graph of a clique). This is where Theorem 1.7 comes to the rescue.
    When applying Theorem 1.7 to G (the input graph of the current call of the algorithm), since we
assume that G is St,t,t -free, we are guaranteed that outcome (1) will not occur. If outcome (3) occurs
then we get an extended strip decomposition (H, η) and, as previously mentioned, we can reduce
finding a maximum independent set of G to finding a maximum independent set in each particle
of (H, η). That is great news, as each particle has at most half of the weight of G, and we can easily
employ a divide-and-conquer strategy by recursively calling the algorithm on each particle of (H, η).
So, since outcome (1) never happens and outcome (3) gives us an easy algorithm, we can always
assume that outcome (2) happens, that is, that Theorem 1.7 gives us a balanced separator of G that
is dominated by O(log n) vertices, and now we can try to extend the techniques found in [GL20] to
work for St,t,t -free graphs. Therefore, for the rest of this subsection we will focus on sketching an
algorithm for independent set on an St,t,t -free graph G such that all induced subgraphs of G have
a balanced separator dominated by some constant number of vertices (the stronger assumption of
a constant number of vertices versus log n vertices does not change the algorithm very much and
simplifies the discussion).
    Before sketching the algorithm let us give a few short definitions around balanced separators
for an St,t,t -free graph G (see Section 2 for formal definitions of balanced separators). For n′ > 0,
we say that a set S ⊆ V (G) is a n′ -balanced separator for G if no component of G − S has more
than n′ vertices. If A ⊆ V (G) and no component of G − S contains over n′ vertices of A, we say
that S is a n′ -balanced separator for (G, A). The outcome (2) of Theorem 1.7 gives us a 0.99|A|-
balanced separator for (G, A) dominated by O(log n) vertices (again here for simplicity we will
assume that these balanced separators are in fact dominated by a constant number of vertices).
However, by picking a constant number of balanced separators as provided by Theorem 1.7 and
taking their union, we can obtain c|A|-balanced separators for (G, A) dominated by a constant
number of vertices for any fixed c ∈ (0, 1), so we will assume we have access to such strengthened
balanced separators.

Summary of the Quasi-Polynomial Time Algorithm for MWIS on Pk -free Graphs. The
starting point for our algorithm is the algorithm for MWIS on Pk -free graphs by Gartland and
Lokshtanov [GL20], who in turn build on an algorithm of Bacsó, Lokshtanov, Marx, Pilipczuk,
Tuza, and van Leeuwen [BLM+ 19]. We    √ therefore give a brief summary of these algorithms.
    We first consider the simple n O(k  n log n) time algorithm of [BLM+ 19] for MWIS on P -free
                                                                                               k
graphs. We begin with an n-vertex Pk -free graph G and branch on all vertices of degree at least
√
  n: we either exclude such a vertex from the solution (and thus remove it from the graph), or we
include it (and then remove its whole neighborhood from the graph). After this we may assume
that the graph in our current instance (we will still refer to this graph as G although some vertices
                                                                                   √
of the original graph G have been removed) now has maximum degree at most n. We solve this
instance by finding an n/2-balanced separator, S, for G that is dominated by at most k vertices.
                               √
Since G has maximum degree n and S is dominated by at most k vertices, S can have size at most
 √                             √
k n. We then branch on all k n vertices of S simultaneously, which then breaks up the graph into
small connected
              √    components and we recurse on each component. A simple analysis shows that this
runs in n O(k  n log n) time.
                                                                             1/3
    Now, let us try to improve it to an algorithm that runs in time nO(kn log n) . We first state a
modified form of a lemma that appears in [GL20].

Lemma 1.9. Let G be an n-vertex Pk -free graph and F a multi-set of subsets of V (G) such that for
every S ∈ F no component of G − S has more than n/2 vertices. Assume that no vertex belongs to
more than c sets of F counting multiplicity. Then provided |F | ⩾ 3ck, no component of G contains


                                                  7
more than 3n/4 vertices.

Sketch of proof. Let S ∈ F and assume for a contradiction that the largest component of G, call
it C, has more than 3n/4 vertices. Select vertices a, b uniformly at random from C. As |C| > 3n/4
the probability that a and b belong to different components of G − S is at least 1/3. If we let XS
be the random variable that is 1 if a and b are in different components       of G − S and 0 otherwise,
then E[XS ] ⩾ 13 . By the linearity of expectation, we have E[ S∈F XS ] ⩾ 13 · 3ck ⩾ ck. It follows
                                                                P
that there exists vertices a, b ∈ S such that for at least ck sets, S ′ , in F (counting multiplicity) a
and b are in different components of G − S ′ . Let F ′ be the subset of F that contains these sets S ′ .
It follows that for any induced path P with a and b as its endpoints, if S ′ ∈ F ′ then V (P ) ∩ S ′ ̸= ∅.
Since F ′ has at least ck sets and no vertex of P belongs to more than c sets in F ′ , P must have at
least k vertices, contradicting the assumption that G is Pk -free.
                  1/3
      For the nO(kn log n) algorithm, we again begin by branching on vertices of high degree, but this
time we set the threshold to vertices with degree at least n2/3 . After this we may assume the graph
in our current instance, call it G1 , has maximum degree n2/3 . We then find a balanced separator,
S 1 , for G1 that is dominated by k vertices, hence S 1 has at most kn2/3 vertices. We then branch on
all vertices with at least n1/3 neighbors in S 1 . Now we assume the graph considered in our current
instance, call it G2 , has maximum degree n2/3 and a balanced separator S 1 such that no vertex
of G2 has more than n1/3 neighbors in S 1 . We then find a balanced separator, S 2 , for G2 that is
dominated by k vertices, hence S 2 has at most kn2/3 vertices and S 1 ∩ S 2 has size at most kn1/3 .
We then branch on all vertices with at least n1/3 vertices in S 2 and we branch on all vertices that
belong to S 1 ∩ S 2 , so S 1 and S 2 “become disjoint”. We repeat this 3k times until we are in an
instance where we have a graph G3k and 3k pairwise disjoint balanced separators S 1 , . . . S 3k . By
Lemma 1.9, G3k has no component with over 3n/4 vertices and we then recurse on each component.
                                                                                         1/3
A somewhat more involved, but still fairly simple analysis shows that this runs in nO(kn log n) time.
                   1/3
      In the nO(kn log n) -time algorithm, we branched on vertices that: had over n2/3 neighbors,
or had n1/3 neighbors in any of the balanced separators we picked up, or belonged to two of the
balanced separators we picked up. In order to modify this algorithm to run in quasi-polynomial
time all that must be done is change the branching threshold. In particular, the algorithm collects
balanced separators (each dominated by at most k vertices) and will branch on any vertex that has
over n/2i neighbors that belong to i or more of the collected balanced separators (the algorithm
no longer branches on vertices that only have high degree). Any vertex that belongs to log n of
the collected balanced separators will then be branched on, so no vertex will ever belong to more
than log n of the collected balanced separators. So, by Lemma 1.9, after collecting 3k log n of these
balanced separators, the graph will not have any large component. A runtime analysis of this
algorithm shows that it runs in quasi-polynomial time. Note that in all three algorithms discussed
                  1/2                1/3
here (the nO(kn log n) -time, nO(kn log n) -time, and quasi-polynomial-time algorithm) it is crucial
for efficient runtime that the balanced separators we use are dominated by few vertices (they were
dominated by k vertices here, but being dominated by polylog(n) vertices would still be sufficent).

Back to St,t,t -free Graphs. Recall that we wish to get a quasi-polynomial time algorithm for
MWIS on St,t,t -free graphs for the case where every induced subgraph of the input graph G has a
set S of at most ct vertices such that N [S] is a n/2-balanced separator. Up to the bound on the set
dominating the separator, this is precisely the case when we keep getting outcome (2) whenever we
apply Theorem 1.7.
    We want to mimic the algorithm for Pk -free graphs. This algorithm used that the input graph
is Pk -free in precisely two places. The first is to keep getting constant size sets S such that N [S] is


                                                    8
an n/2-balanced separator. This is easily adapted to our new setting because we keep getting such
sets whenever we apply Theorem 1.7.
    The second place where Pk -freeness is used is in Lemma 1.9, which states that a Pk -free graph
cannot have a set of 3k log n balanced separators such that no vertex of G appears in at most
O(log n) of them. If we could strengthen the statement of Lemma 1.9 to St,t,t -free graphs we would
be done! Unfortunately such a strengthening is false, indeed a path is a counterexample (each vertex
close to the middle of the path is a balanced separator).
    Nevertheless, a subtle weakening of Lemma 1.9 does turn out to be true. In particular, in St,t,t -
free graphs it is not possible to pack “very strong" balanced separators that are dominated by “very
few” vertices. We will call such balanced separators c-boosted balanced separators. A somewhat
simplified definition of a c-boosted balanced separator is a set N [S] dominated by a set S of at
most c vertices, such that no component of G − N [S] has more than |V (G)|/16c2 vertices (see
Definition 4.1). It turns out that on St,t,t -free graphs Lemma 1.9 is true if “balanced separators” are
replaced by “s-boosted balanced separators” for appropriately chosen integer s.

Lemma 1.10. Let G be an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, s an integer, and F a multi-set of subsets of
V (G) such that every set in F is an s-boosted balanced separator. Assume no vertex belongs to more
than c sets of F. Then, provided |F | ⩾ 80sct, no component of G contains over 3n/4 vertices.

     We skip sketching the proof of Lemma 1.10 here (see Section 4.2.2 for a formal statement and
proof of this lemma), but we will remark that one of the key ingredients of the proof is a probabilistic
argument akin to the proof of Lemma 1.9 (the proof of Lemma 4.11 is a bit more involved).
     At this point we are one “disconnect” away from being able to utilize the strategy for Pk free
graphs: Theorem 1.7 keeps giving us balanced separators, while Lemma 1.10 tells us that we can’t
pack boosted balanced separators. Indeed, if we assumed our St,t,t -free graphs always had, say, ct -
boosted balanced separators (where ct is some constant that depends on t), then by the exact same
reasoning as before, the strategy of iteratively collecting a ct -boosted balanced separator and then
branching (on all vertices that have over n/2i neighbors that belong to i or more of the collected
ct -boosted balanced separators) would work. Any vertex that belongs to log n of the collected ct -
boosted balanced separators will then be branched on, so no vertex will ever belong to over log n of
the collected balanced separators. So, by Lemma 1.10, after collecting 80ct t log n of these ct -boosted
balanced separators, the graph will not have any large component. A running time analysis identical
to the one for Pk -free graphs [GL20] would then show that this algorithm runs in quasi-polynomial
time.
     Is it possible to bridge the “disconnect” from the other side and keep getting boosted balanced
separators? This looks difficult, but we are able to bridge the gap algorithmically, by branching in
such a way that a “normal” balanced separator becomes boosted. We can then add this boosted
balanced separator to our collection of previously created boosted balanced separators, and then
apply Lemma 1.10 to this collection to conclude that the graph gets sufficiently disconnected before
the collection grows too large. We now sketch how to “boost” a separator.

Boosting Separators. We begin with a balanced separator N [S], dominated by a set S of at most
ct vertices, such that no component of G−N [S] has more than n/2 vertices. (For technical reasons in
the actual algorithm N [S] is not a balanced separator, but rather a set given by Theorem 1.6 so that
G−N [S] has an extended strip decomposition with no large particles; from the viewpoint of efficient
independent set algorithms this is just as useful.) We wish to turn N [S] into a ct -boosted balanced
separator. In order to do this, we consider all vertices of N [S] that have a neighbor in a large
component of G − N [S]; we call this set relevant(G, S) (see Figure 2. This is a slight simplification


                                                   9
              Figure 2: Illustration of how the set relevant(G, S) is obtained from S.


of the actual definition of relevant(G, S) that we use in the algorithm, see Definition 4.2). By “large
component” we mean any component of G − N [S] that has more than n/16c2t vertices (note that if
there are no such components, then N [S] is a ct -boosted balanced separator). In order to branch
in a way that turns N [S] into a ct -boosted balanced separator, we use the following lemma, similar
to Lemmas 1.9 and 1.10.
Lemma 1.11. Let G be an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, let N [S] be a balanced separator for G dom-
inated by a set S of at most ct vertices, and let F be a multi-set of |relevant(G, S)|/100c3t -balanced
separators for (G, relevant(G, S)). Assume no vertex belongs to over c sets of F . If |F| ⩾ 10ct,
either S is a ct -boosted balanced separator or no component of G contains more than 3n/4 vertices.
     The proof of Lemma 1.11 follows a similar “expectation argument” that Lemma 1.9 uses, although
it is a bit more involved. We do not sketch a proof of Lemma 1.11 here (this lemma statement is
more or less a combination of Observation 4.6 and Lemma 4.9)
     This lemma suggests the following branching strategy. We first pick up an n/2-balanced sepa-
rator N [S] dominated by a set S of ct vertices, and we will try use Lemma 1.11 to turn N [S] into
a ct -boosted balanced separator or break up G into small components. We use the same reasoning
as before: iteratively collect |relevant(G, S)|/100c3t -balanced separators for (G, relevant(G, S)) and
branch (on all vertices that have over n/2i neighbors that belong to i or more of the collected bal-
anced separators). Any vertex that belongs to log n of the collected balanced separators will then
be branched on, so no vertex will ever belong to over log(n) of the collected balanced separators.
So, by Lemma 1.11 after collecting 10t log n of these |relevant(G, S)|/100c3t -balanced separators for
(G, relevant(G, S)), either the graph will have no large component (and then we make large progress
by calling the algorithm recursively on the components) or S is now a ct -boosted balanced sep-
arator, which we then add to our collection of ct -boosted balanced separators. By Lemma 1.10
this collection cannot grow larger than 80ct t log n before our graph no longer has large connected
components.
     The running time analysis of this algorithm essentially looks like this: if we could assume that
boosting a single balanced separator to become a boosted balanced separator took constant time,
then the analysis would be more or less identical to the analysis of the algorithm for MWIS on

                                                  10
Pk -free graphs. However, now each individual “boosting” step is instead a branching algorithm
whose analysis again is very similar to the analysis of the algorithm for MWIS on Pk -free graphs,
so each boosting step corresponds to a recursive algorithm with quasi-polynomially many leaves.
Since quasi-polynomial functions compose the entire running time is still quasi-polynomial. Finally
we need to take into account what would happen if outcome (3) of Theorem 1.7 does occur, but
this can fairly easily be shown to only be good for the progress of the algorithm.


2    Preliminaries
Basic notation. For a family Q of sets, by Q we denote Q∈Q Q. Let G be a graph. For
                                                  S                  S
X ⊆ V (G), by G[X] we denote the subgraph of G induced by X, i.e., (X, {uv ∈ E(G) : u, v ∈ X}).
If the graph G is clear from the context, we will often identify induced subgraphs with their vertex
sets. The sets X, Y ⊆ V (G) are complete to each other if for every x ∈ X and y ∈ Y the edge xy
is present in G. Note that this, in particular, implies that X and Y are disjoint. We say that two
sets X, Y touch if X ∩ Y ̸= ∅ or there is an edge with one endpoint in X and another in Y . Finally,
two disjoint sets are anti-adjacent or anti-complete if they do not touch.
    For a vertex v, by NG (v) we denote the set of neighbors of v,Sand by NG [v] we denote the set
NG (v) ∪ {v}. For a set X ⊆ V (G), we also define NG (X) := v∈X NG (v) \ X, and NG [X] :=
NG (X) ∪ X. If it does not lead to confusion, we omit the subscript and write simply N (·) and N [·].
                                                              ′           ′
Additionally, if G′ is an induced subgraph of G, we use NGG (X) and NGG [X] to mean NG (X)∩V (G′ )
and NG [X] ∩ V (G′ ) respectively. We often say that a set of vertices X ⊆ V (G) is dominated by a
set Y ⊆ V (G) if X ⊆ NG [Y ].
    The length of a path is the number of edges of the path. Pt denotes an induced path with t
vertices (and t − 1 edges). A claw is a set of three independent vertices, v1 , v2 , and v3 along with a
a vertex u that is neighbors with each vi . An St,t,t is three anti-complete Pt ’s along with a vertex u
that is neighbors with exactly one endpoint from each Pt and no other vertices, so a claw is S1,1,1 .
    Given a graph G and a graph H, G is said to be H-free if G does not contain H as an induced
subgraph. If H is a set of graphs, then G is H-free if for each H ∈ H, G is H-free.

Balanced separators. We define a vertex list, or more simple a list, to be an ordered multi-
set of subsets V (G). If F = {F1 , F2 , . . . , Fk } is a list and S ⊆ V (G) we define F ∪ S to be the
                                                                                                   ′
list F with S appended at the end, that is F ∪ S := {F1 , F2 , . . . , Fk , S}. We define NGG [F] :=
      ′        ′                  ′
{NGG [F1 ], NGG [F2 ], . . . , NGG [Fk ]}.
     Let G be a graph, G′ an induced subgraph of G, Y ⊆ V (G′ ), c non-negative integer, and w a
weight function for the vertices of G′ . We say Y is a c-balanced separator for (G′ , w) if no component,
C, of G′ − Y has w(C) > c. Now let Z ⊆ V (G′ ). We say that Y is a c-balanced separator for (G′ , Z)
when no component of G′ − Y contains over c vertices of Z. When Z = V (G′ ) then we say that Y is
                                                                                                 ′
a c-balanced separator for G′ . Furthermore, if there is a set X ⊆ V (G) such that Y = NGG [X] then
we say that Y has a core X originating in G. We note that while unintuitive, if Y is a c-balanced
separator for (G′ , w), it may be possible for G′ − Y to have fewer components then G′ . For instance
this is true when Y = V (G′ ).

Extended strip decompositions. By T (G), we denote the set of all triangles in G. Similarly
to writing xy ∈ E(G), we write xyz ∈ T (G) to indicate that G[{x, y, z}] ≃ K3 . Now let us define
a certain graph decomposition which will play an important role in the paper. An extended strip
decomposition of a graph G is a pair (H, η) that consists of:
    • a simple graph H,

                                                   11
   • a vertex set η(x) ⊆ V (G) for every x ∈ V (H),

   • an edge set η(xy) ⊆ V (G) for every xy ∈ E(H), and its subsets η(xy, x), η(xy, y) ⊆ η(xy),

   • a triangle set η(xyz) ⊆ V (G) for every xyz ∈ T (H),

which satisfy the following properties (also see Figure 3):

  1. The family {η(o) | o ∈ V (H) ∪ E(H) ∪ T (H)} is a partition of V (G).

  2. For every x ∈ V (H) and every distinct y, z ∈ NH (x), the set η(xy, x) is complete to η(xz, x).

  3. Every uv ∈ E(G) is contained in one of the sets η(o) for o ∈ V (H) ∪ E(H) ∪ T (H), or is as
     follows:

        • u ∈ η(xy, x), v ∈ η(xz, x) for some x ∈ V (H) and y, z ∈ NH (x), or
        • u ∈ η(xy, x), v ∈ η(x) for some xy ∈ E(H), or
        • u ∈ η(xyz) and v ∈ η(xy, x) ∩ η(xy, y) for some xyz ∈ T (H).

An extended strip decomposition (H, η) is rigid if for every xy ∈ E(H), the sets η(xy), η(xy, x),
and η(xy, y) are nonempty, and for every isolated (i.e., with no incident edge) x ∈ V (H), the set
η(x) is nonempty.
    We say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) is peripheral in (H, η) if there is a degree-one vertex x of H,
such that η(xy, x) = {v}, where y is the (unique) neighbor of x in H. For a set Z ⊆ V (G), we say
that (H, η) is an extended strip decomposition of (G, Z) if H has |Z| degree-one vertices and each
vertex of Z is peripheral in (H, η).
    The following theorem by Chudnovsky and Seymour [CS10] is a slight strengthening of their
celebrated solution of the famous three-in-a-tree problem. We will use it as a black-box to build
extended strip decompositions.

Theorem 2.1 ( [CS10, Section 6]). Let G be an n-vertex graph and consider Z ⊆ V (G) with |Z| ⩾ 2.
There is an algorithm that runs in time O(n5 ) and returns one of the following:

   • an induced subtree of G containing at least three elements of Z, or

   • a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of (G, Z).

    Let us point out that actually, an extended strip decomposition produced by Definition 2.1
satisfies more structural properties, but for our purpose, we will only use the fact that it is rigid.

Particles of extended strip decompositions. Let (H, η) be an extended strip decomposition
of a graph G. We introduce some special subsets of V (G) called particles, divided into five types.

         vertex particle: Ax := η(x) for each x ∈ V (H),
   edge interior particle: A⊥
                            xy := η(xy) \ (η(xy, x) ∪ η(xy, y)) for each xy ∈ E(H),
       half-edge particle: Axxy := η(x) ∪ η(xy) \ η(xy, y) for each xy ∈ E(H),
                                                              [
       full edge particle: Axy
                             xy := η(x) ∪ η(y) ∪ η(xy) ∪             η(xyz) for each xy ∈ E(H),
                                                         z : xyz∈T (H)

        triangle particle: Axyz := η(xyz) for each xyz ∈ T (H).



                                                 12
                                                      a
                                                                                  g
                                                          c
                  η(a)                                               e
                                                                              f

                                                          d                       h
                                                      b



                                                                                               η(g)
    η(c)                                     η(ce)

                                                              η(e)
                                                                                      η(gf )
                                                                     η(ef )

                                    η(cde)
           η(cd)                                                                                η(f )



                                                          η(ef, e)   η(ef, f )
                                                                                  η(f h)
                                             η(de)
    η(d)


                                                                                                η(h)




           η(b)

Figure 3: A graph H and an extended strip decomposition (H, η) of some graph G. Edges within
sets η(·) are arbitrary. A solid edge across two sets indicates that there are complete to each other.
A dashed edge means that edges across these sets are allowed but not mandatory. No edge means
that the sets do not touch.




                                                     13
                                row
                                                                                       pegs




                       column                               subwall of sidelength 4
                                   basic subpath

     Figure 4: Wall of sidelength 8. The lines between pegs denote paths of arbitrary length.

Wall notation. A wall of sidelength ℓ is depicted in Figure 4; it consists of ℓ rows and ℓ columns
as in the figure. A peg is a vertex of degree three in a wall. A path between two pegs that has no
other peg as an internal vertex is called a basic path in a wall. We say that wall is k-subdivided if
every basic path has length more than k. A subwall of a wall W is a wall whose rows and columns
are subpaths of the rows and columns of W .

Separations and tangles. Let G be a graph. A separation in G is an ordered pair (A, B) of
vertex sets A, B ⊆ V (G) such that A ∪ B = V (G) and there is no edge of G with one endpoint in
A \ B and the second endpoint in B \ A. The order of the separation (A, B) is |A ∩ B|.
    A tangle of order k in a graph G is a family T of separations of order less than k such that:
   • For every separation (A, B) of order less than k in G, exactly one of the separations (A, B)
     and (B, A) belongs to T .
   • For every triple (A1 , B1 ), (A2 , B2 ), (A3 , B3 ) ∈ T we have A1 ∪ A2 ∪ A3 ̸= V (G).
Observe that if T is a tangle of order k and k ′ < k, then the family T ′ consisting of all separations
of T of order less than k ′ is a tangle of order k ′ . We call such T ′ the restriction of T to order k ′ .
    Let W be a wall in G of sidelength k. Let (A, B) be a separation in G of order k ′ < k. Note
that for exactly one Γ ∈ {A \ B, B \ A}, Γ contains at least k − k ′ full rows and at least k − k ′ full
columns of W . Let TW be the family of those separations (A, B) of order less than ⌈k/3⌉ such that
B \ A contains at least k − ⌈k/3⌉ + 1 full rows and at least k − ⌈k/3⌉ + 1 full columns of W . It is
straightforward to verify that TW is a tangle of order ⌈k/3⌉; we call it the tangle governed by W .
    We make the following simple but important observation.
Lemma 2.2. If W is a wall in a graph G and W ′ is a subwall of W , then TW ′ ⊆ TW .
Proof. Let k and k ′ be the sidelengths of W and W ′ , respectively. Let (A, B) ∈ TW ′ be a separation
of order less than ⌈k ′ /3⌉. Then, B \ A contains at least k ′ − ⌈k ′ /3⌉ + 1 full rows of W and at least
k ′ − ⌈k ′ /3⌉ + 1 full columns of W . Since W ′ is a subwall of W , B \ A contains at least k − ⌈k ′ /3⌉ + 1
full rows of W and at least k − ⌈k ′ /3⌉ + 1 full columns of W . Hence, (A, B) ∈ TW , as desired.

    We will need the following result, which follows from the combination of the polynomial grid mi-
nor theorem [CC16,CT21], the duality of tangles and branchwidth [RS91], and [KTW20, Lemma 14.6].

                                                     14
Theorem 2.3. There exists a function fKTW20 (k) = O(ke 18 ) such that if a graph G admits a tangle
T of order fKTW20 (k) for an integer k, then G contains a wall W of sidelength 3k such that TW is
the restriction of T to order k.


3     Extended Strip Lemma
The main result of this section is the following:

Lemma 3.1 (Extended strip decomposition or small balanced separator). For every fixed integer t,
there exists an integer ct and a polynomial-time algorithm that, given an n-vertex graph G and a
weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞), returns one of the following:

    1. an induced copy of St,t,t in G;

    2. a 0.99w(G)-balanced separator for (G, w) dominated by ct · log n vertices;

    3. a rigid extended strip decomposition of G where no particle is of weight larger than 0.5w(G).

    The main difference between Lemma 3.1 and the main result of [MMM+ 24], namely Theorem 1.6,
is that Lemma 3.1 promises in the last output an extended strip decomposition of the entire graph,
not the graph with a small number of neighborhoods deleted.
    The algorithm of Lemma 3.1 first applies Theorem 1.6 to find either an induced copy of St,t,t
(which can be immediately returned) or a set Z of size O(log n) together with a rigid extended strip
decomposition (H, η) of G − N [Z] such that every particle of (H, η) has weight at most 0.5w(G).
Then, we attempt to put back vertices of N [Z] one-by-one to (H, η), maintaining the property that
every particle of (H, η) has weight at most 0.5w(G). The following lemma, whose proof spans the
remainder of this section, shows that in every such attempt, we can either succeed or obtain one of
the first two outcomes of Lemma 3.1.

Lemma 3.2. For every fixed integer t there exists an integer ct and a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an n-vertex graph G, a weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞), a real τ ⩾ w(G), a vertex
v ∈ V (G), and a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G − v with every particle of weight at
most 0.5τ , returns one of the following:

    1. an induced copy of St,t,t in G;

    2. a 0.99τ -balanced separator for (G, w) dominated by at most ct vertices;

    3. a rigid extended strip decomposition of G where no particle is of weight larger than 0.5τ .

    Let us formally prove Lemma 3.1 using Lemma 3.2.

Proof of Lemma 3.1. Let τ := w(G). Run Theorem 1.6 on (G, w). If an St,t,t is returned, return it as
well. Otherwise, we have a set Z of size O(log n) together with a rigid extended strip decomposition
(H, η) of G − N [Z] such that every particle of (H, η) has weight at most 0.5τ .
    Enumerate N [Z] as {v1 , v2 , . . . , vk }. Let Gi = G−{v1 , . . . , vi } for 0 ⩽ i ⩽ k, so that G0 = G and
Gk = G − N [Z]. Denote (Hk , ηk ) := (H, η). We compute a sequence (Hi , ηi )0i=k of rigid extended
strip decompositions of graphs Gi whose every particle has weight at most 0.5τ as follows. For
each i = k, k − 1, . . . , 1 apply Lemma 3.2 to Gi−1 , vi (recall that Gi = Gi−1 − vi−1 ), τ , and the
rigid extended strip decomposition (Hi , ηi ). If an St,t,t is returned, terminate the algorithm and
return it, too. If a 0.99τ -balanced separator X is returned, return X ∪ N [Z] as a 0.99τ -balanced


                                                      15
separator of G dominated by O(log n) vertices. Otherwise, denote the output rigid extended strip
decomposition of Gi−1 by (Hi−1 , ηi−1 ) and continue with the next step. If we reach (H0 , η0 ), we
return it as the third output of Lemma 3.1.

    It will be useful in future work in this direction if we prove a slight strengthening of Lemma 3.2,
and will only add a small amount of additional work. To this end, we define a {t, t, t}-pyramid to
be an St1 ,t2 ,t3 , where t1 , t2 , t3 ⩾ t, with the three leaves labeled x1 , x2 , and x3 , along with three
additional vertices y1 , y2 , and y3 such that the yi ’s are complete with each other (they induced a
K3 ), yi is a neighbor of xj if and only if i = j, and the yi ’s have no other neighbors in the St1 ,t2 ,t3 .
The following lemma is the strengthening of Lemma 3.2.

Lemma 3.3. For every fixed integer t there exists an integer ct and a polynomial-time algorithm
that, given an n-vertex graph G, a weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞), a real τ ⩾ w(G), a vertex
v ∈ V (G), and a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G − v with every particle of weight at
most 0.5τ , returns one of the following:

   1. an induced copy of {t, t, t}-pyramid in G;

   2. a 0.99τ -balanced separator for (G, w) dominated by at most ct vertices;

   3. a rigid extended strip decomposition of G where no particle is of weight larger than 0.5τ .

   Since a {t, t, t}-pyramid contains an St,t,t as an induced subgraph, it is trivial to see that
Lemma 3.3 implies Lemma 3.2. The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of Lemma 3.3.

3.1    Turning separations in H into separators in G
Let us make the following trivial observation.

Lemma 3.4. If (H, η) is aSrigid extended strip decomposition of a graph G and x ∈ V (H) is of
degree more than one, then y∈NH (x) η(xy, x) is dominated by two vertices.

Proof. Pick two neighbors y1 , y2 ∈ NH (x) and any vi ∈ η(xyi , x) for i = 1, 2. (Recall that we
mandate theS interfaces η(xyi , x) to be nonempty in a rigid
                                                           S extended strip decomposition.) Then, vi
dominates y∈NH (x)\{yi } η(xy, x), so {v1 , v2 } dominates y∈NH (x) η(xy, x).

   For an extended strip decomposition (H, η) of a graph G and a set A ⊆ V (H), the preimage of
A in G is the set ←
                  −
                  η (H,η) (A) ⊆ V (G) consisting of:

   • all vertex sets η(x) for x ∈ A;

   • all edge sets η(xy) for |{x, y} ∩ A| ⩾ 1;

   • all triangle sets η(xyz) for |{x, y, z} ∩ A| ⩾ 2.

   We make the following two observations based on Lemma 3.4.

Lemma 3.5. Let (H, η) be    S an extended
                                    S       strip decomposition of a graph G and let (A, B) be a
separation in H. Let X = x∈A∩B y∈NH (x) η(xy, x). Then, every connected component of G − X
is contained in one of the following sets: ←
                                           −
                                           η (H,η) (A \ B), ←
                                                            −
                                                            η (H,η) (B \ A), η(x) for some x ∈ A ∩ B,
η(xy) for some xy ∈ E(H[A]), or η(xyz) for some triangle xyz ∈ T (H) with |{x, y, z} ∩ A ∩ B| ⩾ 2.
Furthermore, if (H, η) is rigid and every vertex of A ∩ B has degree at least 2, then X is dominated
by at most 2|A ∩ B| vertices.

                                                     16
Proof. Observe that every set Γ being either η(x) for x ∈ A ∩ B, η(xy) for some xy ∈ E(H[A]),
or η(xyz) for a triangle xyz ∈ T (H) with |{x, y, z} ∩ A ∩ B| ⩾ 2 satisfies NG (Γ) ⊆ X. Similarly,
every edge that has exactly one endpoint on ← −
                                              η (H,η) (A \ B) \ X has its second endpoint in X and
                                             ←
                                             −
every edge that has exactly one endpoint on η (H,η) (B \ A) \ X has its second endpoint in X. This
proves the desired separation properties of X. The second part of the lemma follows directly from
Lemma 3.4.

Lemma 3.6. Let 0 < δ < 0.5 be a constant. Let (H, η) be an extended strip decomposition of a graph
G with weight function w. Assume that no particle of (H, η) has weight more than (1 − δ)w(G), but
there is a particle of (H, η) that    weight at least δw(G). Then there exists a set F ⊆ V (H) of
                                S has S
size at most 2 such that X := x∈F y∈NH (x) η(xy, x) is an (1 − δ)w(G)-balanced separator in G.
Furthermore, if (H, η) is rigid, then X is dominated by at most four vertices.

Proof. Observe that inclusion-wise maximal particles are vertex particles for isolated vertices of H
and full edge particles. Without loss of generality, we can assume that there is a particle of (H, η)
of one of those two types that has weight at least δw(G).
    Assume first that w(η(x)) ⩾ δw(G) for some isolated x ∈ V (H). We also have w(η(x)) ⩽
(1−δ)w(G) by the assumptions of the lemma. Since η(x) is the union of some connected components
of G by the properties of an extended strip decomposition, ∅ is a (1 − δ)w(G)-balanced separator
in G and the we are done.
    Assume now that w(Axy   xy ) ⩾ δw(G) for an edge xy ∈ E(H). Again, by the assumptions of the
lemma we have w(Axy   xy ) ⩽ (1 − δ)w(G).SLet FS be the set of those vertices of {x, y} that are of
degree more than one in H and let X := x′ ∈F y′ ∈NH (x′ ) η(x′ y ′ , x′ ). It follows from the properties
of an extended strip decomposition that X separates Axy                          xy
                                                          xy from V (G) \ Axy , i.e., every path from
  xy             xy
Axy to V (G) \ Axy contains a vertex from X. If (H, η) is rigid, then Lemma 3.4 implies that X is
dominated by at most 2|F | ⩽ 4 vertices. Since δw(G) ⩽ w(Axy    xy ) ⩽ (1 − δ)w(G), X is the desired
(1 − δ)w(G)-balanced separator.

3.2   Locally cleaning an extended strip decomposition
We will need a few connectivity properties of an extended strip decomposition, a bit stronger than
just being rigid. Luckily, they are easy to obtain via local modifications.
    Let (H, η) be an extended strip decomposition of a graph G. A local cleaning step for (H, η) is
one of the following modifications.

removing an isolated vertex with an empty set If x ∈ V (H) is an isolated vertex satisfying
    η(x) = ∅, delete x from V (H).

moving an isolated vertex set If x ∈ V (H) is an isolated vertex with η(x) nonempty and
    y ∈ V (H) is any other vertex that is not an isolated vertex with η(y) empty, we set η(y) :=
    η(y) ∪ η(x) and η(x) := ∅.

moving a disconnected component of an edge set If for an edge xy ∈ E(H) there exists a
    connected component C of η(xy) \ (η(xy, x) ∪ η(xy, y)) with no neighbors in η(xy, y) \ η(xy, x),
    we set η(x) := η(x) ∪ C and η(xy) := η(xy) \ C.

moving a disconnected component of a triangle set If C is a connected component of a tri-
    angle xyz ∈ T (H) with no neighbors in η(yz, y) ∩ η(yz, z), then we set η(x) := η(x) ∪ C and
    η(xyz) := η(xyz) \ C.



                                                   17
moving a disconnected vertex of an interface If for an edge xy ∈ E(H) there is a vertex
    v ∈ η(xy, x) \ η(xy, y) such that NG [v] ∩ η(xy) ⊆ η(xy, x), set η(x) := η(x) ∪ {v} and
    η(xy) := η(xy) \ {v}.

removing an edge with an empty interface If xy ∈ E(H) is an edge with η(xy, x) = ∅, we set
    η(y) := η(y) ∪ η(xy) and delete the edge xy from H.

suppressing a degree-1 vertex If x ∈ V (H) is of degree 1 in H, with its unique neighbor y, set
    η(y) := η(y) ∪ η(xy) ∪ η(x), η(x) := ∅ and delete the edge xy.
An extended strip decomposition is locally cleaned if no local cleaning step is applicable.
   The following observations are immediate.
Lemma 3.7. If (H, η) is an extended strip decomposition of G and (H ′ , η ′ ) is a result of applying
the first applicable local cleaning step to (H, η), then (H ′ , η ′ ) is also an extended strip decomposition
of G with V (H ′ ) ⊆ V (H) and E(H ′ ) ⊆ E(H). Furthermore, we have the following:
   • For every xy ∈ E(H ′ ) we have η ′ (xy) ⊆ η(xy), η ′ (xy, x) ⊆ η(xy, x), and η ′ (xy, y) ⊆ η(xy, y).

   • For every xyz ∈ T (H ′ ), we have η ′ (xyz) ⊆ η(xyz).

   • The following potential strictly increases from (H, η) to (H ′ , η ′ ): the number of vertices of G
     in vertex sets of H/H ′ , minus the number of vertices and edges of H/H ′ , and additionally
     minus the number of vertices of H/H ′ that are not isolated vertices with empty vertex sets.
Proof. The only nontrivial check is that whenever we delete an edge e of H, all triangles involving
e already have empty sets. This follows for the “removing an edge with an empty interface” step
due to inapplicability of the “moving a disconnected component of a triangle” step.

   Note that the last property ensures that the local cleaning operation terminates and indeed
produces a locally cleaned extended strip decomposition.
Lemma 3.8. Let (H, η) be an extended strip decomposition of G that is locally cleaned. Then (H, η)
is a rigid extended strip decomposition such that either H consists of a single vertex with the whole
V (G) in its vertex set, or every vertex of H has degree at least 2.
Proof. If there was an isolated x ∈ V (H) with nonempty η(x), the “moving isolated vertex set”
step would apply, unless already η(x) = V (G). If there were an isolated vertex x ∈ V (H) with
η(x) = ∅, the “removing an isolated vertex with an empty set” step would apply. If there were a
vertex x ∈ V (H) of degree one, the “suppressing a degree-1 vertex” step would apply. If there were
an edge xy ∈ E(H) with empty η(xy), η(xy, x), or η(xy, y), the “removing an edge with an empty
interface” step would apply. This concludes the proof.

   Recall that in the context of Lemma 3.3, we have access to a rigid extended strip decomposition
(H, η) of G − v with all particles of weight at most 0.5τ . We want to add v to the extended strip
decomposition; on the way there we can identify an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid or a 0.99τ -balanced
separator that is dominated by a small number of vertices.
   If w(V (G)\NG [v]) ⩽ 0.99τ , then we can return NG [v] as the promised 0.99τ balanced separator.
Hence, we assume w(V (G) \ NG [v]) ⩾ 0.99τ , that is,

                                      τ ⩽ 0.99−1 w(V (G) \ NG [v]).                                      (1)

Let S ⊆ NG [v] with v ∈ S. A local cleaning operation applied to S consists of the following:

                                                     18
  1. Computing an extended strip decomposition (HS , ηS ) of G − S by restricting each set η(·)
     from (H, η) to V (G) \ S. (Note that in this step (HS , ηS ) may not be rigid, as some sets ηS (x),
     ηS (xy) or interfaces ηS (xy, x) may be empty.)

  2. Iteratively, while possible, apply the first applicable local cleaning operation to (HS , ηS ).

  3. If at any moment of the process there exists a particle of (HS , ηS ) whose weight is at least
     0.01w(V (G) \ S), applySLemma  S 3.6 to it, obtaining a 0.99w(V (G) \ S)-balanced separator
     X of G − S equal to x∈F y∈NH (x) ηS (xy, x) for some F ⊆ V (HS ) of size at most 2.
                                           S
     Since  V (HS ) ⊆ V (H) and ηS (xy, x) ⊆ η(xy, x) for every xy ∈ E(HS ) by Lemma 3.7, X ⊆
              y∈NH (x) η(xy, x). Hence, by Lemma 3.4, X is dominated by at most four vertices in
     S      S
       x∈F
     G (not necessarily in G − S). By (1) and since τ ⩾ w(G), every connected component of
     G − S − X has weight at most

                      w(V (G) \ S) − 0.01w(V (G) \ S) = 0.99w(V (G) \ S) ⩽ 0.99τ.

      Thus, we return X ∪ S as a 0.99τ -balanced separator of G dominated by at most five vertices.

Initially, every particle of (HS , ηS ) has weight at most 0.5τ which, by (1), is upper bounded by
0.99 w(V (G) \ NG [v]) ⩽ 0.55w(V (G) \ S). Thus, if Lemma 3.6 is triggered before the first cleaning
 0.5

operation, its assumptions are satisfied. Later in the process, we apply a local cleaning operation to
an extended strip decomposition whose every particle is of weight at most 0.01w(V (G) \ S). Since
every local cleaning operation moves a subset of one set η(·) to another, after a single local cleaning
operation every particle is of weight at most 0.02w(V (G) \ S). This justifies the assumptions of
Lemma 3.6 if triggered in later steps.
     We conclude with the following straightforward summary of the properties of the result of local
cleaning (cf. Lemma 3.8).

Lemma 3.9. Let S ⊆ V (G) with v ∈ S and assume that the local cleaning operation applied to S
finished with an extended strip decomposition (HS , ηS ) of G − S. Then:

   • (HS , ηS ) is a rigid extended strip decomposition of G − S.

   • V (HS ) ⊆ V (H) and E(HS ) ⊆ E(H).

   • For every x ∈ V (HS ) we have ηS (x) ⊇ η(x).

   • For every xy ∈ E(HS ) we have ηS (xy) ⊆ η(xy), ηS (xy, x) ⊆ η(xy, x), and ηS (xy, y) ⊆
     η(xy, y).

   • For every xyz ∈ T (HS ) we have ηS (xyz) ⊆ η(xyz).

   • Every particle of (HS , ηS ) is of weight at most 0.01w(V (G) \ S) ⩽ 0.01τ .

   • Every vertex of HS is of degree at least 2.

     We start the algorithm of Lemma 3.3 with applying the local cleaning operation to (H, η), that
is, the case S = {v}. We either return a 0.99τ -balanced separator dominated by at most five vertices
or (we reuse the name (H, η) for the obtained extended strip decomposition, slightly abusing the
notation) ensure the following two properties.

                        Every particle of (H, η) is of weight at most 0.01τ.                           (2)


                                                   19
                                 Every x ∈ V (H) is of degree at least 2.                                  (3)
   We henceforth proceed assuming (2) and (3). Note that Lemma 3.4 implies the following.
                              [ [
  For every F ⊆ V (H) the set           η(xy, x) is dominated by at most 2|F | vertices in G.
                                    x∈F y∈NH (x)
                                                                                                           (4)

3.3    A wall avoiding N [v]
An edge xy ∈ E(H) is v-safe if there exists a path in G[η(xy)] − N [v] between a vertex of η(xy, x)
and a vertex of η(xy, y). A subgraph of H is v-safe if all its edges are v-safe.
   We now show the following.
Lemma 3.10. For every constant σ there exists a constant σ ′ such that in polynomial time we can
either find a 0.99τ -balanced separator dominated by at most σ ′ vertices in G or a v-safe wall W
in H of sidelength 3σ with TW , the tangle governed by W , having the following property:

                                  ∀(A,B)∈TW w(←
                                              −
                                              η (H,η) (B \ A)) ⩾ 0.99τ.                                    (5)

Proof. Apply the local cleaning operation to (HS , ηS ) where S := N [v]. If a 0.99τ -balanced separator
X is found, return X ∪S as the promised 0.99τ -balanced separator. Otherwise, we have an extended
strip decomposition (HS , ηS ) of G − N [v] that satisfies the properties of Lemma 3.9.
    Let k := fKTW20 (σ) where fKTW20 comes from Theorem 2.3. Note that k is still a constant.
    Assume that there exists a separation (A, B) in HS of order less than k with both

                 w(←−
                    η (HS ,ηS ) (A \ B)) ⩽ 0.99τ and w(←   −
                                                           η (HS ,ηS ) (B \ A)) ⩽ 0.99τ.

By Lemma 3.5, the set X := x∈A∩B y∈NH (x) ηS (xy, x) is a 0.99τ -balanced separator of G − S.
                                  S       S
                                              S S
Due to Lemma 3.9, we have X ⊆ x∈A∩B y∈NH (x) η(xy, x), which is in turn dominated by at most
                                      S
2|A ∩ B| ⩽ 2k − 2 vertices in G due to Lemma 3.4. Since S = N [v], G admits a 0.99τ -balanced
separator dominated by at most 2k − 1 vertices. Since k is a constant, we can find such a separator
in polynomial time and return it. Thus, henceforth we assume that such a separation (A, B) does
not exist.
    Let T ′ be a set consisting of every separation (A, B) in HS of order less than k with

                                       w(←
                                         −
                                         η (HS ,ηS ) (B \ A)) ⩾ 0.99τ.

Since w(G) ⩽ τ and due to our assumption from the previous paragraph, for every separation
(A, B) in HS of order less than k, exactly one of (A, B) and (B, A) belongs to T ′ . Also, for every
(A, B) ∈ T ′ it holds that w(←   −
                                 η (HS ,ηS ) (A \ B)) ⩽ 0.01τ .
    Assume that T is not a tangle of order k. Then, there exist (A1 , B1 ), (A2 , B2 ), (A3 , B2 ) ∈ T ′
                      ′

with A1 ∪SA2 ∪ S  A3 = V (HS ). Let F = (A1 ∩ B1 ) ∪ (A2 ∩ B2 ) ∪ (A3 ∩ B3 ). We have |F | ⩽ 3k − 3.
Let X = x∈F y∈NH (x) ηS (xy, y). Since w(←            −
                                                      η (HS ,ηS ) (Ai \ Bi )) ⩽ 0.01τ for i = 1, 2, 3 and every
                          S
particle of (HS , ηS ) is of weight at most 0.01τ , X is a 0.99τ -balanced separator in G − S. Similarly
as before, Lemmas 3.9 and 3.4 imply that X is dominated by at most 6k − 6 vertices in G. Hence,
X ∪ S is a 0.99τ -balanced separator in G dominated by at most 6k − 5 vertices in G. Since k is a
constant, we can check in polynomial time if such a separator exists. Thus, henceforth we continue
with the assumption that T ′ is a tangle of order k in HS .
    We now apply Theorem 2.3 to obtain a wall W in HS of sidelength 3σ such that TW′ , the tangle
of order σ governed by W in HS , is the restriction of T ′ to order σ. We observe that as σ is a

                                                      20
constant, W can be computed in polynomial time for example by first guessing its pegs, and then
applying an algorithm for Disjoint Paths of [RS95]. Since E(HS ) ⊆ E(H), the wall W exists
also in H. Observe that, due to the local cleaning operation, every edge xy ∈ E(HS ) is v-safe in
H. Hence, W is v-safe.
    Let (A, B) be a separation in H of order less than k. Since E(HS ) ⊆ E(H), we observe that
(A ∩ V (HS ), B ∩ V (HS )) is a separation in HS of order less than k. Let then T be the set of all
separations (A, B) of H of order less than k such that (A ∩ V (HS ), B ∩ V (HS )) belongs to T ′ .
Similarly, let TW be the set of all the separations (A, B) of H of order less than σ such that
(A ∩ V (HS ), B ∩ V (HS )) is in TW′ . Then, T is a tangle of order k in H that satisfies

                                  ∀(A,B)∈T w(←
                                             −
                                             η (HS ,ηS ) (B \ A)) ⩾ 0.99τ.

Moreover, TW is the tangle of order σ governed by W in H and is equal to the restriction of T to
order σ satisfying (5).

    We fix the wall W obtained via Lemma 3.10 for the remainder of the proof. In subsequent steps
we are going to obtain more and more structural properties of (H, η) and W , at the cost of gradually
shrinking W . The actual value of σ will be fixed at the end of the proof, so that the final remnants
of W are still substantial.

3.4    Finding a {t, t, t}-pyramid in a v-safe wall
In what follows, we will be thinking of every path P as a path with an orientation, so that P has a
starting vertex ←u−(P ) and an ending vertex →       −
                                                     u (P ), and for an integer 1 ⩽ i ⩽ |V (P )| we can speak
of the i-th vertex ui (P ) of a path. Clearly, ←     −(P ) = u (P ) and →
                                                     u          1
                                                                            −
                                                                            u (P ) = u|V (P )| (P ). Additionally,
we will call a set of paths P1 , P2 , . . . , Pi almost vertex-disjoint if they all share the same final vertex
and are otherwise vertex-disjoint. More formally, if there is a vertex u such that for all 1 ⩽ j ⩽ i,
→
−u (Pj ) = u, and the set of paths P1 − u, P2 − u, . . . , Pi − u is vertex-disjoint set of paths, then we
the paths are almost vertex-disjoint.
    For a moment, let us get out of the context of the proof of Lemma 3.2 and introduce an auxiliary
tool for finding long almost disjoint paths in some parts of H and subwalls of W .

Lemma 3.11 (Finding paths of length t in a wall). Let W       f be a 2t-subdivided wall of sidelength at
least 3 in a graph H.e Let P1 , P2 , P3 be vertex-disjoint paths such that →       −
                                                                                   u (Pi ) is a peg of W
                                                                                                       f for
i = 1, 2, 3. Let H ′
                 e be the subgraph of H e consisting of W f and all paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3.
    Then, there exist three almost vertex-disjoint paths P1′ , P2′ , P3′ in H
                                                                            e ′ such that for every i = 1, 2, 3
                                            ′
there exists an integer 1 ⩽ ki ⩽ min(|V (Pi )|, |V (Pi )|) so that

   • the prefix of Pi′ up to uki (Pi′ ) equals the prefix of Pi up to uki (Pi ); and

   • the suffix of Pi′ from uki (Pi′ ) is an induced path in W
                                                             f of length greater than t.

Proof. A finishing touch for a vertex v in W
                                           f is a path defined as follows:

   • if v is a peg of H,
                      e then a finishing touch is a zero-length path consisting of v only;

   • otherwise, if Q is the basic path of W
                                          f containing v, then a finishing touch of v is a subpath
     of Q between v and one of its endpoints (which is always a peg). Note that if v is not a peg
     then v has two finishing touches.



                                                       21
Thus, a finishing touch connects v with a peg of W          f , without any other peg on the way.
     Consider the following modification step. Let i ∈ {1, 2, 3} and assume Pi contains a vertex v
such that the suffix of Pi starting in v is not a finishing touch for v, but there is a finishing touch
of v whose intersection with V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 ) ∪ V (P3 ) is contained in the suffix of Pi starting at v.
Then, modify Pi by replacing the suffix starting at v with the said finishing touch of v. In the
case where this can be done with either finishing touch, choose the shorter one, so that the other
finishing touch (the one not chosen) contains over t vertices. Note that if we find the paths P1′ , P2′ ,
and P3′ for the modified paths, then they are also good for the original paths, as one can assume
that uki (Pi′ ) is not later than v on Pi′ .
     As this modification either strictly decreases the number of edges of H              e ′ that are not in W  f or
strictly decreases the number of pegs on the paths P1 , P2 , P3 while keeping H              e intact, without loss
                                                                                               ′

of generality we can assume that the modification step is not possible. This, in particular, implies
that for i = 1, 2, 3, the only peg on Pi is →    −
                                                 u (Pi ).
     Let Q be a basic path in W . Assume that there is an internal vertex of Q which is on one of the
                                 f
paths Pi . We claim that either both endpoints of Q are endpoints of two out of three paths P1 , P2 ,
P3 , or the intersection of Q with the union of paths P1 , P2 , P3 is a suffix of one of those paths and
is equal to a finishing touch of some internal vertex, v, of Q and is the shorter of v’s two finishing
touches (and therefore has at most t vertices).
     To this end, assume that an endpoint u of Q is not an endpoint of any of the paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3.
Since the endpoints are the only pegs on the paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3, u does not lie on either of the
paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3. Let w be the closest to u vertex of Q that lies on one of the paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3,
and let i ∈ {1, 2, 3} be such that w lies on Pi . By our assumption, w is an internal vertex of Q.
     Note that the modification step is applicable and we could replace the suffix of Pi starting at w
with the finishing touch being the subpath of Q from w to u. The only reason this modification
step is invalid is that the suffix of Pi starting from w is the second (and shorter) finishing touch
of w, that is, the suffix is the subpath of Q from w to the second endpoint, and that finishing touch
is the shorter of the two. This proves the claim.
     It is straightforward to verify that for any wall, H, of sidelength at least 3 and for any three
pegs, x, y, z of the wall, there is a connected component, C, of H −{x, y, z} such that x, y, z ∈ N (C).
Hence, there exists a connected component, C, of W            f − {→  −
                                                                      u (P1 ), →
                                                                               −u (P2 ), →
                                                                                         −
                                                                                         u (P3 )} such that →  −u (P1 ),
→
−         →
          −                                                           →
                                                                      −            →
                                                                                   −
 u (P2 ), u (P3 ) ∈ N (C). Let P be a shortest path from u (P1 ) to u (P2 ) with internal vertices in
C, and let P ′ be P along with a shortest path from →           −u (P3 ) to an internal vertex of P , with internal
vertices in C.
     First, we show that P ′ is a St1 ,t2 ,t3 , where t1 , t2 , t3 > 2t, with →−u (P1 ), →
                                                                                         −
                                                                                         u (P2 ), and →−
                                                                                                       u (P3 )} as its
                                                                               →
                                                                               −         →
                                                                                         −
leaves. That P is not a path follows from the fact that none of u (P1 ), u (P2 ), nor u (P3 ) belong
                   ′                                                                                  →
                                                                                                      −
to C. Furthermore, pegs of W     f , that is all vertices of degree 3, are of distance greater than 2t from
one another in W    f by the definition of a 2t-subdivided wall. It follows that P ′ must be a St ,t ,t .
                                                                                                               1 2 3
     Let c be the center of the claw (degree 3 vertex) that is P ′ and for the leaves →           −u (Pi ), i = 1, 2, 3,
let Pi∗ be the path of the claw from →    −u (Pi ) to c. Let Qi denote the basic path of W       f contained in P ∗
                                                                                                                      i
that has →  −
            u (Pi ) as one of its endpoints. Note that it follows from our previous claim that because
the only vertex of Pi∗ that is the endpoint of P1 , P2 , or P3 is →       −
                                                                          u (Pi ), we may conclude that for j ̸= i,
Pj does not intersect Pi . Furthermore, from the same claim it follows that Pi only intersects Pi∗
                            ∗

in Qi and this intersection is a suffix of Pi , which we denote as Ri , and Ri is a finishing touch for
vertex vi of Qi where the subpath of Qi from vi to the other endpoint of Qi length greater than t.
Finally, to obtain the desired path Pi′ to complete the proof, we replace Ri in Pi with the subpath
of Pi∗ from vi to c, which has length greater than t. This completes the proof.



                                                          22
    Now we get back to the context of the proof of Lemma 3.3, i.e., we work with an extended strip
decomposition (H, η) of G−v. First, consider a collection P1 , P2 , . . . , Pi of induced paths, where path
Pj has endpoints xj , yj . We say this collection is a pyramid base if the paths P1 −y1 , P2 −y2 , . . . , Pi −yi
are pairwise anti-complete, and y1 , y2 , . . . , yi form a clique of size i. We make the following simple
observation that we will later use multiple times to find {t, t, t}-pyramids within our proofs.
Lemma 3.12. Let H   e be a v-safe subgraph of H and let P be a family of almost vertex-disjoint paths
   e each of length at least one. Then one can find a family Q = {QP | P ∈ P} of induced paths
in H,
in G − N [v] which form a pyramid base and for every P ∈ P, the path QP :
   • is of length at least |V (P )| − 2;

   • starts in a vertex of η(←
                             −(P )u (P ), ←
                             u     2
                                          −(P ));
                                          u

   • ends in a vertex of η(→
                           −
                           u (P )u|V (P )|−1 (P ), →
                                                   −
                                                   u (P )); and

   • has all internal vertices contained in

                         η(e) \ (η(←
                                   −(P )u (P ), ←
                                                −(P )) ∪ η(→
                                                           −
                                                           u (P )u|V (P )|−1 (P ), →
                                                                                   −
                    [
                                   u      2     u                                  u (P ))).
                    e∈E(P )


Proof. Fix P ∈ P. Since H       e is v-safe, for every 1 ⩽ i < |V (P )| there exists a path QP,i in
G[η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ))]−N [v] with endpoints in η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ), ui (P )) and in η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ), ui+1 (P ))
and all internal vertices in η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ))\(η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ), ui (P ))∪η(ui (P )ui+1 (P ), ui+1 (P ))).
By the properties of an extended strip decomposition, the ending vertex of QP,i is adjacent to the
starting vertex of QP,i+1 for 1 ⩽ i < |V (P )| − 1. Thus, the concatenation of those paths gives
a path QP in G − N [v] with the starting and ending vertices placed as desired and with at least
|V (P )| − 1 vertices. Finally, the properties of an extended strip decomposition, together with the
assumption that the paths P are almost vertex-disjoint imply that the paths {QP | P ∈ P} form a
pyramid base. This completes the proof.

S By the properties of an extended strip decomposition, every connected component of G − v −
  e∈E(H) η(e) lies in a single set η(x) for some x ∈ V (H) or in a single set η(xyz) S
                                                                                     for some xyz ∈
T (H). We will be thinking of vertices that are reachable from v without visiting e∈E(H) η(e) as
vertices close to v in the following sense.
Definition   3.13 (projection). The projection of v, denoted Π, is the set of those vertices u ∈
Se∈E(H) η(e) for which there exists a path Pu with endpoints v and u and no internal vertex in
                                             Π
S

  e∈E(H) η(e).

    Note that PuΠ is either a single edge, or a path whose all internal vertices lie in a single set η(x)
for
S some x ∈ V (H), or in a single set η(xyz) for some xyz ∈ T (H). In particular, Π ∩ N [v] =
  e∈E(H) η(e) ∩ N [v].
    We need one more tool that will help us exhibit induced {t, t, t}-pyramids.
Lemma 3.14. Let P be a path in H of length at least one with x = ←        −(P ), y = u (P ), and
                                                                          u                2
Π ∩ η(xy) ̸= ∅.
   Then there is a path Q in G that starts in v, ends in a vertex of η(→
                                                                       −
                                                                       u (P )u|V (P )|−1 (P ), →
                                                                                               −
                                                                                               u (P )),
and has all internal vertices in
                                      [                  [
                        η(x) ∪ η(y) ∪      η(e) ∪                  η(xyz).
                                           e∈E(P )       z∈V (H) | xyz∈T (H)


                                                       23
Furthermore, if Π ∩ (η(xy) \ η(xy, x)) ̸= ∅, then Q can be chosen with all internal vertices in
                                                  [
                                         η(y) ∪       η(e).
                                                         e∈E(P )

Proof. Pick u ∈ Π ∩ η(xy), preferably not in η(xy, x) if possible. The path PuΠ is either a direct
edge, has all internal vertices in η(y), all internal vertices in η(x), or all internal vertices in η(xyz)
for some z ∈ V (H) such that xyz ∈ T (H). Furthermore, if u ∈      / η(xy, x), then the last two options
are impossible.
    Since (H, η) is locally cleaned, in particular, the “moving a disconnected vertex of an interface”
and “moving a disconnected component of an edge set” steps are inapplicable, there is a path
Qu in η(xy) from u to a vertex w ∈ η(xy, y) with all internal vertices not in η(xy, x). By the
properties of a locally cleaned extended S strip decomposition, there is a path Ru from w to a vertex
of η(→−
      u (P )u|V (P )|−1 (P ), →
                              −
                              u (P )) via e∈E(P )\{xy} η(e). By concatenating PuΠ , Qu , and Ru , and
possibly shortcuting it to an induced path we obtain the desired path Q.
    We are ready to find our first {t, t, t}-pyramid of the proof.
Lemma 3.15. For every constant t1 there is a constant t2 such that if W is a v-safe wall in H of
sidelength at least t2 , then either G contains an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid or there exists a subwall
W ′ of W of sidelength t1 such that for every e ∈ E(H) with Π ∩ η(e) ̸= ∅, at most one endpoint of
e lies in W ′ .
Proof. Consider the natural plane embedding of the wall W as given in Figure 4. Assume that the
columns and rows of W have been sequentially labeled 1 through t2 . Remove rows t2 − t through t2
of W , if it now holds that every e ∈ E(H) with Π ∩ η(e) ̸= ∅, at most one endpoint of e lies in W ,
then we are done, so assume that this does not happen. So there is an x1 and y1 in W such that
Π ∩ η(x1 y1 ) ̸= ∅. Let Cx1 and Cy1 be the columns of W that x1 and y1 lie in. If x1 and y2 lie on
the same column, then choose x1 to be the vertex that is closer to row t2 in W . Remove Cx1 and
Cy1 from W . Again, if it now holds that every e ∈ E(H) with Π ∩ η(e) ̸= ∅, at most one endpoint
of e lies in W , then we are done, so assume that this does not happen. Repeat this process to find
a x2 , y2 and x3 , y3 .
     Now consider the original wall W , without any of the columns or rows removed. By how x1 ,
x2 , and x3 were chosen, there exists paths P1 , P2 , and P3 each of length at least t + 1 contained in
columns Cx1 , Cx2 , Cx3 from x1 , x2 , and x3 respectively down to row t2 which are vertex-disjoint
and do not contain y1 , y2 , nor y3 . Assume, without loss of generality, that the end vertex of P2 that
lies in row t2 , call it z2 , (which must be a peg) is in-between the end vertices of P1 and P3 that lie
in row t2 . Extended P1 and P3 to reach z2 using vertices in row t2 . Now P1 , P2 , and P3 are three
almost vertex-disjoint paths of lengths at least t + 1.
     Now, for i = 1, 2, 3, proceed as follows. Apply Lemma 3.14 to a path consisting of the edge xi yi
only, obtaining a path Qi from    S v to a vertex ui ∈ η(xi yi , xi ) with all internal vertices in η(xi ) ∪
η(yi )∪(η(xi yi )\η(xi yi , xi ))∪ z∈V (H) | xi yi z∈T (H) η(xi yi z). Since the vertices x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , x3 , y3 are
pairwise distinct, the paths {Qi −{v} | 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 3} are anti-adjacent. Hence, V (Q1 )∪V (Q2 )∪V (Q3 )
induce a tree with three leaves u1 , u2 , u3 and v being the unique vertex of degree 3. We now extend
this tree with paths QPi for i = 1, 2, 3, obtained from paths Pi , i = 1, 2, 3, using Lemma 3.12 for
He = W . This gives the desired {t, t, t}-pyramid.

   A wall W ′ in H is v-pure if it is v-safe, it is 2t-subdivided, and for every e ∈ E(H) with
η(e) ∩ Π ̸= ∅, at most one endpoint of e lies in W ′ .
   The following statement follows directly from Lemma 3.15 and the fact that by leaving only
every (2t + 1)-th column and row of a wall, we can extract a 2t-subdivided subwall.

                                                           24
Lemma 3.16. For every constant t1 there exists a constant t2 such that if W is a v-safe wall in H
of sidelength at least t2 , then either G contains an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid or W contains a v-pure
subwall W ′ of sidelength t1 .

3.5    The case of Π being well-connected to a v-pure wall
Lemma 3.16 allows us to find a large v-pure wall W in H. We now observe that if there is a
substantial connection between edges of H containing elements of Π in their sets and W , then G
admits an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid.

Lemma 3.17 (Pyramid rooted at v without a small cut). Let W be a v-pure wall in H of sidelength
at least 3. Assume that H contains three vertex-disjoint paths P1 , P2 , and P3 such that for every
i = 1, 2, 3, the first edge ei of Pi is such that η(ei ) ∩ Π ̸= ∅ and the ending vertex of Pi is a peg
of W . Then G contains an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid.

Proof. Apply Lemma 3.11 to P1 , P2 , P3 , and W , obtaining paths P1′ , P2′ , P3′ . For every i = 1, 2, 3
define the path Pi′′ as follows. If ei is the first edge of Pi′ (i.e., ki > 1 from Lemma 3.11), then keep
Pi′′ := Pi′ . The other case is only possible if ei = xi yi with xi ∈ V (W ), yi ∈    / V (W ), xi = ←    −(P ),
                                                                                                          u    i
and the path Pi′ is fully contained in W . Note that, because Pj and Pj′ differ only inside W , the
vertex xi is not used by any other path Pj′ . Define Pi′′ to be the path Pi′ prepended with the edge
ei (so now ←   −(P ′′ ) = y ). (Note that e cannot be an edge of W as y ∈
               u    i       i                i                                 i / V (W ).) In this manner,
(Pi′′ )i=1,2,3 are almost vertex-disjoint, each starts with ei and contains a suffix of length at least t
contained in the wall W .
     Split each Pi′′ into the said suffix Ri of length t and the remaining prefix Qi . Lemma 3.12 applied
to {Ri | 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 3} and H     e = W induced paths R′ on at least t vertices each which forms a pyramid
                                                       i
base. Lemma 3.14 applied to Qi gives a path Q′i from v to a vertex of η(→     −
                                                                              u (Qi )u|V (Qi )|−1 (Qi ), →
                                                                                                         −
                                                                                                         u (Qi )).
Because the paths Pi for i = 1, 2, 3 are almost vertex-disjoint, the paths Qi − {v} for i = 1, 2, 3 are
                         ′′                                                        ′

anti-adjacent. Then, Q′1 ∪ Q′2 ∪ Q′3 ∪ R1′ ∪ R2′ ∪ R3′ contains an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid with v as the
apex (the unique degree three vertex in {t, t, t}-pyramid with an independent neighborhood).

Lemma 3.18 (Pyramid in wall rooted at v where paths in H start at a single vertex). Let W
be a v-pure wall of sidelength at least 3. Assume that H contains three vertex-disjoint paths P1 ,
P2 , P3 and a vertex x ∈ V (H) such that for every i = 1, 2, 3 the ending vertex of Pi is a peg of
W while x←   −(P ) ∈ E(H) and Π ∩ (η(x←
             u   i
                                         −(P )) \ η(x←
                                         u  i
                                                     −(P ), x)) ̸= ∅. Then, G contains an induced
                                                     u  i
{t, t, t}-pyramid.

Proof. We start by applying Lemma 3.11 to P1 , P2 , and P3 , obtaining almost vertex-disjoint paths
P1′ , P2′ , and P3′ and indices k1 , k2 , and k3 . We remark that x may appear on one of the paths Pi′
and even one of those paths can start with the edge x←        −(P ).
                                                              u   i
      Fix i ∈ {1, 2, 3}. Denote yi = ←  −(P ) = ←
                                        u   i
                                                  −(P ′ ). Lemma 3.14, applied to the single edge xy gives
                                                  u  i                                                     i
a path Qi from v to vi ∈ η(yi x, yi ) with all internal vertices in η(yi )∪(η(xyi )\(η(xyi , x)∪η(xyi , yi ))).
Observe that because vertices yi are pairwise distinct, the paths Qi − {v} are pairwise disjoint and
anti-adjacent for i = 1, 2, 3.
      If ki > 1, extend Qi from vi to a vertex of η(uki (Pi′ )uki −1 (Pi′ ), uki (Pi′ )) via sets η(e) for e lying
on the prefix of Pi′ till uki (Pi′ ), and shorten the walk to an induced path in the end. Let Q′i be the
resulting path; set Q′i = Qi if ki = 1 and observe that if ki = 1 then the first edge of Pi′ is not xyi
as xyi ∈   / E(W ) due to W being v-pure. To obtain the desired {t, t, t}-pyramid with apex v, extend
every path Q′i with a path obtained from Lemma 3.12 applied to the suffix of Pi′ from uki (Pi′ ) and
He = W.


                                                       25
   We will use Lemmas 3.17 and 3.18 to find a separation that separates W from Π. The precise
meaning of “separate” is encapsulated in the following statement.
Definition 3.19 (capturing a projection). Let (A, B) be a separation in H and let Z ⊆ A ∩ B.
We say that (A, B) captures Π with backdoor set Z if for every e ∈ E(H) with Π ∩ η(e) ̸= ∅, either
e ⊆ A or there is an endpoint x ∈ e such that x ∈ Z and Π ∩ η(e) ⊆ η(e, x).
Lemma 3.20. Let W be a v-pure wall in H of sidelength at least 55. Then either G contains an
induced {t, t, t}-pyramid or there exists a separation (A, B) ∈ TW of order less than 19 that captures
Π with a backdoor set of size at most 2.
Proof. Let
                       X1 = {x ∈ V (H) | ∃ex =xyx ∈E(H) Π ∩ (η(ex ) \ η(ex , yx )) ̸= ∅}.
For each x ∈ X1 fix one edge ex (and thus also the endpoint yx ) as in the definition above. Let

                                               / X1 and Π ∩ η(e, x) ∩ η(e, y) ̸= ∅}.
                     F = {e = xy ∈ E(H) | x, y ∈

Let F2 be a maximal matching in F and let X2 := V (F2 ). For an edge e = xy ∈ F2 we denote
ex = ey = e. Furthermore, for every x ∈ X2 , if xy is the unique edge of F2 containing x, then we
denote yx = y. Let X := X1 ∪ X2 . Note that ex and yx has been defined for all x ∈ X. Observe
that, by the definition of X,

            ∀e∈E(H) (η(e) ∩ Π ̸= ∅) =⇒ (e ⊆ X) or (e ∩ X = {x} and η(e) ∩ Π ⊆ η(e, x)) .                           (6)

     Assume first that there exists a family P of 17 vertex-disjoint paths in H with starting points
in X and ending points in pegs of W . Let X ′ ⊆ X be the set of the starting points of the paths in
P and for x ∈ X ′ let Px ∈ P be the path starting at x. We say that x ∈ X ′ kills x′ ∈ X ′ \ {x} if yx
lies on Px′ . Observe that x kills at most one x′ ∈ X ′ as paths in P are pairwise vertex-disjoint.
     Consider an auxiliary bipartite graph K with sides being two copies of X ′ and an edge (x, x′ ) ∈
E(K) if x kills x′ . We consider two subcases. In the first subcase, K has a matching of size 9.
Then, K contains three edges (x1 , x′1 ), (x2 , x′2 ), and (x3 , x′3 ) such that x1 , x′1 , x2 , x′2 , x3 , x′3 are six
pairwise distinct vertices of X ′ . Then, the paths Pxi prepended with the edge exi are vertex-disjoint
and satisfy the requirements of Lemma 3.17, giving an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G. In the other
case, K has a vertex cover of size at most 8. By deleting these vertices from X ′ , we obtain a subset
X ′′ ⊆ X ′ of size 9 where no vertex kills another one.
     Consider now a graph L on the vertex set X ′′ where xx′ ∈ E(L) if yx = yx′ . By Ramsey’s
Theorem, L has an independent set of size 3 or a clique of size 4. If I is an independent set of size
3 in L, then for every x ∈ I obtain a path Px′ as follows: if yx does not lie on Px , set Px′ to be Px
prepended with the edge xyx , and otherwise set Px′ to be the edge xyx with the suffix of Px starting
in yx ; note that {Px′ | x ∈ I} satisfy the requirements of Lemma 3.17. If I is a clique of size 4 in
L, denote by z the vertex that is equal to yx for every x ∈ I. Note that because F2 is a matching,
at most one element of I is in X2 . Hence, z and {Px | x ∈ I \ X2 } satisfy the requirements of
Lemma 3.18. This finishes the case where the family of paths P exists.
     In the other case, by Menger’s theorem, there is a separation (A, B) in H of order less than 17
such that X ⊆ A but all pegs of W lie in B. By (6), (A, B) captures Π, but the set of backdoors can
be as large as A ∩ B. Our goal is now to modify (A, B) a bit to restrict the set of backdoors. To this
end, consider a subgraph H ′ of H with V (H ′ ) = B and e ∈ E(H ′ ) if e ⊆ B \ A or |e ∩ A ∩ B| = 1
and η(e) ∩ Π ̸= ∅.
     We consider two subcases. In the first subcase, H ′ contains a family Q of three vertex-disjoint
paths from A ∩ B to the set of pegs of W that are in B \ A. By the construction of H ′ , each path

                                                          26
Q ∈ Q starts with a vertex x ∈ A ∩ B and an edge ex = xyx , yx ∈ B \ A, and Π ∩ η(ex ) ̸= ∅. Then,
Lemma 3.17 applied to Q yields an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G.
    In the second subcase, there is a separation (A′ , B ′ ) in H ′ of order less than 3 such that A∩B ⊆ A′
while all pegs of W that lie in B \ A belong to B ′ . Let A′′ := A ∪ A′ and B ′′ := B ′ ∪ (A ∩ B).
Then, (A′′ , B ′′ ) is a separation in H with X ⊆ A′′ and all pegs of W lying in B ′′ . Furthermore,
A′′ ∩ B ′′ = (A′ ∩ B ′ ) ∪ (A ∩ B). In particular, the order of (A′′ , B ′′ ) is less than 19 and hence
(A′′ , B ′′ ) ∈ TW as W has sidelength at least 55 (so TW has order at least 19) and all pegs of W lie
in B ′′ .
    Consider now z ∈ A′′ ∩ B ′′ such that there exists an edge zy ∈ E(H) with y ∈ B ′′ \ A′′ and
Π ∩ η(zy) ̸= ∅. By (6), {y, z} ∩ X ̸= ∅. However, as X ⊆ A while y ∈            / A, we have z ∈ X, z ∈ A,
and, by (6) again, Π ∩ η(zy) ⊆ η(zy, z). The edge zy belongs to H ′ . Since y ∈ B ′′ \ A′′ ⊆ B ′ \ A′ ,
we have z ∈ B ′ . Since z ∈ A ∩ B ⊆ A′ , we have z ∈ A′ ∩ B ′ .
    Hence, (A′′ , B ′′ ) ∈ TW is a separation of order less than 19 that captures Π with backdoor set
Z ⊆ A′ ∩ B ′ , which is of size at most 2. This finishes the proof.

3.6     Cleaning the backdoors
Lemma 3.20 allows us to find a separation of small order that captures Π with at most two backdoors.
Our goal in this section is to further clean the situation with regards to how exactly the neighbors
of v can appear around η(z) and η(zx, x) for a backdoor vertex z. On the way there, we will need
to sacrifice small parts of the wall W defining the tangle or slightly increase the size of the allowed
separation.
    We start with the following straightforward observation from the definition of capturing Π and
the fact that (H, η) is locally cleaned.
Lemma 3.21. Let (A, B) be a separation in H that captures Π with backdoor set Z. Suppose
xyz ∈ T (H) is such that η(xyz) ∩ N (v) ̸= ∅. Then either x, y, z ∈ A, or two of the vertices x, y, z
belong to Z and the third one is in B \ A.
   We need a few definitions that describe how a separation behaves with respect to the triangles.
Let (A, B) be a separation in H that captures Π with backdoor set Z.
Definition 3.22 (triangle-safe separation). We say that (A, B) is triangle-safe if for every triangle
T = xyz ∈ T (H) with η(T ) ∩ N (v) ̸= ∅ either x, y, z ∈ A or, assuming without loss of generality
y, z ∈ A ∩ B and x ∈ B \ A, we have that v is complete to both η(xy, y) and η(xz, z).
      Assume (A, B) is triangle-safe separation in H that captures Π with backdoor set Z. For z ∈ Z,
let                                               [
                                     Pz :=                    η(zx, z).
                                             x∈NH (z)∩(B\A)

Observe that for every u ∈ Π ∩ Pz , the path PuΠ is either a direct edge or goes via η(z): it cannot go
through η(xyz) for a triangle with say x ∈ B \ A as, thanks to triangle-safeness, v is then complete
to η(xz, z), where u resides. A z-entry point is a vertex v ′ ∈ {v} ∪ η(z) that has a neighbor in Pz
and admits a path QΠ  v ′ from v to v (it can be of zero length when v = v ) whose internal vertices
                                     ′                                       ′

have no neighbors in Pz . A backdoor vertex z ∈ Z is pure if every z-entry point is complete to Pz .
    In the next two lemmas we first ensure that we have a separation in H that captures Π and is
triangle-safe, and then we ensure that all backdoors are pure.
Lemma 3.23 (triangle cleanup). Let W be a v-pure wall in G and let (A, B) ∈ TW be a separation
capturing Π with a set of backdoors Z of size at most 2 such that the sidelength of W is kW ⩾

                                                    27
4|A ∩ B| + 7. Then, either G admits an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid or there exists a subwall W ′ of W
of sidelength at least kW − |A ∩ B| and a separation (A′ , B ′ ) ∈ TW ′ in H of order at most |A ∩ B| + 2
that captures Π with a backdoor set of size at most 2, A ⊆ A′ , B ′ ⊆ B, and is triangle-safe.
Proof. If (A, B) is already triangle-safe, we can return W = W ′ and (A′ , B ′ ) = (A, B), so assume
otherwise. By Lemma 3.21, this is only possible if |Z| = 2, say Z = {z1 , z2 } and there is a triangle
z1 z2 x ∈ T (H) with η(xyz) ∩ N (v) ̸= ∅ and x ∈ B \ A, but v is not complete to η(zx, z) for some
z ∈ {z1 , z2 }. Let us call such a triangle a violating triangle. Let X be the set of those x ∈ B \ A for
which z1 z2 x is a violating triangle.
    Since (A, B) ∈ TW , B \ A contains kW − |A ∩ B| full rows and kW − |A ∩ B| full columns of W ;
let W ′ be a subwall of W completely contained in B \ A of sidelength at least kW − |A ∩ B|.
    We consider two cases. In the first case, there are three vertex-disjoint paths P1 , P2 , P3 from X
to the pegs of W ′ in the graph H[B \ A]. Let xi = ←         −(P ) for i = 1, 2, 3. In this case, we exhibit an
                                                             u    i
induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G.
    To this end, apply Lemma 3.11 to P1 , P2 , P3 , and W ′ , obtaining paths P1′ , P2′ , and P3′ . We
note that as all paths P1 , P2 , and P3 , as well as the wall W ′ are in H[B \ A], the paths P1′ , P2′ ,
and P3′ are also contained in H[B \ A]; in particular, they do not contain vertices z1 nor z2 . Since
(A, B) captures Π, H[B \ A] is v-safe. Thus, Lemma 3.12 applied to {P1′ , P2′ , P3′ } in H[B \ A] yields
induced paths R1 , R2 , R3 which form a pyramid base.
    For i = 1, 2, 3, let Ci be a component of G[η(xi z1 z2 )] that contains a neighbor of v. Since z1
and z2 are symmetric so far, as z1 z2 x2 is a violating triangle, we can assume that v is not complete
to η(z1 x2 , z1 ); pick y2 ∈ η(z1 x2 , z1 ) nonadjacent to v. Since (H, η) is locally cleaned, C1 has a
neighbor y1 ∈ η(z1 x1 , z1 ) ∩ η(z1 x1 , x1 ) and C3 has a neighbor y3 ∈ η(z2 x3 , z2 ) ∩ η(z2 x3 , x3 ). (We
emphasize the intended lack of symmetry in the choice of z1 vs z2 in the last two sentences.) By the
properties of an extended strip decomposition, y1 y2 ∈ E(G), y1 y3 , y2 y3 ∈       / E(G), and C1 and C3 are
anti-adjacent to y2 . Let Q be a shortest path from y1 to y3 via C1 , v, and C3 (note that it may go
via direct edges vy1 or vy3 if they exist). Let R2′ be a shortest path from y2 to a vertex of η(z1 x2 , x2 )
with all internal vertices in η(z1 x2 ) \ (η(z1 x2 , z1 ) ∪ η(z1 x2 , x2 )). By appending R1 to y1 , R2′ and R2
to y2 , and R3 to y3 and connecting y1 and y3 via Q, we obtain an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G
with apex in y1 .
    In the second case, there is a separation (A1 , B1 ) in H[B \ A] of order less than 3 with X ⊆ A1
and all pegs of W ′ lying in B1 . Define A′ = A ∪ A1 and B ′ = B1 ∪ (A ∩ B). Clearly, (A′ , B ′ ) is a
separation of order at most |A ∩ B| + 2 in H with A ⊆ A′ and B ′ ⊆ B. Since the sidelength of W ′
is at least 3|A ∩ B| + 7 and all pegs of W ′ lie in B ′ , we have (A′ , B ′ ) ∈ TW ′ . Since A ⊆ A′ , any
backdoor vertex of (A′ , B ′ ) is also a backdoor vertex of (A, B), and thus is in the set Z of size 2.
Finally, since X ⊆ A1 , for every xyz ∈ T (H) with η(xyz) ∩ N (v) ̸= ∅ we have x, y, z ∈ A′ . Thus,
the wall W ′ and the separation (A′ , B ′ ) is the desired outcome.

Lemma 3.24 (backdoor cleanup). Let W be a v-pure wall in G and let (A, B) ∈ TW be a separation
capturing Π with a set of backdoors Z of size at most 2 that is triangle-safe and such that the
sidelength of W is kW ⩾ 4|A ∩ B| + 7.
    Suppose there exists a backdoor vertex z ∈ Z that is not pure. Then, one of the following holds:
   • G admits an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid;

   • H admits a separation (A0 , B0 ) ∈ TW of order 1 that captures Π with backdoor set A ∩ B;

   • H admits a subwall W ′ of W of sidelength at least kW −|A∩B| and a separation (A′ , B ′ ) ∈ TW ′
     of order at most |A ∩ B| + 2 with A ⊆ A′ and B ′ ⊆ B capturing Π with backdoor set contained
     in Z \ {z}; or

                                                      28
    • H admits a separation (A∗ , B ∗ ) ∈ TW of order at most |A ∩ B| with A ⊆ A∗ , B ∗ ⊆ B, and
       (A, B) ̸= (A∗ , B ∗ ).
Proof. Recall that for z ∈ A ∩ B, Pz = x∈NH (z)∩(B\A) η(zx, z). Fix a z-entry point v ′ ∈ {v} ∪ η(z)
                                          S

that causes z not to be pure: v ′ has some neighbors in Pz , but is not complete to Pz .
    Since (A, B) ∈ TW while the sidelength of W is at least 4|A ∩ B| + 7, we define W ′ to be a
subwall of W of sidelength at least kW − |A ∩ B| ⩾ 3|A ∩ B| + 7 that is fully contained in H[B \ A].
    We define X1 to be the set of those vertices x ∈ A for which either xz ∈ E(H) and Π ∩ (η(xz) \
η(xz, z)) ̸= ∅, or there exists a neighbor y ∈ NH (x) ∩ (A \ {z}) with Π ∩ η(xy) ̸= ∅. Let X⊥ be the
set of those vertices y ∈ B \ A for which there exists xy ∈ X1 and a path Py in H from xy to y that
avoids z and whose only vertex outside A is y; denote the last edge of Py by ey and the penultimate
vertex of Py by zy (so that ey = zy y). Note that Lemma 3.14 implies that for every y ∈ X⊥ there
exists an induced path Ry from v to a vertex η(ey , y) whose all internal vertices belong to
                          [                            [               [              [
 (η(ey )\η(ey , y))∪            (η(zx)\η(zx, x))∪              η(e)∪        η(x)∪           η(T ). (7)
                    x∈NH (z)∩A                      e∈E(H[A\{z}])       x∈A\{z}         T ∈T (H[A])

     We construct an auxiliary graph H1 as follows. Start with H1 := H[B \ A]. Add all vertices of
Pz to H1 and for a vertex u ∈ Pz , if u ∈ η(zy, z) for y ∈ B \ A, make u adjacent to y in H1 . Add
three new vertices a◦ , a• , and a⊥ . Make a⊥ adjacent to all vertices of X⊥ . Make a◦ adjacent to all
vertices of Pz that are nonadjacent to v ′ in G and make a• adjacent to all vertices of Pz that are
adjacent to v ′ in G.
     We consider two cases. In the first case, there are three vertex-disjoint paths P◦ , P• , and P⊥
in H1 from a◦ , a• , and a⊥ , respectively, to the set of pegs of W ′ . In this case, we will exhibit an
induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G.
     Since every vertex of Pz is of degree 2 in H1 , the path P◦ starts in a◦ , continues via u◦ ∈ η(zx◦ , z)
to x◦ ∈ B \ A and then stays in B \ A till the end. Similarly, the path P• starts in a• , continues
via u• ∈ η(zx• , z) to x• ∈ B \ A and then stays in B \ A till the end. By construction, v ′ u◦ ∈    / E(G)
while v u• ∈ E(G). Since P◦ and P• are vertex-disjoint, x◦ ̸= x• and thus u◦ u• ∈ E(G) by the
          ′

properties of an extended strip decomposition. Let a⊥ x⊥ be the first edge of P⊥ for some x⊥ ∈ X⊥ .
     Apply Lemma 3.11 to P◦ , P• , P⊥ , and the wall W ′ , obtaining almost vertex-disjoint paths P◦′ ,
P• , and P⊥′ . Note that a◦ u◦ and u◦ x◦ remain the first two edges of P◦′ , a• u• and u• x• remain the
   ′

first two edges of P•′ , and a⊥ x⊥ remains the first edge of P⊥′ .
     The suffixes of paths P◦′ , P•′ , and P⊥′ from x◦ , x• , and x⊥ , respectively, stay in H[B \ A], which
is v-safe due to the assumption that (A, B) captures Π. Apply Lemma 3.12 to these three suffixes
and H[B \ A], obtaining induced paths R◦ , R• , and R⊥ which form a pyramid base.
     We now exhibit an induced {t, t, t}-pyramid in G with apex u• . For the first leg, as (H, η)
is locally cleaned (in particular, the “moving a disconnected vertex of an interface” and “moving
a disconnected component of an edge set” operations are inapplicable), there is a path in η(zx• )
(possibly of zero length) from u• to a vertex of η(zx• , x• ) whose only vertex of η(zx• , z) is u• ;
concatenate this path with R• . For the second leg, start with an edge u• u◦ , continue via an
analogous path in η(zx◦ ) from u◦ to a vertex of η(zx◦ , x◦ ) whose only vertex of η(zx◦ , z) is u◦ and
append R◦ at the end. For the third leg, go with a shortest path from u• to the starting vertex of
R⊥ via v ′ , QΠ v ′ , v, Rx⊥ , and finish with R⊥ . Condition (7) ensures that this is indeed an induced
{t, t, t}-pyramid in G.
     We are left with the second case where H1 contains a separation (A1 , B1 ) of order less than three
with a◦ , a• , a⊥ ∈ A1 but all pegs of W ′ in B1 . Pick such (A1 , B1 ) with B1 inclusion-wise minimal.
     Observe that no vertex of Pz is in A1 ∩ B1 , as if some u ∈ A1 ∩ B1 with u ∈ η(zx, z), x ∈ B \ A,
then as a◦ , a• ∈ A1 , (A1 ∪ {x}, B1 \ {u}) is also a separation of order less than 3, contradicting the

                                                     29
choice of (A1 , B1 ). Let B ′ consist of the pegs of W ′ and NH [(B\A)∩(B1 \A1 )] and A′ = V (H)\((B\
A) ∩ (B1 \ A1 )). Clearly, (A′ , B ′ ) is a separation in H. Observe that A′ ∩ B ′ ⊆ (A ∩ B) ∪ (A1 ∩ B1 ),
and thus the order of (A′ , B ′ ) is at most |A ∩ B| + |A1 ∩ B1 | ⩽ |A ∩ B| + 2. As all pegs of W ′ are
in B ′ , (A′ , B ′ ) ∈ TW ′ ⊆ TW . We have B ′ ⊆ B and thus A ⊆ A′ , and hence (A′ , B ′ ) is triangle-safe
and captures Π with a backdoor set being a subset of Z.
    If there is no path in H[B \ A] from X⊥ to a peg of W ′ , then define a separation as follows.
Let B0 consist of z and all vertices of H reachable in H − {z} from a peg of W ′ , and let A0 =
(V (H) \ B0 ) ∪ {z}. Clearly, (A0 , B0 ) is a separation of order 1 in H. Since all pegs of W ′ lie in
B0 , we have (A0 , B0 ) ∈ TW ′ ⊆ TW . By the assumption, X⊥ ⊆ A0 . Hence, (A0 , B0 ) is Π-capturing.
This gives the second outcome of the lemma.
    If for some a ∈ {a◦ , a• } there is no path in H1 from a to a peg of W ′ , define a separation (A∗ , B ∗ )
as follow. Let C be all vertices of B \ A reachable from a in H1 . Since v ′ has at least one neighbor
in Pz , but is not complete to Pz , we have that a is not an isolated vertex of H1 and thus C ̸= ∅.
Let A∗ = A ∪ C and B ∗ = B \ C. Then, (A∗ , B ∗ ) is also a separation in H with A ∩ B = A∗ ∩ B ∗
and all pegs in W ′ lying in B ∗ (thus (A∗ , B ∗ ) ∈ TW ′ ⊆ TW ) but with A ⊊ A∗ , B ∗ ⊊ B. This gives
the last outcome of the lemma.
    If z is not a backdoor vertex of (A′ , B ′ ), then we are done with the penultimate outcome.
Otherwise, there exists x ∈ B ′ \ A′ with Π ∩ η(zx, z) ̸= ∅. We have x ∈ B1 \ A1 and thus either a◦ or
a• belongs to A1 ∩ B1 . Since |A1 ∩ B1 | < 3 and for every a ∈ {a◦ , a• , a⊥ } there is a path from a to a
peg of W ′ in H1 , A1 ∩B1 is of size 2 and consists of a ∈ {a◦ , a• } and a vertex z ′ ∈ B\A. In particular,
a⊥ ∈ A1 \ B1 hence X⊥ ⊆ A1 . Observe that for every y ∈ X⊥ , we have NH (zy ) ∩ (B \ A) ⊆ X⊥ .
Hence, for every y ∈ X⊥ , the vertex zy lies in A′ \ B ′ . As there is a path from X⊥ to a peg of
W ′ in H[B \ A], in particular we have X⊥ ̸= ∅, so at least one zy in (A′ \ B ′ ) ∩ (A ∩ B) exists.
As A1 ∩ B1 = {a, z ′ }, we have A′ ∩ B ′ ⊆ (A ∩ B) ∪ {z ′ }. As (A′ \ B ′ ) ∩ (A ∩ B) ̸= ∅, we have
|A′ ∩ B ′ | ⩽ |A ∩ B| and (A′ , B ′ ) ̸= (A, B). This proves that (A′ , B ′ ) satisfies the properties of the
last outcome of the lemma.

   We conclude this section with a lemma summarizing what we obtained so far.

Lemma 3.25. For every constant t, there exists a constant ct and a polynomial-time algorithm that,
given input as in Lemma 3.2, either returns one of the promised outputs of Lemma 3.2 or outputs
all the following objects:

   • a locally clean extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G − v where every vertex of H has degree
     at least 2 and every particle of has weight at most 0.01τ ,

   • a separation (A, B) in H of order at most ct that is triangle-safe, captures Π with backdoor
     set Z of size at most 2 such that every z ∈ Z is pure, and satisfies w(←
                                                                            −
                                                                            η (H,η) (B \ A)) ⩾ 0.99τ ,
     and

   • for every X ⊆ A ∩ B of size three, a family QX = {QX     x | x ∈ X} of three induced paths
     in G on t vertices each which induce a pyramid base, where for every x ∈ X there exists
     yx ∈ NH (x) ∩ (B \ A)                      X
                        S such that the path Qx starts in a vertex of η(xyx , x) and has all re-
     maining vertices in e∈E(G[B\A]) η(e) or in η(xyx ) \ η(xyx , x).

Proof. We compute (H, η) as discussed in Section 3.2, by exhaustively applying the local cleaning
operation to the input extended strip decomposition of G − v and discarding isolated vertices of
H with empty vertex sets. Either a 0.99τ -balanced separator dominated by a constant number of
vertices is returned, or (H, η) satisfies properties (2), (3), and (4).



                                                     30
      We fix σ to be large enough constant depending on t, emerging from the proof. We start
searching for W and (A, B) by applying Lemma 3.10. Thus, we can either already conclude, or get
a v-safe wall W of sidelength 3σ satisfying (5).
      We proceed with W with a series of lemmas that each either concludes the reasoning, or exhibit
a subwall W ′ of W with some additional property. The new subwall will be large in the following
sense: if for every constant σ ′ there exists a constant σ such that if W is of sidelength at least σ,
then W ′ is guaranteed to be of sidelength at least σ ′ . After each step, we rename W ′ back to W .
For the sake of clarity, we will not follow the exact computation of the dependencies of σ on σ ′ , but
only refer to them as a “decrease” or “losing on the sidelength”.
      We start with applying Lemma 3.16 to W ; by losing a bit on the sidelength of W , we can
assume that W is actually v-pure. We then apply Lemma 3.20. This yields either an induced
{t, t, t}-pyramid in G (which we can return) or a separation (A, B) ∈ TW of order less than 19 that
 captures Π and has backdoor set of size at most 2. We pass it to Lemma 3.23 that either finds
 {t, t, t}-pyramid or, at the cost of a slight decrease (of at most |A ∩ B|) of the sidelength of W
 and an increase of the order of (A, B) by at most 2, upgrades (A, B) to be triangle-safe. (Here, we
 slightly abuse the notation by denoting the output of Lemma 3.23 by W and (A, B), again.)
      We now iterate on improving W and (A, B) using Lemma 3.24. While (A, B) has a backdoor
 vertex z that is not pure, apply Lemma 3.24 to W , (A, B), and z. If the third outcome happens,
 replace W with W ′ and (A, B) with (A′ , B ′ ) and repeat; note that this can happen only twice as
 initially (A, B) has at most two backdoors. If the fourth outcome happens, replace (A, B) with
 (A∗ , B ∗ ) and repeat; note that this step can happen O(|V (H)|) times, but does not degrade the
 order of (A, B) nor the size of the wall W .
      If we reach (A, B) with all backdoor vertices being pure, we proceed as follows. First, note that
 we can assume that there is no (A′ , B ′ ) ∈ TW with A ⊆ A′ but |A′ ∩ B ′ | < |A ∩ B|, as then we can
 replace (A, B) with (A′ , B ′ ), because such an operation cannot turn a pure backdoor into a non-pure
 backdoor. We would like to return (H, η) and (A, B) as the third outcome of the lemma; to this
 end, we need to construct the path families QX . Fix a subwall W ′ of W contained in H[B \ A];
 assuming σ is large enough, we can choose W ′ of sidelength at least 3|A ∩ B| + 4. Since A ∩ B and
 the pegs of W ′ cannot be separated in H[B] by a separation of order less than |A ∩ B|, by Menger’s
 theorem, there is a family P = {Px | x ∈ A ∩ B} of vertex-disjoint paths in H[B] such that every
 Px ∈ P starts in x and ends in a peg of W ′ . For every X ⊆ A ∩ B of size three, construct QX as
 follows: Apply Lemma 3.11 to {Px | x ∈ X} and W ′ , obtaining paths {Px′ | x ∈ X}. Let yx be the
 second vertex of a path Px′ for x ∈ X. As H[B \ A] is v-pure, apply Lemma 3.12 to the paths Px′
 with the first edges removed, obtaining paths Rx for x ∈ X. Prepend every path Rx with a shortest
 path in η(xyx ) from η(xyx , x) to η(xyx , yx ), obtaining the desired path QX  x .
      The remaining case is when one of the applications of Lemma 3.24 returns a separation (A0 , B0 ) ∈
TW of order 1 that captures Π. Let {z} = A0 ∩B0 . Compute an extended strip decomposition (H ′ , η ′ )
of G as follows. Start with H ′ := H[B0 ] and η ′ (α) := η(α) for every α ∈ V (H ′ ) ∪ E(H ′ ) ∪ T (H ′ ).
Let V ′ be the set of vertices of G that are already in some set of η ′ . Add every vertex of V (G) \ V ′
to the vertex set η ′ (z).
      We first observe that (H ′ , η ′ ) is indeed an extended strip decomposition of G. Indeed, since
zS is a cutvertex of H, every vertex of V (G) \ (V ′ ∪ {v}) has only neighbors in V (G) \ V ′ and
    y∈NH (z)∩B0 η(zy, z). Furthermore, since (A0 , B0 ) captures Π, all neighbors of v are also only in
 V (G) \ V ′ and y∈NH (z)∩B0 η(zy, z). Since (A0 , B0 ) ∈ TW , we have w(←       −
                   S
                                                                                 η (H,η) (B0 \ A0 )) ⩾ 0.99τ
 by (5). Hence, as w(G) ⩽ τ , we have w(η (z)) ⩽ 0.01τ . Since every particle of (H, η) is of weight
                                                 ′

 at most 0.01τ by (2), every particle of (H ′ , η ′ ) is of weight at most (0.01 + 0.01)τ = 0.02τ . Hence,
 we can output (H ′ , η ′ ) as the third output of Lemma 3.2.


                                                    31
    To finish the proof, we observe that after getting the first wall W from Lemma 3.10, all further
steps tackle separations of constant order and subwalls of a wall of constant sidelength. Hence, all
computations in later steps can be done in polynomial time naively.

3.7   Applying three-in-a-tree
Lemma 3.25 allows us to conclude the proof of Lemma 3.2 by applying the three-in-a-tree theorem
(Theorem 2.1) in the following way.
    Given the input to Lemma 3.2, we apply Lemma 3.25 for the constant t. Unless we are already
done, we obtained the last output, consisting of (H, η), (A, B), and W . Recall that (A, B) captures
Π with a backdoor set Z of size at most 2, it is triangle-safe, and all zS∈ Z are pure backdoors.
    We will need the following notation. Fix z ∈ Z. Recall that Pz = x∈NH (z)∩(B\A) η(zx, z). Let
Vz ⊆ η(z) be the set of those vertices u ∈ η(z) that are reachable from v by a path contained in
G[{v} ∪ η(z)] whose all vertices, except for possibly the last one, are anti-adjacent to Pz . Note
that as z is a pure backdoor, every vertex u ∈ Vz is either completely adjacent to Pz or completely
anti-adjacent to Pz ; we denote by Vz• and Vz◦ the sets of vertices of u ∈ Vz that are completely
adjacent and completely anti-adjacent to Pz , respectively. Furthermore, observe that as z is a pure
backdoor, v is either completely adjacent to Pz or completely anti-adjacent to Pz and, in the first
case, Vz = ∅.
    We construct an auxiliary graph GA as follows. Let XA ⊆ V (G) consist of the following:

   • the vertex v;

   • every η(e) for e ∈ E(G[A]);

   • every η(xyz) for xyz ∈ T (G[A]);

   • every η(x) for x ∈ A \ B; and

   • for every z ∈ Z, the set Vz .

Observe that XA is disjoint with ←  −
                                    η (H,η) (B \ A) and thus w(XA ) ⩽ 0.01τ .
    We start with GA := G[XA ] and then, forS    every x ∈ A ∩ B we add two new adjacent vertices ax,1
and ax,2 to GA , adjacent to every vertex of y∈NH (x)∩A η(xy, x). Furthermore, if x ∈ Z, we make
ax,1 and ax,2 fully adjacent to Vz• and, if v is complete to Pz , also adjacent to v. Observe that for
x ∈ A ∩ B, the vertices ax,1 and ax,2 are true twins in GA . Let Z = {ax,i | x ∈ A ∩ B, i ∈ {1, 2}}.
    We apply Theorem 2.1 to GA and the set Z. There are two possible outcomes: either an induced
tree in GA containing at least three elements of Z or a rigid extended strip decomposition (HA , ηA )
of (GA , Z). We deal with these cases separately.

An induced tree in GA . Let K be an induced tree in GA containing at least three elements
of Z. Without loss of generality, we can assume that K contains exactly three elements of Z, and
K is either a path with two endpoints in Z or a tree with exactly three leaves being the elements
of Z. For x ∈ A ∩ B, as ax,1 and ax,2 are true twins while K contains three elements of Z and is an
induced tree, K can contain only one of ax,1 and ax,2 . Without loss of generality, we can assume
that V (K) ∩ Z = {ax,1 | x ∈ X} for some X ⊆ A ∩ B of size three.
    Consider the family QX = {QX    x | x ∈ X} promised by Lemma 3.25 and let ux be the starting
vertex of QXx  for x ∈  X.  Observe  that ux has exactly the same neighbors in XA as ax,1 , while all
other vertices of QXx  are anti-adjacent to XA . Hence, (V (K) \ {ax1 | x ∈ X}) ∪ {V (QX
                                                                                       x ) | x ∈ X}
induces a tree in G that contains an {t, t, t}-pyramid, as desired.


                                                 32
An extended strip decomposition of GA . We will now show that one can merge (HA , ηA ) and
(H, η) into an extended strip decomposition (H ∗ , η ∗ ) of the whole graph G.
     Recall that for every ax,i ∈ Z there is a degree-1 vertex ξx,i ∈ V (HA ) with a unique neighbor
ζx,i ∈ V (HA ) and ηA (ξx,i ζx,i , ξx,i ) = {ax,i }. For every x ∈ A ∩ B, since ax,1 and ax,2 are adjacent, we
have ζx,1 = ζx,2 (and we henceforth denote this vertex by ζx ) and ax,i ∈ ηA (ξx,i ζx , ζx ) for i = 1, 2.
Thus, we can assume without loss of generality that actually ηA (ξx,i ζx ) = {ax,i } and ηA (ξx,i ) = ∅,
as all vertices of ηA (ξx,i ζx ) ∪ ηA (ξx,i ) except for ax,i can be moved to ηA (ζx ). Furthermore, since
ax,i and ay,j are nonadjacent for x ̸= y, i, j ∈ {1, 2}, we have that ζx and ζy are distinct.
     Denote HA ′ := H − {ξ
                       A         x,i | x ∈ A ∩ B, i = 1, 2} and observe that HA with ηA defined as ηA
                                                                                     ′        ′

restricted to the vertices, edges, and triangles present in HA      ′ is an extended strip decomposition of

G[XA ].
     Note that every vertex of V (G) \ XA appears in (H, η) either in η(x) for some x ∈ B, in η(e) for
an edge e with at least one endpoint in B \ A and both endpoints in B, or in η(xyz) for a triangle
xyz with x, y, z ∈ B and at least one vertex in B \ A. Hence, HB             ′ := H[B] with η ′ defined as η
                                                                                                B
with the domain restricted to the objects present in H[B] and every value restricted to vertices of
V (G) \ XA is an extended strip decomposition of G − XA . We note that ηB              ′ (e) = ∅ for an edge e

with both endpoints in A ∩ B, but we retain the edge e in HB as there may be triangles of H[B]
                                                                        ′

involving it.
     We construct H ∗ by taking a disjoint union of HA        ′ and H ′ , discarding edges e of H ′ that have
                                                                      B                            B
both endpoints in A ∩ B, and identifying ζx with x for every x ∈ A ∩ B. We define η ∗ as follows:
    • η ∗ (e) for e ∈ E(H ∗ ) equals ηA
                                      ′ (e) or η ′ (e), depending on whether e came from H ′ or H ′ ;
                                                B                                         A      B

    • η ∗ (xyz) for xyz ∈ T (H ∗ ) equals ηA
                                           ′ (xyz), η ′ (xyz), or ∅, depending on whether the triangle
                                                      B
      xyz is present in HA′ , or at least one of x, y, z is in B \ A, or none of these options happen;


    • η ∗ (x) for x ∈ V (H ∗ ) equals ηA
                                       ′ (x) for x ∈ V (H ′ )\{ζ | x ∈ A∩B}, equals η ′ (x) for x ∈ B \A,
                                                         A      x                    B
      equals ηA (ζx ) ∪ ηB (x) for x ∈ A ∩ B.
                ′         ′


Finally, we discard from H ∗ every edge e for which η ∗ (e) = ∅ and e does not participate in any
triangle with a nonempty set in η ∗ , and every isolated vertex with an empty vertex set.
     We now check that (H ∗ , η ∗ ) is indeed a rigid extended strip decomposition of G. Recall that
(HA ′ , η ′ ) and (H ′ , η ′ ) are extended strip decompositions of G[X ] and G − X , respectively.
         A           B B                                                             A              A
Furthermore, (HA    ′ , η ′ ) is rigid; for (H ′ , η ′ ), we have η ′ (e) = η(e) and η ′ (e, x) = η(e, x) for every
                         A                    B B                  B                     B
e with at least one endpoint in B \ A and any x ∈ e, so (HB               ′ , η ′ ) can violate the requirements of
                                                                               B
being rigid only at vertex sets and edges contained in A ∩ B. We infer that it remains to check the
following three properties:
   1. For every uw ∈ E(G) with u ∈ XA and w ∈     / XA , u and w are placed in (H ∗ , η ∗ ) in a way
      allowing the edge uw, that is, both u and w either
         • belong to one set η ∗ (e) for some e ∈ E(H ∗ ), or
         • belong to one set η ∗ (x) ∪ y∈NH ∗ (x) η(xy, x) for some x ∈ V (H ∗ ), or
                                       S

         • belong to one set η ∗ (xyz) ∪ (η ∗ (xy, x) ∩ η ∗ (xy, y)) ∪ (η ∗ (yz, y) ∩ η ∗ (yz, z)) ∪ (η ∗ (zx, z) ∩
           η ∗ (zx, x)) for some triangle xyz ∈ T (H ∗ ).
   2. S
      For every u ∈ XA and w ∈ V (G) \ XA such that for some x ∈ A ∩ B it holds that u, w ∈
        y∈NH ∗ (x) η (xy, x), we have uw ∈ E(G).
                    ∗


   3. For every edge xy ∈ E(H) with x, y ⊆ A ∩ B, if there exists a triangle xyz with z ∈ B \ A
      and η(xyz) = ηB′ (xyz) ̸= ∅, the edge ζ ζ exists in H ′ .
                                             x y           A


                                                        33
   For the first property, let u ∈ XA and w ∈
                                            / XA be adjacent. We observe that, since (H, η) is an
extended strip decomposition of G − v, we can break into the following subcases.

   • u = v. Then, as (A, B) is triangle-safe and captures Π, we have two options when w exists:

         – There exists z ∈ Z with v complete to Pz and w ∈S          Pz . Then, v is adjacent to az,1 and
           az,2 . Hence, in (HA ′ , η ′ ) we have that v ∈ η ′ (ζ ) ∪
                                     A                      A z        y∈NH ′ (ζz ) η(ζz y, ζz ). Consequently,
                                                                            A
           in (H ∗ , η ∗ ) we have that both u = v and w belong to η ∗ (z) ∪ y∈NH ∗ (z) η ∗ (zy, z), as
                                                                                      S
           desired.
         – There exists a triangle xyz ∈ T (H) with x, y ∈ Z and z ∈ B \ A with w ∈ η(xyz). Then,
           as (A, B) is triangle-safe, we have that v is complete to η(xz, x) ∪ η(yz, y). Hence, v is
           adjacent to ax,1 , ax,2 , ay,1 , and ay,2 in GA . The only way how (HA , ηA ) can accommodate
           this is if ζx ζy ∈ E(HA ) and v ∈ ηA (ζx ζy , ζx )∩ηA (ζx ζy , ζy ). Hence, v ∈ η ∗ (xy, x)∩η ∗ (xy, y)
           while w ∈ η ∗ (xyz), as desired.

   • u ∈ η(z) for some z ∈ V (H). By the definition of XA , we have actually z ∈ A. By the
     existence of w, we have z ∈ A ∩ B. Since the only parts of sets η(x) for x ∈ A ∩ B that
     are in XA are sets Vx for x ∈ Z, we have z ∈ Z and v is anti-complete to Pz . Furthermore,
     as Vz◦ is nonadjacent to Pz and to η(z) \ Vz , we have u ∈ Vz•Sand w ∈ Pz ∪ (η(z) \ Vz ).
     Then, u is adjacent to az,1 and az,2 in GA . Thus, u ∈ ηA
                                                             ′ (ζ ) ∪
                                                                 z    y∈NH ′ (z) η(ζz y, ζz ). Hence,
                                                                          A
     u, w ∈ η ∗ (z) ∪ y∈NH ∗ (z) η ∗ (zy, z), as desired.
                     S

   • u ∈ η(e) for some e ∈ E(H). By the definition of XA , both endpoints of e are in A. Due to
     the existence of the vertex w ∈ NG (u) \ XA , we have the following options:

         – ThereSexists an endpoint x of e that lies in A ∩ B, u ∈ η(e, x), and w ∈ η(x) or
           w ∈ y∈NH (x)∩(B\A) η(xy, x). Then, u is adjacent to ax,1 and ax,2 in GA , and there-
           fore u ∈ ηA   ′ (ζ ) ∪
                                     y∈NH ′ (ζx ) ηA (ζx y, ζx ). Thus, both u and w belong to η (x) ∪
                                                   ′                                            ∗
                                   S
                             x
                                         A
                         ∗
           S
             y∈NH ∗ (x) η (xy, x).
         – Both endpoints x, y of e lie in A ∩ B, u ∈ η(xy, x) ∩ η(xy, y) and there exists z ∈ B \ A
           with xz, yz ∈ E(H) and w ∈ η(xyz). We infer that u is adjacent to ax,1 , ax,2 , ay,1 , and
           ay,2 in GA . The only way how u is accommodated in (HA , ηA ) is that ζx ζy ∈ E(HA ) and
           u ∈ ηA (ζx ζy , ζx ) ∩ ηA (ζx ζy , ζy ). Hence, u ∈ η ∗ (xy, x) ∩ η ∗ (xy, y) while w ∈ η ∗ (xyz).

    • u ∈ η(xyz) for some xyz ∈ T (H). By the definition of XA , we have x, y, z ∈ A. Then,
      NG (η(xyz)) ⊆ XA , contradicting the existence of w. Hence, this case is impossible.

    For the second property, let x ∈ A ∩ B and u, w ∈ y∈NH ∗ (x) η ∗ (xy, x) with u ∈ XA and
                                                             S
w∈ / XA . By the way we obtained (H ∗ , η ∗ ), there exists yu ∈ NHA′ (ζx ) with u ∈ ηA (ζx yu , ζx ) and
yw ∈ NH (x) ∩ (B \ A) with w ∈ η(xyw , x). In particular, u is adjacent    S to ax,1 and ax,2 in GA .
Therefore, by the way we constructed GA , we have that either u ∈ y∈NH (x)∩A η(xy, x), or for
z ∈ Z, eitherS u ∈ Vz , or u = v and v is completely adjacent to Pz . On all cases, u is completely
                      •

adjacent to y∈NH (x)∩(B\A) η(xy, x), where w resides. This proves uw ∈ E(G), as desired.
    For the third property, consider xyz ∈ T (H) with x, y ∈ A ∩ B, z ∈ B \ A, and η(xy) ̸= ∅. Since
(H, η) is locally cleaned, there is an edge uw ∈ E(G) with w ∈ η(xyz) and u ∈ η(xy, x) ∩ η(xy, y).
Then, u ∈ XA and u is adjacent to ax,1 , ax,2 , ay,1 , and ay,2 in GA . Hence, the only option to
accommodate u in (HA , ηA ) is that ζx ζy ∈ E(HA ) and u ∈ ηA (ζx ζy , ζx ) ∩ ηA (ζx ζy , ζy ). This proves
the third property.


                                                       34
    Hence, (H ∗ , η ∗ ) is indeed a rigid extended strip decomposition of G. Since w(XA ) ⩽ 0.01τ and
every particle of (H, η) has weight at most 0.01τ , every particle of (H ∗ , η ∗ ) has weight at most
0.5τ . This proves that (H ∗ , η ∗ ) satisfies the requirements for the last outcome of Lemma 3.2. This
concludes the proof of Lemma 3.2, and thus also the proof of Lemma 3.1.


4     Algorithm
In this section, we define log(n) = max(2, ⌈log2 (n)⌉). Let t be a positive integer, throughout this
section, we will use ct to denote the constant given in Lemma 3.1 of the same name. In order to
make dealing with constants easier (in particular the constants that arise from Definition 4.4), we
will assume that ct ⩾ 34t. Additionally, in this section we will assume that all graphs, G, come
equipped with a weight function w : V (G) → [0, +∞). If G′ is an induced subgraph of G′ , then we
assume that G inherits its weight function from G, that is the weight function for the vertices of
G′ is the weight function
                      P for the vertices of G when restricted to the vertices of G . For a subset
                                                                                      ′

X ⊆ V (G), w(X) = x∈X w(x).

4.1   Definitions and Observations
In this subsection we collect most of the definitions we will use for this section and immediate
observations about these definitions.
    The interpretation of G and G′ in the coming definitions will be as follows: we are running the
algorithm in order to find the maximum size independent set of G. The algorithm is recursive, and
only makes recursive calls on induced subgraphs of the input graph. Suppose we want to analyze
a recursive call in which the current induced subgraph of G that is being considered is G′ . When
arguing about the behavior of the algorithm on input G′ , it is useful to be able to conclude that
the bigger graph G contains an St,t,t .
    Throughout our algorithm, balanced separators as defined in Section 2 will often be readily
available. However we will sometimes need balanced separators with even stronger properties; in
particular we will need the amount that the separator disconnects the graph to depend super-linearly
in the size of its core. We will call such balanced separators boosted (see Definition 4.1 below), and
a substantial part of our algorithm will consist of trying to reduce the input graph G so that some
vertex set becomes boosted (in the sense of Definition 4.1). Unlike for normal balanced separators,
the following definition is always used with Z = V (G′ ), so reference to Z is dropped in the following
definition.

Definition 4.1 (s-boosted balanced separator). Let G be a graph, G′ an induced subgraph of G,
and s be a positive integer. A vertex set Y ⊆ V (G′ ) is an s-boosted balanced separator for G′ with a
core X originating in G if Y is a c-balanced separator for G′ with core X originating in G, |X| ⩽ s,
          |C|
and c ⩽ 16s 2 , where C is a largest component of G . When G and G are clear from context, we
                                                      ′                   ′

may say that X is a core of the boosted balanced separator, Y .

    The algorithm will often work with a graph G, a vertex set X in G and an induced subgraph G′
of G. The aim is to ensure that X is a core of an s-boosted balanced separator (for an appropriately
                                                                                           ′
chosen s) of G′ . If X doesn’t already satisfy this, it is because G′ − Y , where Y = NGG [X], has
some connected components that are too big. The next definition zooms in on the neighborhood of
these connected components into Y (the constants in the formal definition don’t quite match the
intuition above for book keeping reasons).



                                                  35
Definition 4.2 (relevant set). Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free graph, X ⊆ V (G), G′ an
induced subgraph of G, and N a positive integer. We define relevantG (G′ , X, N ) to be the subset of
               ′                                                                            ′
vertices of NGG [X] that have at least one neighbor in at least one component of G′ − NGG [X] that
contains over 32c2 log
                    N
                       2
                         (N )
                              vertices.
                          t

    We make the following important observation about relevantG (G′ , X, N ) that follows directly
                                                                                              ′′
from the fact that if G′′ is an induced subgraph of G′ , then every component of G′′ − NGG [X] of
                                                                                 ′
size at least 32c2 log
                    N
                       2
                         (N )
                              vertices is contained in some component of G′ − NGG [X] of size at least
                      t
      N
32c2t log2 (N )
                  .

Observation 4.3. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free graph, X ⊆ V (G), G′ an induced
subgraph of G, G′′ and induced subgraph of G′ , and N a positive integer. Then relevantG (G′′ , X, N )
⊆ relevantG (G′ , X, N ).
    Note that in an St,t,t -free graph, Theorem 1.6 will always return a family F satisfying the second
bullet point of the theorem statement. This motivates the following definition.
Definition 4.4 (esd and inferred extended strip decomposition). Let t be a positive integer and G
an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph. We define esd(G) to be a subroutine that uses Theorem 1.6 to return
a set X ⊆ V (G), |X| ⩽ (t + 1)(11 log(n) + 6) ⩽ 34t log(n) ⩽ ct log(n) such that G − NG [X] has
a rigid extended strip decomposition, (H, η), where no particle of (H, η) has over |G|/2 vertices.
Furthermore, this subroutine runs in time polynomial time.
    Additionally, for any induced subgraph G′ of G, we define the extended strip decomposition
inferred by (X, G′ ), call it (H ′ , η ′ ). For each component, C, of G′ that does not contain a vertex
       ′
of NGG [X], H ′ contains an isolated copy Hc of H, and for all vertices, edges, and triangles, Rc , of
Hc let R be the corresponding vertex, edge, or triangle in H; we set η ′ (Rc ) = η(R) ∩ C. For each
                                                                 ′
component C ∗ of G′ that contain at least one vertex of NGG [X], H ′ contains an isolated vertex vc∗
and η ′ (vc∗ ) = C ∗ .
    It follows from the definition of extended strip decomposition that (H ′ , η ′ ) is a valid extended
strip decomposition of G′ . Note that the extended strip decomposition inferred by (X, G′ ) can be
computed in polynomial time since we have access to the extended strip decomposition, (H, η),
by Theorem 1.6 and since H has only O(n) vertices (because it is rigid, see the discussion after
Theorem 1.6), H ′ has nO(1) vertices and therefore nO(1) particles. Furthermore, note that for any
particle P of (H ′ , η ′ ) either P is equal so some component C ∗ that contains at least one vertex
       ′
of NGG [X] (when P = η ′ (vc∗ )) or P is equal to to P ′ ∩ C where P ′ is a particle of (H, η) and C
                                                                         ′
is a component of G′ that does note contain any vertices of NGG [X]. This leads to the next two
observation. But we first give one additional definition related to extended strip decompositions
which is meant to capture when each particle of our extended strip decomposition is “small enough”
so that we make enough progress when we recursively call the algorithm on each particle.
    Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free graph, N a natural number, and (H, η) an extended
strip decomposition of G. We say that (H, η) is an N -good extended strip decomposition of G if no
particle of (H, η) has over (1 − 32c2 log1
                                           2
                                             (N )
                                                  )N vertices of G. Note that these are the same constants
                                       t
used in the definition of relevant, the reason for this will become apparent in Observation 4.6.
    The first observation follows from the fact that the size of the largest particle of the extended
strip decomposition inferred by (X, G′ ) is bounded by the size of the largest component of G′ .
Observation 4.5. Let t be a positive integer, N a natural number, G an St,t,t -free graph, G′ an
induced subgraph of G, and X ⊆ V (G). If no component of G′ has over (1 − 32c2 log
                                                                                1
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     (N )
                                                                                          )N vertices
                                                                                     t
then the extended strip decomposition inferred by (X, G′ ) is N -good.

                                                   36
Observation 4.6. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, N a natural number, G′
an induced subgraph of G, and X ⊆ V (G) such that G−NG [X] has an extended strip decomposition,
                                                                                                      ′
(H, η), where no particle contains over N/2 vertices. If relevantG (G′ , X, N ) = ∅ then either NGG [X]
            N
is an 32c2 log 2
                 (N )
                      -balanced separator for G′ or the extended strip decomposition inferred by (X, G′ ) is
         t
N -good.

Proof. Let t, N , G, G′ , X, and (H, η) be as in the statement of the lemma and (H ′ , η ′ ) be the
                                                                                               ′
extended strip decomposition inferred by (X, G′ ). If there are no components of G′ − NGG [X]
                                                                                   ′
that contain at least 32c2 log
                            N
                               2
                                 (N )
                                      of the vertices of G then we are done (as NGG [X] would be an
                              t
                                                                                                       ′
      N
32c2t log2 (N )
                  balanced separator). So we may assume that there is a component C of G′ − NGG [X]
                                                                         ′
that contains at least 32c2 log
                             N
                                2
                                  (N )
                                       vertices of G and NG′ [C] ∩ NGG [X] = ∅ by the assumption that
                               t
relevantG (G′ , X, N ) = ∅. It follows that C is a component of G′ and therefore any component of G′
                                           ′
that contains at least one vertex of NGG [X] has at most (1 − 32c2 log
                                                                    1
                                                                       2
                                                                         (N )
                                                                              )N vertices. This combined
                                                                     t
with the note about particles made just after Definition 4.4 (that every particle of (H ′ , η ′ ) is either
                                                                    ′
a component, C, of G that contains at least one vertex of NGG [X] - which can have size at most
           1
(1 − 32c2 log 2
                (N )
                     )N - or a subset of a particle of (H, η) - which by assumption has at most N/2
           t
vertices) proves the observation.

4.2       Preliminary Lemmas
We will now present a few lemmas that will be useful to have in hand before describing the algorithm.
Given a graph G and an extended strip decomposition (H, η) for G the following lemma shows that
solving independent set on G can be reduced to solving independent set on each particle of G. This
reduction first appears in [CPPT20], the version we cite here is derived from [ACDR22] (Lemma
5.2).

Lemma 4.7 ( [CPPT20,ACDR22]). Let G be an n-vertex graph and let (H, η) be an extended strip
decomposition of G where H has N vertices. Furthermore, assume that for each particle, P , of
(H, η), we know the weight of a maximum weight independent set of G[P ]. Then in time polynomial
in n + N we can compute the weight of a maximum weight independent set for G.

    Let G be a graph and (H, η) an extended strip decomposition for G such that for each particle, P ,
of (H, η) the weight of a maximum weight independent set of G[P ] is known. We use matching(H, η)
to denote the output (the weight of a maximum weight independent set of G) of running the
algorithm of Lemma 4.7.

Lemma 4.8. Let t be an positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, A ⊆ V (G), and i ⩽ log(n)
a natural number. Either G contains a set C such that NG [C] is an (|A|/2i )-balanced separator for
(G, A) and |C| ⩽ (ct )(70)2i+1 log(n) or G has a rigid extended strip decomposition, (H, η), such
that no particle contains over (1 − 1/2i+2 )|A| vertices of A. Furthermore, either C or (H, η) can be
found in polynomial time.

Proof. Let t, G, n, and A be as in the statement of this lemma. We first claim that either G contains
a set C such that NG [C] is an (|A|/2)-balanced separator for (G, A) and |C| ⩽ 70ct log(n) or G has
an extended strip decomposition, (H, η), such that no particle contains over (1 − 1/4)|A| vertices of
A and either C or (H, η) can be found in polynomial time.
    In order the prove this we will consider a process consisting of at most 70 step. At the j th step
we will assume we have a set Cj such that NG [Cj ] is an (|A| · 0.99j )-balanced separator for (G, A)


                                                    37
and |C| ⩽ ct j log(n) (we have C0 = ∅ for the base case). Given such a Cj , we show how to find Cj+1
or find a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of G such that no particle has over (1 − 1/4)|A|
vertices of A. If NG [Cj ] is already an |A|/2-balanced separator for (G, A) then we are done, so
assume this does not happen, let X be the component of G − NG [Cj ] that contains over half the
vertices of A and let XA = X ∩ A.
     We apply Lemma 3.1 to G where all vertices of XA have weight 1 and all other vertices have
weight 0. Outcome (1) cannot occur as G is St,t,t -free. If outcome (2) occurs, then we get a set
XC such that NG [XC ] is an (|XA | · 0.99)-balanced separator for (G, XA ) and |XC | ⩽ ct log(n). We
set Cj+1 = Cj ∪ XC , it holds then that NG [Cj+1 ] is an (|A| · 0.99j+1 )-balanced separator for (G, A)
and |Cj+1 | ⩽ |Ct | + |Xc | ⩽ ct (j + 1) log(n), as desired. If outcome (3) occurs then we get a rigid
extended strip decomposition (H, η) for G such that no particle of (H, η) contains over half of XA .
Since |XA | ⩾ |A|/2 it follows that no particle of (H, η) contains over (1 − 1/4)|A| vertices of A.
Since 0.9970 < .5 this process must end by the 70th step. Since Lemma 3.1 runs in polynomial time,
this process runs in polynomial time.
     We now prove the full statement of this lemma in a similar manner. Fix some natural number
i ⩽ log(n). In order the prove this we will consider a process consisting of at most i step. At the
j th step, j < i, we will assume we have a set Cj such that NG [Cj ] is an |A|/2j -balanced separator
for (G, A) and |C| ⩽ 70ct · 2j+1 log(n) (we have C0 = ∅ for the base case). So, assume Cj satisfies
these properties, we show how to find Cj+1 or find a rigid extended strip decomposition (H, η) of
G such that no particle has over (1 − 1/2j+2 )|A| vertices of A (we have C0 = ∅ for the base case).
     Consider each component, X, of G − NG [Cj ] that contain at least |A|/2j+1 vertices of |A|, there
are at most 2j+1 such components, set XA = X ∩ A. For each X and corresponding XA we apply
the claim from the first paragraph of this proof to G where all vertices of XA have weight 1 and
all other vertices have weight 0. The first possibility is for each X and XA we get a set XC such
that NG [XC ]Sis an |XA |/2-balanced separator for (G, XA ) and |XC | ⩽ 70ct log(n). Then we set
Cj+1 = Cj ∪ XC , it holds then that NG [Cj+1 ] is an (|A|/2j+1 )-balanced separator for (G, A) and
              X
                            X
        |Cj+1 | ⩽ |Cj | +       |XC | ⩽ 70ct · 2j+1 log(n) + 70ct · 2j+1 log(n) = 70ct · 2j+2 log(n),
                            X

as desired. The other possibility is that for at least one X we get a rigid extended strip decomposition
(H, η) for G such that no particle of (H, η) contains over half of XA . Since |XA | ⩾ |A|/2j+1 it follows
that no particle of (H, η) contains over (1 − 1/2j+3 )|A| ⩽ (1 − 1/2i+2 ) vertices of A (since j < i).
    Repeating this i ⩽ log(n) times (or until we get a desired extended strip decomposition) then
yields the result. Since each step applies Lemma 3.1 less than n time and Lemma 3.1 runs in
polynomial time and there are at most log(n) steps, this process runs in polynomial time.

4.2.1   Cannot Pack Many Balanced Separators
Recall the following notation from Section 2: Let G be a graph, G′ an induced subgraph of G, and
                            ′
X ⊆ V (G). We define NGG [X] to mean NG [X] ∩ V (G′ ). Furthermore, let F = {F1 , F2 , . . . , Fk } be
                                    ′          ′          ′                  ′
a list of vertex sets of G. Then NGG [F] = {NGG [F1 ], NGG [F2 ], . . . , NGG [Fk ]}.

Lemma 4.9. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, N ⩽ |G| a natural number,
G′ an induced subgraph of G, X ⊆ V (G), and F a list of G. Assume that relevantG (G′ , X, N ) ̸= ∅
                                               ′
and that all sets of NGG [F] are |relevant
                        ′                 G (G ,X,N )|
                                   100c2 log2 (N )|X|
                                                       -balanced separators for (G′ , relevantG (G′ ,X, N ))
                                           t
                                                               ′
such that no vertex of G′ belongs to over c̄ sets of NGG [F] for some positive integer c̄. Assume
|F| ⩾ 10tc̄. Then G contains an induced St,t,t .

                                                      38
Proof. Let t, G, G′ , N, X, F, and c̄ have the same meaning as in the statement of this lemma.
                                                                ′|
Among all components of G′ − NGG [X] that have at least 32c2 |G
                                   ′
                                                              log2 (N )
                                                                        vertices, let C denote the one
                                                                         t
such that the size of C ∗ = NG′ [C] ∩ relevantG (G′ , X, N ) is maximized. Since there are at most
                                                                      ′|
32c2t log2 (N ) components of G′ − NGG [X] that have at least 32c2 |G
                                      ′
                                                                    log2 (N )
                                                                              vertices and by definition
                                                                             t
                                                                                                              ′
all vertices of relevantG (G′ , X, N ) have at least one neighbor in a component of G′ − NGG [X] of
                      ′|                                            ′
size at least 32c2 |G  2
                    log (N )
                             , it holds that |C ∗ | ⩾ |relevantG (G ,X,N )| . Next for all vertices in X let x
                                                              2   2
                                                           32c log (N )
                   t                                            t
                                                   ′                                          ′
be one such that the size of C ∗,x = NGG [x] ∩ C ∗ is maximized, since NGG [X] dominates C ∗ it
                         ∗| |relevantG (G′ ,X,N )|
holds that |C ∗,x | ⩾ |C
                       |X| ⩾ 32c2 log2 (N )|X|     > 0 (the last inequality following from the assumption
                                     t
relevantG (G′ , X, N ) ̸= ∅).
Claim 4.10. There exist a triple of vertices a, b, c ∈ C ∗,x and a subfamily of F , call it F ∗ , of
size greater than 2tc̄, such that no two vertices among a, b, and c are in the same component in
         ′
G − NGG [F ∗ ] for all F ∗ ∈ F ∗ (but possibly with some or all of a, b, and c belonging to F ∗ ).
     In order to prove Claim 4.10, we let F ∈ F and let a, b, c be three independently and uniformly
at random (with replacement) chosen vertices of C ∗,x (so it is possible that, for instance, a = b). We
first calculate the probability that no two vertices among a, b, and c belong to the same component
                                                 ′                                      ′
in G′ − NGG [F ]. Since |C ∗,x | ⩾ |relevant              , NGG [F ] is a |relevant
            ′                                G (G ,X,N )|      ′                   G (G ,X,N )|
                                      32c2 log2 (N )|X|                     100c2 log2 (N )|X|
                                                                                                -balanced separator for
                                          t                                  t
                                                                                                       ∗,x
(G′ , relevantG (G′ , X, N )), and C ∗,x ⊆ relevantG (G′ , X, N ), we have that NGG [F ] is a |C 3 | -balanced
                                                                                          ′

                                                                                  ∗,x
separator for (G′ , C ∗,x ). So, since no component of G − NGG [F ] has over |C 3 | vertices of C ∗,x there
                                                                   ′


is at least a 32 probability that a and b do not belong to the same component, either because a
                                                   ′
and b are in different components of G − NGG [F ] or at least one of a and b is in F . Furthermore,
                                                                                ′
conditioned on a and b not being in the same component of G − NGG [F ], there is at least a 13
probability that c is not in the same component as a or b. It follows that there is at least a 32 · 13 = 29
                                                                                                           ′
probability that no two vertices among a, b, and c belong to the same component in G′ − NGG [F ]
                                                                         ′
(again, possibly with some or even all of a, b, and c belong to NGG [F ]).
     Hence if XF represents the random variable that is 1 if no two of the independently and uniformly
                                                                                                      ′
at random chosen a, b, c ∈ C ∗,x (with replacement) are in the same component in G′ − NGG [F ] and
0 otherwise,    the expected value E[XF ] ⩾ 92 . Then by the linearity of expectation, we have that
E[ F ∈F XF ] ⩾ 29 · 10tc̄ > 2tc̄. Thus, there must exists a triple, a, b, c ∈ C ∗,x , such that for a
   P
subset of F, call it F ∗ , of size greater than 2tc̄, no two of a, b, and c are in the same component in
           ′
G′ − NGG [F ∗ ] for all F ∗ ∈ F ∗ . This completes the proof of Claim 4.10.
     Now, let a, b, c ∈ C ∗,x and F ∗ be as in the statement of Claim 4.10. We have that for any
path P in G′ with a and b as its endpoints must have over 2t vertices because for all F ∗ ∈ F ∗
    ′                                                                                    ′
NGG [F ∗ ] ∩ P ̸= ∅ (or else a and b would be in the same component of G′ − NGG [f ∗ ]) and if P had
at most 2t vertices, since |F ∗ | > 2tc̄, that would force some vertex of P to belong to over c̄ sets
        ′
in NGG [F ∗ ], contrary to assumption. Similarly, all paths with a and c or b and c with its endpoint
must have over 2t vertices as well.
     Now we show there exists three anti-complete induced paths, Pa , Pb and Pc , each with t vertices
such that a, b, and c are one of the endpoints of Pa , Pb and Pc respectively, and all other vertices
of these paths belong to C (recall from the first paragraph of this proof that C is the component
             ′
of G′ − NGG [X] such that C ∗ = NG′ [C] ∩ relevantG (G′ , X, N ). Since C ∗,x ⊆ C ∗ , all vertices of C ∗,x ,
which includes a, b, and c, have a neighbor in C). To locate Pa , take a shortest path from a to b
with all internal vertices in C (since a and b both have neighbors in C and C is connected, such a
path exists). By the previous paragraph this path must have at least 2t vertices, so let Pa be the
first t vertices of this path, so Pa is a path with t vertices such that a is one endpoint of the path


                                                          39
and all other vertices are in C. Identical arguments show there are induced paths Pb and Pc which
have b and c as their endpoints, respectively, and all other other vertices are in C. Furthermore,
if Pa , Pb and Pc were not anti-complete, then that would imply that there exists paths between
two vertices of {a, b, c} with at most 2t vertices, which contradicts the conclusion of the previous
paragraph.
                                                          ′
    Lastly, note that since C is a component of G′ − NGG [X] and x ∈ X, x has no neighbors in C.
So, since x is neighbors with a, b, and c and Pa , Pb and Pc are anti-complete, x along with Pa , Pb
and Pc form an St,t,t .

4.2.2   Cannot Pack Many Boosted Balanced Separators
Lemma 4.11. Let G be a graph and G′ be an induced subgraph of G, and s, t, c be positive integers.
If there exists a list F of s-boosted balanced separators of G′ originating in G such that |F| ⩾ 80·s·t·c,
and no vertex of G′ belongs to over c sets of F , then G contains an St,t,t .
    This subsection is devoted to the proof of Lemma 4.11. Thus, within this subsection we will
assume that the premise of Lemma 4.11 holds. Towards the proof of Lemma 4.11, we set F =
{Y1 , Y2 , . . . Yℓ }. For every Yi in F we let Xi be a core of Yi originating in G. In other words,
            ′
Yi = NGG [Xi ], and |Xi | ⩽ s. Additionally, C is the largest component of G′ , and r = 4s.
Lemma 4.12. There exists a set R ⊆ C of size r and a subfamily F1 ⊆ F such that |F1 | > |F|/2,
and for every Yi ∈ F1 , each connected component of G′ − Yi contains at most one vertex of R.
Proof. We pick a tuple R = v1 , v2 , . . . , vr of r = 4s vertices from C uniformly at random (with
repetition). Consider an arbitrary Yi ∈ F. For each choice of 1 ⩽ p < q ⩽ r, the probability that
                                                             |C|
vq is in the same component of G′ − Yi as vp is at most 16s     2 . The union bound over all choices of
p, q yields that the probability that no component of G − Yi contains at least two vertices of R is
                                                           ′

at least 1 − 2r · 16s1
                       2 > 1/2. Define F1 to be the family of all Yi ’s in F such that no component
of G − Yi contains at least two vertices of R. The expected size of F1 is strictly larger than |F |/2,
     ′

and there exists at least one choice of R that achieves expectation, proving the statement of the
lemma.

   We will use the following well-known facts about trees, that we will state without proof.
Observation 4.13. A tree with k leaves has at most k − 1 vertices of degree at least 3.
Observation 4.14. Let T be a tree and P be a path in the tree such that all vertices on P have
degree 2 in T . Then T − V (P ) has precisely two connected components.
   For the rest of the proof of Lemma 4.11, let R and F1 be as given in the statement of Lemma 4.12,
G be an inclusion minimal connected induced subgraph of G′ [C] containing R, and T ∗ be a spanning
 ∗

tree of G∗ . Define M as R plus all the vertices of T ∗ that have degree at least three in T ∗ . Finally,
set M ∗ = NT ∗ [M ]. In the next lemma we collect a few simple observations about G∗ , T ∗ , M ,
and M ∗ .
Lemma 4.15. G∗ , T ∗ , M and M ∗ have the following properties:
  1. All leaves of T ∗ are in R,
  2. |M | ⩽ 2|R|,
  3. there are at most |M | − 1 connected components of T ∗ − M ,
  4. |M ∗ | ⩽ 6|R|,

                                                   40
  5. each edge uv of G∗ is an edge of T ∗ or has at least one endpoint in M ∗ .

Proof. For (1), note that G∗ − v is connected for every leaf v of T ∗ . Thus v ∈  / R would contradict
minimality of G∗ . For (2) we note that (1) implies that T ∗ has at most |R| leaves, and therefore
(by Observation 4.13) at most |R| − 1 vertices of degree at least 3.
    For (3) and (4) we note that every vertex in V (T ∗ ) − M has degree precisely 2 in T ∗ . Thus
every component P of T ∗ − M is a path (on one or more vertices), only the endpoints of the path
are neighbors (in T ∗ ) of M , and |NT ∗ (P )| = 2. Let κ be the number of connected components of
T ∗ − M . Then κ applications of Observation 4.14 implies that T ∗ [M ] has at least 1 + κ components.
Hence 1 + κ ⩽ |M |, proving (3). Since each component of T ∗ − M contains at most two neighbors
(in T ∗ ) of M it follows that |NT ∗ (M )| ⩽ 2|M |, and hence |M ∗ | ⩽ 3|M | ⩽ 6|R|, proving (4).
    For (5) suppose for contradiction that there exists an edge uv in G∗ that is neither an edge in
T ∗ nor has an endpoint in M ∗ . Let P be the path in T ∗ from u to v. Since uv is not an edge of T ∗
the path P has at least one internal vertex. Let u′ be the vertex immediately after u on P . Since
u∈ / M ∗ and u ∈ NT ∗ (u′ ) it follows that u′ ∈
                                               / M . Thus u′ ∈/ R and u′ has degree precisely 2 in T ∗ .
But then (T − u ) ∪ {uv} is connected (since we can go between u and the successor of u′ on P via
              ∗    ′

uv and then P ) and contains R, contradicting the minimality of G∗ .

   We are now ready to conclude the proof of Lemma 4.11

Proof of Lemma 4.11. We set M ′ to be the set of all vertices in T ∗ at distance (in T ∗ ) at most
t from M ∗ . By Lemma 4.15 (point 3) we have that |M ′ | ⩽ |M ∗ | + 2t|M | ⩽ 6r + 4tr. Since
|F1 | > |F/2| ⩾ r(4t + 6)c there exists a Yi ∈ F1 disjoint from M ′ .
     Let z be the number of connected components of T ∗ − M that have nonempty intersection with
Yi , and Z be the union of the vertex sets of all such components. Since each component of T ∗ − M
is a path of vertices of degree 2 in T ∗ , z applications of Observation 4.14 yield that T ∗ − Z has
precisely z + 1 connected components. Since Yi ∈ F1 we have that no connected component of
G∗ − Yi contains two vertices of R. Thus no connected component of T ∗ − Yi contains two vertices
of R, and Yi is disjoint from M ′ ⊇ M , so Yi ∩ V (T ∗ ) ⊆ Z and no connected component of T ∗ − Z
contains two vertices of R either. But then T ∗ − Z has at least r connected components, implying
z + 1 ⩾ r.
     Since Yi ⊆ NG [Xi ] and |Xi | ⩽ s, and z ⩾ r − 1 = 4s − 1 > 2|Xi |, there exists an x ∈ Xi such
that NG [x] has nonempty intersection with three distinct components C1 , C2 and C3 of T ∗ − M .
For each j ∈ {1, 2, 3} define Pj to be a shortest path in T ∗ [Cj ] from NG [x] to NT ∗ [M ∗ ]. Since Yi ,
and therefore NG [x], is disjoint from M ′ it follows that |V (Pj )| ⩾ t. Since Pj is shortest it follows
that x ∈ / V (Pj ), that x is a neighbor (in G) of precisely one endpoint of Pj (and no other vertices
of Pj ), and that V (Pj ) ∩ M ∗ = ∅. Thus, Lemma 4.15 (point 5) yields that each Pj induces a path
in G∗ (and therefore in G) and that there are no edges in G between Pj and Pj ′ for j ̸= j ′ . But
then x ∪ V (P1 ) ∪ V (P2 ) ∪ V (P3 ) induces an St1 ,t2 ,t3 in G with t1 , t2 , t3 ⩾ t.

4.3   Presentation of the Algorithm
We give one last definition before presenting the algorithm.

Definition 4.16 (level sets). Let G be graph, G′ and induced subgraph of G, F a list of vertex
sets of G, and N a positive integer. For all natural numbers j, the j th level set with respect to G,
G′ , and F, denoted by Lj (G, G′ , F), is defined as the set of vertices of G′ that belong to at least j
                                   ′
sets (counting multiplicity) of NGG [F].



                                                   41
     In the following recursive algorithm, the input will always consist of a natural number N , two
lists F1 and F2 and a graph G. Additionally, there will be a global variable G which is set to the
very first graph the algorithm is called on, so G will always be an induced subgraph of G. We
will say that a vertex, v, in G is N-branchable with respect to G, G, F1 , and F2 (or more simply
branchable when the values of N , G, G, F1 , and F2 are clear from the context) if there is an natural
number j such that either |NG [v] ∩ Lj (G, G, F1 )| ⩾ 2Nj or |NG [v] ∩ Lj (G, G, F2 | ⩾ 2Nj .
     We now present a quasi-polynomial time algorithm for independent set on St,t,t -free graphs
which we will refer to as IND. We first give the high level ideas of how IND works, followed by a
formal prose-style description of the algorithm, then we give the algorithm in pseudocode.

Overview. At the highest level IND is a recursive algorithm that does three basic operations.
When there is an N -branchable vertex, v, (for N |G|) IND will be recursively called on G − v
and G − NG [v], when there is an extended strip decomposition such that no particle contains
too much weight, IND will be recursively called on each particle, and when there is a balanced
separator that is dominated by few vertices, it adds the balanced separator to a list (either F1 or
F2 ). The lists (F1 and F2 ) are what will guide the branching process, and the goal of branching is to
(efficiently) reach an instance where the input graph has a desirable extended strip decomposition.
Both the “extended strip decomposition” and “add a balanced separator” operations will come in two
distinct flavors. The “extended strip decomposition” operation will be either a type 1 extended strip
decomposition operation, with reference to the N -good extended strip decomposition of Observation
4.6, or a type 2 extended strip decomposition operation, with reference to the rigid extended strip
decomposition of Lemma 4.8. The “balanced separator” operation will be either a boosted balanced
separator operation, with reference balanced separators of Observation 4.6 (which will in fact be
s-boosted balanced separator), or (simply) a balanced separator operation, with reference to the
balanced separator of Lemma 4.8.
     Let us now be a little more detailed about how IND works. The algorithm is a recursive algorithm
that takes as input an St,t,t -free graph G, a vertex set X (X may also be set to ⊥, indicating that
a new set for X must be found), an integer N , and two lists F1 and F2 . If we wish to know the
weight of a maximum weight independent set of the graph G, then IND is intended to be initially
called on the inputs G, X = ⊥, N = |G|, F1 = ∅, F2 = ∅. The algorithm sets a global variable G
which is set to the first graph that the algorithm is called on, so that in all recursive calls, G refers
to the initial graph the algorithm is called on. In any given call of IND, the vertex set X along with
the vertex sets contained in F1 and F2 may not be subsets of V (G), but they will always be subsets
of V (G). The integer N will be approximately equal to |G| (and will always satisfy |G| ⩽ N ), and
is used for the sake of making the run time analysis easier. Among other things, this integer is used
to determine when a vertex is branchable (i.e. when it is N -branchable).
     The set X is obtained using esd(G) (see Definition 4.4) and will thus have the property that
no particle of the corresponding extended strip decomposition of G − NG [X] will have more than
|G|/2 ⩽ N/2 vertices and |X| ⩽ ct log(N ). One goal of the branching operation, “type 2 ex-
tended strip decomposition”, and “type 2 balanced separator” operation are to efficiently reduce
relevantG (G, X, N ) to the empty set. Observation 4.6 tells us that when relevantG (G, X, N ) = ∅
that either we will get an extended strip decomposition that is N -good (in which case we make a lot
of progress as each particle now has much less than N ≈ |G| vertices, this is the “type 1 extended
strip decomposition” operation) or we get that NGG [X] is a ct log(N )-boosted balanced separator
(with X as a core). In either case we find a new X using Theorem 1.6 and repeat the process.
     But how do we make progress in the case where NGG [X] is a ct log(N )-boosted balanced separator
(and we do not have an N -good extended strip decomposition)? When NGG [X] is a ct log(N )-boosted


                                                   42
balanced separator, we place X into F1 (this is the “type 1 balanced separator operation”). An
analysis similar to that found in [GL20] (sketched in Section 1.1.2) shows that, because the size of
X is at most ct log(N )), we can collect these cores of ct log(N )-boosted balanced separators into
the list F1 and efficiently branch in a manner such that no vertex of NGG [F1 ] belongs to over log(N )
of these sets, and therefore by Lemma 4.11, in an St,t,t -free graph, F1 cannot contain more than
80tct log2 (N ) sets. It follows that when we repeat the process from the previous paragraph, we
can only get back that NGG [X] is ct log(N )-boosted balanced separator only a few times (at most
80tct log2 (N ) times) before get an extended strip decomposition that is N -good (or no component
of G has many vertices, but by Observation 4.5 this implies the existence of an N -good extended
strip decomposition), and we make good progress.
    Next, let us briefly look at how the algorithm is able to efficiently reduce relevantG (G, X, N ) to the
empty set using the branching, “type 2 extended strip decomposition”, and “type 2 balanced separa-
tor” operations. The basic idea is based on a combination of Lemmas 4.8 and 4.9 and the techniques
used in [GL20] (sketched in Section 1.1.2). IND applies Lemma 4.8 to G and relevantG (G, X, N )
(with i = log(200c3t log3 (N ))). If an extended strip decomposition, (H, η), is returned then since
each particle, P , has much less than |relevantG (G, X, N )| vertices of relevantG (G, X, N ) (at most
            1
(1 − 800c3 log 3
                 (N )
                      )|relevantG (G, X, N )|) and because relevantG (P, X, N ) ⊆ relevantG (G, X, N ), it fol-
         t
lows that |relevantG (P, X, N )| << |relevantG (G, X, N )| and good progress is made in reducing the
size of relevantG (P, X, N ) (this is the type 2 extended strip decomposition operation). Other-
wise the lemma returns a set C such that NG [C] is an |relevant    G (G,X,N )|
                                                              200c3 log3 (N )
                                                                               -balanced separator of (G,
                                                                      t
|relevantG (G, X, N )|) and |C| ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (N ).
     So how do we make progress in efficiently reducing |relevantG (G, X, N )| when what we get back is
a set C such that NG [C] is an |relevant G (G,X,N )|
                                  200c3 log3 (N )
                                                     -balanced separator of G for |relevantG (G, X, N )|? An
                                        t
analysis similar to that found in [GL20] shows that, because |C| ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (N ), we can collect
these sets C that we find into the list F2 (this is the “type 2 balanced separator operation”) and
efficiently branch in a manner such that no vertex of NGG [F2 ] belongs to over log(N ) of these sets.
Since G is St,t,t -free (and |X| ⩽ ct log(N )), it follows from Lemma 4.9 that |F2 | cannot grow larger
than 10t log(N ). Hence, after applying Lemma 4.8 a few times (at most 10t log(N ) times), it must
return an extended strip decomposition and good progress is made in decreasing relevantG (G, X, N ).

Formal description. We now give a formal description of our independent set algorithm for
St,t,t -free graphs, which we will refer to as IND. The algorithm is a recursive algorithm that takes
as input a graph G, a vertex set X (X may also be set to ⊥), an integer N , and two lists F1
and F2 . IND is intended to be initially called on the inputs G, X = ⊥, N = |G|, F1 = ∅, F2 = ∅.
The algorithm sets a global variable G which is set to the graph in the first set of input parameters,
G, X, N, F1 , F2 , that the algorithm is called on so that on all recursive calls G refers to the initial
graph the algorithm is called on. The vertex set X along with the vertex sets contained in F1
and F2 may not be subsets of V (G), although they will always be subsets of V (G). N will be
approximately, but always greater than or equal to, the size of G. The point of N is to help in the
runtime analysis. Among other things, N is used to determine when a vertex is branchable (i.e.
when it is N -branchable).
     When the algorithm makes a recursive call, some of the elements among the input parameters,
G, X, N, F1 , F2 , will be the same in the recursive call as they are in the current instance, while
the remaining parameters will be changed. In the following description of the algorithm, when
describing the input to the recursive calls, we will only explicitly mention the parameters that are
changed from the current call, unmentioned parameters are assumed to remain the same as in the


                                                      43
      current call. For instance if the graph that the recursive call is made on is different from the graph
      of the current call but all other elements, X, N, F1 , F2 remain the same as in the current call of the
      algorithm, we will only indicate what the new graph is the call is made on and not mention the
      unchanged elements, X, N, F1 , F2 .
          In order to help the runtime analysis of the algorithm, we will label each call of IND that is
      made based on the first case it satisfies (which in turn determines the recursive calls it will make).

Base Case: For the Base Case (Label: base case call), if |V (G)| ⩽ 1 then IND returns w(V (G)).
   Case 1: For Case 1 (Label: branch call), if there exists a branchable vertex v ∈ G, then IND is
           recursively called on two instances, the first instance on G − v and the second on G − NG [v],
           and stores the numbers returned by these recursive calls as If and Is respectively. The
           algorithm then returns the maximum of If and Is + w(v).
         • If the algorithm has not returned at this point and X is equal to ⊥, then the algorithm sets
           X = esd(G). No recursive call is made here, no label is given here, and the algorithm continues
           to see which case it satisfies. We say that the set X is discovered in this call.
   Case 2: For Case 2 (Label: type 1 extended strip decomposition call) if the extended strip decompo-
           sition inferred by (X, G), call it (H, η), is an N -good extended strip decomposition, then for
           each particle P of (H, η) the algorithm recursively calls itself on G = P , X = ⊥, N = |P |,
           F1 = ∅, F2 = ∅. Then IND returns matching(H, η).
   Case 3: For Case 3 (Label: boosted balanced separator call), if NGG [X] is an 32c2 logN
                                                                                           2
                                                                                             (N )
                                                                                                  -balanced
                                                                                       t
           separator for G then IND is recursively called with X added to F1 , X set to ⊥, and F2 set to
           ∅. Then the algorithm returns the value obtained from this recursive call. Here we say that
           X is the boosted balanced separator core added in this call.
         • If IND has not returned at this point then note by Observation 4.6 and the fact that Case 2 and
           3 do not hold implies relevantG (G, X, N ) ̸= ∅. The algorithm then applies Lemma 4.8 (with i =
           log(200c3t log3 (N ))) to either obtain, in polynomial time, a rigid extended strip decomposition
           of G, call it (H, η), such no particle of (H, η) has over (1 − 800c3 log
                                                                                  1
                                                                                    3
                                                                                      (N )
                                                                                           )|relevantG (G, X, N )|
                                                                                  t

            vertices of relevantG (G, X, N ) or a C ⊆ V (G) such that NG [C] is a |relevantG (G,X,N )|
                                                                                     200c3 log3 (N )
                                                                                                       -balanced
                                                                                            t
            separator for relevant(G, X, N ), and |C| ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (|G|) ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (N ). No recursive
            call is made here, no label is given, and the algorithm continues to see which case it satisfies.
   Case 4: For Case 4 (Label: type 2 extended strip decomposition call), if Lemma 4.8 returned an
           extended strip decomposition, (H, η), then for each particle, P , of (H, η) IND is recursively
           called with the graph set to P and F2 set to the empty set. IND then returns matching(H, η).
   Case 5: For Case 5 (Label: balanced separator call), if Lemma 4.8 returned a balanced separator,
           NG [C], for relevantG (G, X, N ) then IND is recursively called, adding C to F2 . IND then
           returns the value obtained from this recursive call. Here we say the set C is the balanced
           separator core added in this call.

          For completeness and ease of reference we give pseudocode for the algorithm IND below. The
      correctness proofs and running time analysis do not refer to the pseudocode, and so a reader may
      choose to skip it. Recall that IND sets a global variable G which is set to the graph in the first set
      of input parameters, G, X, N, F1 , F2 . This step is not explicitly mentioned in the pseudocode.
      IND

                                                          44
 1: Input: G, X, N , F1 , F2
 2: Output: mwis(G).
 3: if |V (G)| ⩽ 1 then
 4:    return w(V (G))
 5: if exists branchable vertex, v, then
 6:    return max (IND(G − v, X, N, F1 , F2 ), IND(G − NG [v], X, N, F1 , F2 ) + w(v))
 7: if X = ⊥ then
 8:    Set X = esd(G)
 9: if the extended strip decomposition, (H, η), inferred by (X, G) is N -good then
10:    for all particles P in (H, η) do
11:      Get IND(P, ⊥, |P |, ∅, ∅)
12:    return matching(H, η)
13: if NGG [X] is an       N
                                    -balanced separator for G then
                     32c2 log2 (N )
                          t
14:    return IND(G, ⊥, N, F1 ∪ X, ∅)
15: Use Lemma 4.8 with i = log(200c3t log3 (N )) to obtain either a rigid extended strip decomposi-
    tion, (H, η), such that no particle of (H, η) contains over (1 − 800c3 log
                                                                            1
                                                                               3
                                                                                 (N )
                                                                                      )|relevantG (G, X, N )|
                                                                               t

      vertices of relevantG (G, X, N ) or a set C ⊆ V (G) such that NG [C] is a |relevantG (G,X,N )|
                                                                                   200c3 log3 (N )
                                                                                                     -balanced
                                                                                        t
    separator for relevantG (G, X, N ), and |C| ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (|G|) ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (N ).
16: if Lemma 4.8 returns (H, η) then
17:    for all particles P in (H, η) do
18:      Get IND(P, X, N, F1 , ∅)
19:    return matching(H, η)
20: if Lemma 4.8 returns C then
21:    return IND(G, X, N, F1 , F2 ∪ C)


4.4     Correctness and Runtime Analysis
In order to analyze the runtime of the algorithm, we will find it useful to define the recursion
tree generated by a run of the algorithm and prove that it has only a quasi-polynomial number of
vertices. Because we have yet to prove the algorithm will terminate, the tree in the next definition
may be infinite, but we will shortly prove that IND will terminate that the recursion tree for IND
is finite.

Definition 4.17 (recursion tree). The recursion tree, T , generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) is the
directed rooted tree with a node for each call of IND made in the course of running IND on the
initial input (G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), the root node corresponding to the initial call of IND on the input
(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅). There is a directed edge from a node p ∈ T to a node c ∈ T when the call that
corresponds to p invoked the call that corresponds to c. Furthermore, we label the vertices p and c
as well as the edge pc as follows. The vertices p and c get the same label as the calls they correspond
to respectively (replacing “call” now with “node”). If the call that corresponds to p is labeled with
anything other than branch call, then the pc edge gets same label as the call that corresponds to p
(replacing “call” now with “edge”). If p corresponds to a branch call then let v be the vertex that is
branched on in that call and let Gp be the graph given in the input of that call. If c corresponds
to the call where the graph Gp − NGp [v] is used as the input then we label pc as a “success edge”,
and if c corresponds to the call where the graph Gp − v is used as the input we label pc as a “failure
edge”.



                                                      45
   Furthermore, let u be a node of T . Then we let (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) denote the tuple that
was used for the input of the call u corresponds to. We call this tuple the parameters of u.

    Let G be a graph. We collect a set of observations about IND and the recursion tree generated by
IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) that follow directly from how IND has been defined. We state these observations
without a proof (as their proofs follow directly from how the algorithm was defined) and we will
use them use in future proofs typically without reference to this observation.

Observation 4.18. Let G be a graph and let T be the recursion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅).
Let p and c be nodes of T such that pc is an edge of T and let (Gp , Xp , Np , F1,p , F2,p ) and (Gc , Xc , Nc ,
F1,c , F2,c ) be the parameters of p and c respectively. Then the following hold:

   1. Np < Nc if pc is a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge and Np = Nc otherwise. Addi-
      tionally, Np , Nc ⩾ |G|.

   2. Gc is an induced subgraph of Gp , Gc is a proper induced subgraph of Gp if pc is a success,
      failure, or type 2 extended strip decomposition, and Gp = Gc if pc is a balanced separator or
      boosted balanced separator edge.

   3. If Xp = ⊥ and p is not a base case node nor a branch node, then there is a set X discovered
      in the call that corresponds to p.

   4. Assume p is not a base case node nor a branch node. If Xp ̸= ⊥ then let X = Xp , else let X
      be the set that is discovered in the call that corresponds to p. Then if relevantG (Gp , X, Np ) = ∅
      then (using Observation 4.6) p is either a type 1 extended strip decomposition node or a boosted
      balanced separator node.

   5. If c is a base case node then c is a leaf of T .

  The next three lemmas show that IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) terminates and returns the weight of a
maximum weight independent set of G.

Lemma 4.19. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free graph, T the recursion tree generated by
IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), u ∈ T such that u is a balanced separator or boosted balanced separator node,
and let (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) be the parameters of u. If C is the balanced separator or boosted
balanced separator core added in the call that corresponds to u, then NGGu [C] ̸= ∅.

Proof. Let t, G, T , u, (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ), and C be as in the statement of this lemma, and
assume for a contradiction that NGGu [C] = ∅.
   First assume that u is a boosted balanced separator node, so either C = Xu or Xu = ⊥ and
C was discovered in the call that corresponds to u. In either case, since u is a boosted balanced
separator node, NGGu [C] is an 32c2 log
                                     Nu
                                        2
                                          (N )
                                               -balanced separator for Gu and by assumption NGGu [C] = ∅,
                                    t      u

it follows that no component of Gu contains over 32c2 log
                                                       Nu
                                                          2
                                                            (N )
                                                                 vertices. It follows by Observation 4.5
                                                           t      u
that the extended strip decomposition inferred by (C, Gu ) is Nu -good and hence u should have been
a type 1 extended strip decomposition node and not a boosted balanced separator node.
    Next, assume that u is a balanced separator node, so the empty set is a |relevant    G (Gu ,X,Nu )|
                                                                                     200c3 log3 (N )
                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                  t      u
balanced separator of (Gu , relevantG (Gu , X, Nu )). If Xu ̸= ⊥ then let X = Xu , and if Xu = ⊥ then
let X be the set discovered in the call that corresponds to u. Since u is not a type 1 extended
strip decomposition node nor a boosted balanced separator node it follows from the 4 point of
Observation 4.18 (or Observation 4.6) that relevantG (Gu , X, Nu ) ̸= ∅. Since NGGu [C] = ∅ it follows

                                                      46
that no component of Gu contains over |relevantG (Gu ,X,Nu )|
                                          200c3 log3 (N )
                                                              vertices of relevantG (Gu , X, Nu ). Among
                                                      t            u

all components of Gu − NGGu [X] that has over 32c2 log
                                                    Nu
                                                       2
                                                         (N )
                                                              vertices (of which there are at most
                                                               t       u
32c2t log2 (Nu )), let B be one such that |NGu [B] ∩ relevantG (Gu , X, Nu )| is maximized, so since every
vertex of relevantG (Gu , X, Nu ) has a neighbor in at least on component of Gu −NGGu [X] that has over
      Nu
32c2 log2 (N )
               , it follows that |NGu [B] ∩ relevantG (Gu , X, Nu )| > |relevant G (Gu ,X,Nu )|
                                                                            32c2 log2 (N )
                                                                                                . But then NGu [B]
   t      u                                                                    t       u

is a connected set that contains at least |relevant   G (Gu ,X,Nu )|
                                                 32c2t log2 (Nu )
                                                                     vertices of relevantG (Gu , X, Nu ) and there-
                                 |relevantG (Gu ,X,Nu )|
fore the empty set cannot be a       200c3t log3 (Nu )
                                                           -balanced separator of (Gu , relevantG (Gu , X, Nu )).


Lemma 4.20. Let t be a positive integer and, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph. Then IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅)
terminated and the recursion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) is finite.

Proof. Let t, G, and n be as in the statement of this lemma, T the recursion tree of IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅),
and P some path in T . In order to show that IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) terminates and that T is finite, it is
sufficient to show that there is a bounded number of each of the 6 types of edges that can appear in P ,
type 1 and type 2 extended strip decomposition edges, balanced separator and boosted balanced
separator edges, and success/failure edges. Let pc be an edge of T , and let (Gp , Xp , Np , F1,p , F2,p )
and (Gc , Xc , Nc , F1,c , F2,c ) be the parameters of p and c respectively. If pc is a success edge, failure,
edge, or type 2 extended strip decomposition edge, then Gc is a proper subgraph of Gp , hence there
can be at most n of each type of these edges. If pc is a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge,
then Nc < Np , so again there can be at most n type 1 extended strip decomposition edges.
    Now let u and w be two nodes of P with parameters (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) and (Gw , Xw ,
Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) respectively and let P ′ be the subpath of P that starts at u and ends at w. Assume
that P ′ does not contain any type 1 or type 2 extended strip decomposition edges nor success/failure
edges (so all edges are balanced separator and boosted balanced separator edges). It follows that
Gu = Gw , Nu = Nw = N , and if P ′ has N log(N ) boosted balanced separator edges, then F1,w
must have at least N log(N ) sets S ∈ F1,w (counting multiplicity) such that NGGw [S] ̸= ∅ (using
Lemma 4.19 to ensure they are nonempty). Hence Llog(N ) (G, Gw , F1,w , N ) is none empty and since
any vertex v ∈ Llog(N ) (G, Gw , F1,w , N ) is by definition a branchable vertex, w must be a branch
node (or a base case node). It follows that P ′ can have at most N log(N ) boosted balanced separator
edges. Since P has a bounded number of type 1 or type 2 extended strip decomposition edges and
success/failure edges, there must be a bounded number of boosted balanced separator edges as well.
    Now additionally assume that P ′ contains no boosted balanced separator edges as well, so all
edges of P ′ are balanced separator edges. So, if P ′ has N log(N ) balanced separator edges, then
F2,w must have at least N log(N ) sets S ∈ F2,w (counting multiplicity) such that NGGw [S] ̸= ∅ (using
Lemma 4.19 to ensure they are nonempty). Hence Llog(N ) (G, Gw , F2,w , N ) is nonempty and since
any vertex v ∈ Llog(N ) (G, Gw , F2,w , N ) is by definition a branchable vertex, w must be a branch
node (or a base case node). It follows that P ′ can have at most N log(N ) balanced separator edges.
Since P has a bounded number of all other edge types, there must be a bounded number of balanced
separator edges as well, completing the proof.

    Now that we have established the recursion tree is finite, we can prove that IND returns the
correct answer.

Lemma 4.21. Let G be a graph. Then IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) returns the weight of a maximum weight
independent set of G.



                                                          47
Proof. Let G be a graph, T the recursion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and u a node of
T and assume that for all children, v, of u, that the call corresponding to v correctly returns the
weight of a maximum weight independent set of Gv , where Gv is the graph used as input for the call
corresponding to v. We show that the call corresponding to u then correctly returns the maximum
weight independent set of Gu where Gu is the graph used as input for the call corresponding to u.
    If u is balanced separator or boosted balanced separator node then Gu = Gv and so u returns
the weight of a maximum weight independent set of Gv = Gu . If u is a branch node which branches
on the vertex v ∈ Gu , then if we set If and Is to be the weight of a maximum weight independent
set of G − v and G − NGu [v] respectively, then u returns the maximum of If and Is + w(v) which is
the weight of a maximum weight independent set of Gu . Lastly, if u is a type 1 or type 2 extended
strip decomposition node, then u returns matching(H, η), which by Lemma 4.7 is the weight of a
maximum weight independent set of Gu .
    It now follows from induction that IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) returns the weight of a maximum weight
independent set of G.

   Next, we observe that the degree of recursion trees is at most polynomial.

Observation 4.22. There exists a constant c such that for any positive integer t and St,t,t -free
n-vertex graph G, the recursion tree, T , of IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) has a maximum degree of most nc .

Proof. Let t, G, and T be as in the statement of the lemma, and let u ∈ T with parameters
(Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ). If u is any type of node other than a type 1 or type 2 extended strip
decomposition node, then it is clear the degree of u is at most 2. If u is a type 1 extended strip
decomposition node then (by the discussion immediately after Definition 4.4) the extended strip
decomposition inferred by (Xu , Gu ) has nO(1) particles, hence u has degree nO(1) . If u is a type
2 extended strip decomposition, then each child of u corresponds to a particle of a rigid extended
strip decomposition of Gu , which has O(n) vertices and therefore nO(1) particles, and therefore u
has degree nO(1) .

    Let G be an n-vertex graph and T the recursion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅). Recall
that the edges of T are labeled (see Definition 4.17). The next set of lemmas show that on any root
to leaf path P of T , there are at most polylog(n) edges with any given label other than a failure
label, of which there can be at most n. We will then be able to use this fact to bound the runtime
of IND.

Lemma 4.23. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph, T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T . Then P contains at most 64c2t log3 (n) type 1
extended strip decomposition edges.

Proof. Let t, G, n, T , and P be as in the statement of this lemma. Let pc be a type 1 extended
strip decomposition edge of P and let (Gp , Xp , Np , F1,p , F2,p ) and (Gc , Xc , Nc , F1,c , F2,c ) be the
parameters of p and c respectively. Then Nc ⩽ (1 − 32c2 log1 2 (N ) )Np ⩽ (1 − 32c2 log
                                                                                     1
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          (n)
                                                                                              )Np .
                                                             t      p                 t
    Now, let u and w be two vertices of P with parameters (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) and (Gw , Xw ,
Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) respectively. Since for all c ⩾ 2, (1 − 1/c)2c ⩽ 1/2 it follows that if there are
64c2t log3 (n) type 1 extended strip decomposition edges on the subpath of P that starts at u and
                                              2    3
ends at w then Nw ⩽ (1 − 32c2 log 1
                                    2
                                      (n)
                                          )64ct log (n) Nu ⩽ (1 − 1/2)log(n) Nu ⩽ 1. It follows that |Gw | ⩽ 1
                                t
and therefore w must be a base node and hence the last vertex of P . So, P cannot have over
64c2t log3 (N ) type 1 extended strip decomposition edges.



                                                     48
Lemma 4.24. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free graph, T the recursion generated by
IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and u a node of T with parameters (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ). Then no vertex of
Gu belongs to over log(Nu ) sets of NGGu [F1,u ] and no vertex of Gu belongs to over log(Nu ) sets of
NGGu [F2,u ], hence Li (G, Gp , F1,u , Nu ) = Li (G, Gp , F2,u , Nu ) = ∅ for i > log(Nu ).

Proof. Let t, G, T , u, and (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) be as in the statement of this lemma. Assume
for a contradiction that the statement of this lemma does not hold for u and that u is the first node
on a path from the root to u such that the statement of this lemma does not hold. It follows there is
some vertex, call it v, of Gu belongs to over log(Nu ) sets of NGGu [F1,u ] or log(Nu ) sets of NGGu [F2,u ].
Let w be the parent of u in T and let (Gw , Xw , Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) be the parameters of w. If the edge
wu was a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge, then F1,u = F2,u = ∅ but then v could not
belong to over log(Nu ) sets of NG [F1,u ], so wu is not a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge,
hence Nw = Nu .
    As the arguments are nearly identical, with out loss of generality assume v ∈ Gu belongs to over
log(Nu ) sets of NG [F1,u ]. Since (by how u was chosen) v does not belong to over log(Nw ) = log(Nu )
sets of NG [F1,w ] it follows that the edge wu must be a boosted balanced separator edge (hence
Gu = Gw ) and v must belong to log(Nu ) = log(Nw ) sets of NGGw [F1,w ] in order for v to belong to
over log(Nu ) sets of NGGu [F1,u ]. But then by definition of being a branchable vertex, since v belongs
to log(Nw ) sets of NGGw [F1,w ] the call that corresponds to w should have branched on v (or some
other branchable vertex) and the edge wu would therefore be a either a success or failure edge,
which is a contradiction. Therefore, there can never be a “first node” in T such that the statement
of this lemma does not hold.

Lemma 4.25. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph, T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), u a node of T with parameters (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ), and C the
largest component of Gu . Then either |C| < Nu /2 or all sets of F1,u are cores of ct log(Nu )-boosted
balanced separators of Gu originating in G.

Proof. Let t, G, T , u, (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F1,u ), and C be as in the statement of this lemma. Let S
be in F1,u and assume that |C| ⩾ Nu /2, we show that S is a core of a ct log(Nu )-boosted balanced
separator for Gu originating in G.
    Let w be the closest ancestor of u in T that corresponds to a call where S is the core of a boosted
balanced separator added in that call. Let (Gw , Xw , Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) be the parameters of w. Note
that this implies Xw = S or Xw = ⊥ and S was discovered in the call that corresponds to w.
Additionally, let a be the closest ancestor of w that corresponds to a call where S was discovered.
Let (Ga , Xa , Na , F1,a , F2,a ) be the parameters of a, as S was discovered in the call the corresponds
to a, it follows that Xa = ⊥.
    No edge on the path of T starting from w and ending at u can be a type 1 extended strip
decomposition edge or else S would not be in F1,u (since type 1 extended strip decompositions
“resets F1 ” to ∅), and no edge on the path of T starting from a and ending at w can be a type 1
extended strip decomposition edge (since type 1 extended strip decompositions “resets X” to ⊥).
Hence Na = Nw = Nu , so set N = Na = Nw = Nu . So, |S| ⩽ ct log(N ) and since NGGw [S] is an
      N
32c2 log2 (N )
               -balanced separator for Gw and Gu is an induced subgraph of Gw , it follows that NGGu [S]
   t
is an 32c2 log
            N
               2
                 (N )
                      -balanced separator for Gu . Since by assumption |C| ⩾ N/2, we have that NGGu [S]
         t
           |C|
is an 16c2 log 2
                 (N )
                      -balanced separator for Gu and therefore S is a core of a ct log(N )-boosted balanced
         t
separator for Gu originating in G.



                                                     49
Lemma 4.26. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T . Then P contains at most 5200c4t log5 (n)
boosted balanced separator edges.
Proof. Let t, G, T , and P be as in the statement if this lemma. Let P ′ be a subpath of P that does
not contain any edges that are type 1 extended strip decomposition edges. We first show that P ′
has less than 80tct log2 (n) boosted balanced separator edges.
    Assume for a contradiction that P ′ does have 80tct log2 (n) boosted balanced separator edges,
let uw be the 80tct log2 (n))th boosted balanced separator edge, and let (Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) and
(Gw , Xw , Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) be the parameters of u and w respectively. Since P ′ has no type 1 extended
strip decomposition edges and 80tct log2 (n) boosted balanced separator edges it follows that |F1,w |
⩾ 80tct log2 (n) ⩾ 80tct log2 (Nw ) and Nu = Nw .
    Since uw is a boosted balanced separator edge and not a type 1 extended strip decomposition
edge we can conclude that if C is the largest component of Gu = Gw , then |C| ⩾ Nu /2 = Nw /2 (or
else by Observation 4.5 the extended strip decomposition inferred by (Xu , Gu ) would be Nu -good
and uw would be a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge). It follows then from Lemma 4.25 that
all 80tct log2 (n) ⩾ 80tct log2 (Nw ) sets of F1,w are cores of ct log(Nw )-boosted balanced separators
for Gw originating in G. By Lemma 4.24 no vertex of Gw belongs to over log(Nw ) vertex sets of
NGGw [F1,w ], it then follows from Lemma 4.11 that G contains an St,t,t , a contradiction.
    Hence, P ′ has less than 80tct log2 (n) boosted balanced separator edges. Since by Lemma 4.23
P has at most 64c2t log3 (n) type 1 extended strip decomposition edges, it follows that P contains
at most (80tct log2 (n)) · (64c2t log3 (n) + 1) ⩽ 5200tc3t log5 (n) ⩽ 5200c4t log5 (n) (recall by definition
that ct ⩾ t) boosted balanced separator edges.

Lemma 4.27. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T . Then P contains at most 107 c7t log9 (n) type
2 extended strip decomposition edges.
Proof. Let t, G, T , and P be as in the statement of this lemma. Let P ′ be a subpath of P that
contains no type 1 extended strip decomposition nor boosted balanced separator edges. It then
follows that there exists an integer N and a set X ⊆ V (G) such that for any node a ∈ P ′ with
parameters (Ga , Xa , Na , F1,a , F2,a ) it holds that Na = N and Xa = ⊥ or X.
     We first show that P ′ has at most 1600c3t log4 (n) + 2 type 2 extended strip decomposition
edges. Let pc be a type 2 extended strip decomposition edge of P ′ and let (Gp , Xp , N, F1,p , F2,p )
and (Gc , Xc , N, F1,c , F2,c ) be the parameters of p and c respectively. Either Xp = Xc = X or
Xp = ⊥, Xc = X and X was discovered in the call p corresponds to. In either case we have
                                      1                                               1
|relevantG (Gc , X, N )| ⩽ (1− 800c3 log 3
                                           (N )
                                                )|relevantG (Gp , X, N )| ⩽ (1− 800c3 log 3
                                                                                            (n)
                                                                                                )|relevantG (Gp , X, N )|.
                                     t                                                t
    Now, let u and w be two vertices of P ′ with parameters (Gu , Xu , N, F1,u , F2,u ) and (Gw , Xw ,
N, F1,w , F2,w ) respectively. Since (1−1/c)2c ⩽ 1/2 for c ⩾ 2, it follows that if there are 1600c3t log4 (n)+
2 type 2 extended strip decomposition edges on the subpath of P ′ that starts at u and ends at w
then
                                                 1             3    4
           |relevantG (Gw , X, N )| ⩽ (1 −     3    3    )1600ct log (n)+2 |relevantG (Gu , X, N )|
                                           800ct log (n)
                                         ⩽ (1 − 1/2)log(n)+1 |relevantG (Gu , X, N )| < 1.
It follows that |relevantG (Gw , X, N )| = 0 and therefore, for any node z in P ′ (with parameters say
(Gz , X, N, F1,z , F2,z )) that comes after w it holds that relevantG (Gz , X, N ) = ∅. It then follows from
the 4th point of Observation 4.18 that there cannot be any other type 2 extended strip decomposition
edges after w in P ′ .

                                                          50
   Since P ′ has at most 1600c3t log4 (n) + 2 type 2 extended strip decomposition edges and by Lem-
mas 4.23 and 4.26, P has at most 64c2t log3 (n) type 1 extended strip decomposition edges and at most
5200c4t log(n)5 boosted balanced separator edges, it follows that P has at most (1600c3t log4 (n) + 2)
(64c2t log3 (n) + 5200c4t log5 (n) + 1) ⩽ 107 c7t log9 (n) type 2 extended strip decomposition edges.

Lemma 4.28. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T such that no edges of P are type 1 extended
strip decomposition, boosted balanced separator, nor type 2 extended strip decomposition edges. Then
P contains at most 109 c8t log11 (n) balanced separator edges.

Proof. Let t, G, T , and P be as in the statement of this lemma. Let P ′ be a subpath of P that
contains no type 1 extended strip decomposition, boosted balanced separator, nor type 2 extended
strip decomposition edges. It then follows that there exists an integer N and a set X ⊆ V (G) such
that for any node a ∈ P ′ with parameters (Ga , Xa , Na , F1,a , F2,a ) it holds that Na = N and Xa =
⊥ or X.
    Assume for a contradiction that P ′ has 10t log2 (n) balanced separator edge. Let ui wi denote
the (i10t log(n))th balanced separator edge, u0 be the first vertex of P ′ , (Gui , Xui , N, F1,ui , F2,ui )
be the parameters of ui , i ⩾ 0, of P ′ , and P j denote the subpath of P ′ that starts at uj and ends
at uj+1 , j ⩾ 0.
    For some P j it must hold that |relevantG (Gj , X, N )|/2 ⩽ |relevantG (Gj+1 , X, N )| or else

                             |relevantG (G0 , X, N )|
                                                      > |relevantG (Glog(n) , X, N )|
                                     2log(n)
which implies that |relevantG (Glog(n) , X, N )| = 0. Therefore, by the 4th point of Observation 4.18 it
follows that ulog(n) wlog(n) cannot be a balanced separator edge. So, we conclude that for some P j
it must hold that |relevantG (Gj , X, N )|/2 ⩽ |relevantG (Gj+1 , X, N )|, so fix this index as j.
     For each balanced separator node, v, on the path P j , let Bv denote the balanced separator core
added in call v, F the list of these Bv ’s, and (Gv , Xv , N, F1,v , F2,v ) the parameters of v. Note
that X = Xv (accept for possibly the first such v if Xv = ⊥ and then X would be X discov-
ered in the call the corresponds to v) and |relevantG (Gv , X, N )|/2 ⩽ |relevantG (Guj , X, N )|/2 ⩽
|relevantG (Guj+1 , X, N )| and relevantG (Guj+1 , X, N ) ⊆ relevantG (Gv , X, N ) ⊆ relevantG (Guj , X, N ).
So, since NGGv [Bv ] is an |relevant G (Gv ,X,N )|
                               200c3 log3 (N )
                                                   -balanced separator for relevantG (Gv , X, N ), it follows that
                                   t
 Gu                |relevantG (Guj+1 ,X,N )|
NG j+1 [Bv ] is an       100c3t log3 (N )
                                             -balanced separator for relevantG (Guj+1 , X, N ).    By definition
of F, it follows that |F| ⩾ 10t log(n) ⩾ 10t log(N ), by Lemma 4.24 no vertex of Guj+1 belongs to
                        Gu                                    Gu
over log(N ) set of NG j+1 [F2,uj+1 ] and therefore of NG j+1 [F] (as F ⊆ F2,uj+1 ), so by Lemma 4.9
G contains and St,t,t , a contradiction.
   We conclude that P ′ has less that 10t log2 (n) ⩽ 10ct log2 (n) (recall by definition ct ⩾ t) balanced
separators. Since by Lemmas 4.23, 4.26, and 4.27 P has at most 64c2t log3 (n), 5200c4t log5 (n),
and 107 c7t log9 (n) type 1 extend strip decomposition edges, boosted balanced separator edges, and
type 2 extended strip decomposition edges respectively, it follows that P has at most 10ct log2 (n)
(64c2t log3 (n) + 5200c4t log5 (n) + 107 c7t log9 (n) + 1) ⩽ 109 c8t log11 (n) balanced separator edges.

    Let G be a graph, T the recursion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and p, c ∈ T such
that pc is an edge of T with parameters (Gp , Xp , Np , F1,p , F2,p ) and (Gc , Xc , Nc , F1,c , F2,c ) respec-
tively. We say that a vertex v ∈ G is added to level set i during the call corresponding to p if v ∈              /
(Li (G, Gp , F1,p ) ∪ Li (G, Gp , F2,p )) and v ∈ (Li (G, Gc , F1,c ) ∪ Li (G, Gc , F2,c )). Note that for a vertex
v to be added to level set i during call p, the edge pc must be either a balanced separator edge or


                                                        51
a boosted balanced separator edge and v ∈ (Li−1 (G, Gp , F1,p ) ∪ Li−1 (G, Gp , F2,p )). Given a path P
in T we say that a vertex v is added to level set i in path P if there is at least one node u such that
v is added to level set i during the call corresponding to u. Note that it is possible for a vertex v
to be added to level set i in path P multiple times since the level sets F1 and F2 can get set to the
empty set multiple times.
    Additionally, we say that a vertex v ∈ G is removed from level set i during the call corresponding
to p if v ∈ (Li (G, Gp , F1,p ) ∪ Li (G, Gp , F2,p )) and v ∈
                                                            / (Li (G, Gc , F1,c ) ∪ Li (G, Gc , F2,c )). We say
that a vertex v is added to level set i in path P if there is at least one node u such that v is removed
from level set i during the call corresponding to u. Note that it is possible for a vertex v to be
removed from level set i in path P multiple times since the level sets F1 and F2 can get set to the
empty set multiple times. Furthermore, note that if the call that corresponds to the first vertex of
P has the property that both lists F1 and F2 are the empty set, then the number of vertices added
to level set i in path P , counting multiplicity, is at least as much as the number of vertices removed
from level set i in path P . This holds because if for a node u ∈ P a vertex v is removed from level
set i during the call corresponding to u, the vertex v must have been first added to level set i during
the call corresponding to w for some w ∈ P that comes before u in P .
Lemma 4.29. Let t be a positive integer, G be an n-vertex graph St,t,t -free graph, T the recur-
sion tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T such that no edges of P are type 1
extended strip decomposition edge and P contains c balanced separator and boosted balanced sepa-
rator edges. Then there exists a natural number N such that for any vertex v ∈ P with parameters
(Gv , Xv , Nv , F1,v , F2,v ) it holds that Nv = N and at most c · 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices are added
to level set i in P .
Proof. Let t, G, T , c, and P be as in the statement of this lemma. The fact that there exists a
natural number N such that for any vertex v ∈ P with parameters (Gv , Xv , Nv , F1,v , F2,v ) it holds
that Nv = N follows from the fact that P has no type 1 extended strip decomposition edges.
    Now, let p be a node of P and let (Gp , Xp , N, F1,p , F2,p ) be the parameters of p. Note that
if there is a vertex v that is added to level set i during call p, it must be that the vertex v is in
Li−1 (G, Gp , F1,p , N ) or Li−1 (G, Gp , F2,p , N ).
    First, assume that p is a balanced separator node of P and the set Bp is the balanced separator
core added in the call that corresponds to p, so |Bp | ⩽ 28000c4t log4 (N ). Since p is a balanced
separator node, there is no branchable vertex in the call corresponding to p. Therefore each vertex of
Bp has less than N/2i−1 neighbors in level set Li−1 (G, Gp , F2,p , N ) and therefore at most |Bp |N/2i−1
⩽ 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices are added to level set i during call p.
    Next, assume that p is a boosted balanced separator node of P , and let X be the boosted
balanced separator core added in the call that corresponds to p (if Xp ̸= ⊥ then X = Xp , and if
Xp = ⊥ then the set X was discovered in the call that corresponds to p). Let p′ be the first ancestor
of p in T where X was discovered (possibly with p′ = p) and let (Gp′ , Xp′ , Np′ , F1,p′ , F2,p′ ) be the
parameters of p′ , so X ⊆ V (Gp′ ) and |X| ⩽ ct log(Np′ ). It follows that all nodes between p′ and p
are branch nodes, type 2 extended strip decomposition nodes, and balanced separator nodes (since
all recursive calls of boosted balanced separator nodes and type 1 extended strip decomposition
nodes would reset X to ⊥). It follows that F1,p′ = F1,p and Np′ = N and so |X| ⩽ ct log(N ).
Additionally, since X was discovered in the call that corresponds to p′ , p′ cannot be a branch node
so there is no branchable vertex in the call corresponding to p′ , in particular, there is no vertex in
Gp′ that has at least N/2i−1 neighbors in Li−1 (G, Gp′ , L1,p′ , N ). Therefore each vertex of X has
at most N/2i−1 neighbors in level set Li−1 (G, Gp′ , F1,p′ , N ) and therefore (since Gp is an induced
subgraph of Gp′ and F1,p′ = F1,p ) in level set Li−1 (G, Gp , F1,p , N ). Hence at most |X|N/2i−1 ⩽
2ct log(N )N/2i vertices are added to level set i during call p.

                                                      52
    In either case, we conclude that at most 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices are added to level set i
in the call p. Since by assumption there are c boosted balanced separator and balanced separator
edges in P , it follows that at most c · 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices are added to level set i in P .

Lemma 4.30. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph, T the recursion tree
                                                                                          16
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅), and P a path of T . Then P contains at most 1014 c12
                                                                                     t log (n)
success edges.

Proof. Let t, G, T , and P be as in the statement of this lemma. Let P ′ be a maximal subpath of
P that contains no type 1 extended strip decomposition edges, c the number of balanced separator
and boosted balanced separator edges in P ′ , u the first vertex of P ′ (note by the maximality of
P ′ the in-edge of u is either a type 1 extended strip decomposition or u is the root of T ), and
(Gu , Xu , Nu , F1,u , F2,u ) the parameters of u.
     By Lemma 4.29 there is a natural number N such that for any node w ∈ P with param-
eters (Gw , Xw , Nw , F1,w , F2,w ) it holds that Nw = N , hence Nu = N , and there are at most
c · 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices added to level set i in P ′ (counting multiplicity). Since the in-edge
of u is a type 1 extended strip decomposition edge (or u is the root vertex of T ), it follows that
F1,u = F2,u = ∅. Hence if a vertex v is removed in P ′ , the vertex v must also have been added
in P ′ , so at most c56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices can be removed from level set i in P ′ (counting
multiplicity).
     Let pc be a success edge of P ′ and let (Gp , Xp , N, F1,p , F2,p ) and (Gc , Xc , N, F1,c , F2,c ) be the
parameters of p and c respectively. Then there is some vertex v ∈ Gp such that Gc = Gp − NGp [v].
Furthermore there is some natural number i such that NGp [v] contains at least N/2i vertices in
either level set Li (G, Gp , F1,p , N ) or Li (G, Gp , F2,p , N ), call this set of vertices S. It follows that
all of the vertices of S are removed from level set i in call p. Since at most c · 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i
vertices are added to level set i in P ′ (therefore as noted in the first paragraph of this proof at most
c · 56000c4t log4 (N )N/2i vertices can be removed to level set i in P ′ ) this can happen to level set i
in P ′ at most c · 56000c4t log4 (N ) times before it is empty. Since by Lemma 4.24 for all j > log(N )
Lj (G, Gp , F2,p , N ) and Lj (G, Gp , F2,p , N ) are already empty, it follows that i ⩽ log(N ). Therefore
there can be at most c · 56000c4t log5 (N ) success edges before all level sets are empty. Hence there
are at most c · 56000c4t log5 (N ) ⩽ c · 56000c4t log5 (n) success edges in P ′ .
     Lastly, by Lemmas 4.26 and 4.28 there are at most 5200c4t log5 (n) and 109 c8t log11 (n) boosted
balanced separator and balanced separator edges respectively in P . It then follows that there are
at most (5200c4t log(n)5 + 109 c8t log11 (n) + 1)(56000c4t log5 (n)) ⩽ 1014 c12    t log (n) success edges in
                                                                                         16

P.

Lemma 4.31. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph and T the recursion tree
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅). Then there are at most n failure edges on any root to leaf path
in T .

Proof. Let t, G, P , and T be as in the statement of this lemma, and let pc be a failure edge of T .
Then |Gc | = |Gp | − 1. Hence it is impossible for P to have n + 1 failure edges.

    Let G be an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph. In order to bound the number of nodes in the recursion
tree T generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) we will provide a sequence which will uniquely determine
                                                        12  16
every node of T , then prove that there is at most nO(ct log (n)) such sequences. Let u be a node in
T and let P be the path from the root node to u. The sequence we give is just the edges (given by
their labels) taken on the path from the root to the vertex u. Let us assume that we have been given
such a sequence of edge labels, S, that corresponds to the sequence of edge labelings of P . We show


                                                      53
how to use S to reconstruct the path P from the root node to u (proving this sequence uniquely
determines the vertex u). Assume we are currently at a vertex w, if w is a branch node, then the
next label in S must either be a success or failure edge, and whichever one it is uniquely determines
the next node in our path to u. Similarly, if w is a balanced separator or boosted balanced separator
node, then the next label in S must be a balanced separator edge or boosted balanced separator
edge and w has exactly one child, so again the next node in the path is uniquely determined. If w
is a type 1 or type 2 extended strip decomposition node though, there exists some constant c (by
Observation 4.22, independent of the choice of G) so that w can have up to nc children, and all
edges going to these children have the same label, hence the next node in the path is not uniquely
determined. To fix this issue we define an enriched recursion tree to be a recursion tree T such
that for every type 1 or type 2 extended strip decomposition node, each of its out edge labels are
additionally given a unique number 1 − nc . It follows that with this enriching, the next label of S
will uniquely determine a child of w and then this sequence uniquely determines the vertex u.
Lemma 4.32. Let t be a positive integer, G an St,t,t -free n-vertex graph, and T the recursion tree
                                                           12   16
generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅). Then T has at most nO(ct log (n)) nodes.
Proof. Let t, G and T be as in the statement of this lemma, and let c be the constant from
Observation 4.22. Furthermore, assume that T is an enriched recursion tree, that is for every u ∈ T
that is a type 1 or type 2 extended strip decomposition node, the labels of the out edges of u are given
an additional unique integer between 1 and nc , where c is the constant given in Observation 4.22.
    We consider the set of all edge label sequences which contain at most 64c2t log3 (n) type 1 extended
strip decomposition edges (by Lemma 4.23 that is as many as T can have), 5200c4t log5 (n) boosted
balanced separator edges (by Lemma 4.26 that is as many as T can have), 107 c7t log9 (n) type 2
extended strip decomposition edges (by Lemma 4.27 that is as many as T can have), 109 c8t log11 (n)
balanced separator edges (by Lemma 4.28 that is as many as T can have), 1014 c12              t log (n) (by
                                                                                                     16

Lemma 4.30 that is as many as T can have) success edges, and n failure edges (by Lemma 4.31
that is as many as T can have). To bound the number of such sequenced, first note that since
there are six types of edges and none can appear over nO(1) times there are at most nO(1) choices
for the number of each type of edge, call these choices n1 , n2 , n3 , n4 , n5 , and n6 and let n6 be the
number which denotes the number of failure        edges. The number of possiblen sequences        with these
number choices is then n1 +nn21+n  3 +n4 +n5 +n6
                                ,n2 ,n3 ,n4 ,n5   ⩽ (n 1 + n2 + n3 + n4 + n 5 +  n6 ) 1 +n2 +n3 +n4 +n5 . Since

                                                                               12   16
n6 ⩽ n and for i < 6, ni ⩽ 1014 c12  t log (n) this number is at most n
                                          16                                O(ct log (n)) . Since there are at
                                                                                                    12   16
most n  O(1)   difference choices for values of the ni ’s, it follows there are at most nO(1) nO(ct log (n))
        12    16
= nO(ct log (n)) sequences of this type.
    Next we consider the “enriched” version of these sequences, that is, for each type 1 and type 2
extended strip decomposition edge in a sequence of S we give it some number between 1 and nc .
as there are at most 64c2t log3 (n) and 107 c7t log9 (n) type 1 and type 2 extended strip decomposition
                                              2   3       7 7    9       12  16             12  16
edges respectively there are at most nc(64ct log (n)+10 ct log (n)) nO(ct log (n)) = nO(ct log (n)) of these
enriched sequences. It follows now that for any u ∈ T , the sequences of edges in the path from the
root node to u is contained in S, and by the discussion just before the statement of this lemma, for
                                                                    12  16
each u ∈ T is edge sequence is unique. So, since |S| = nO(ct log (n)) it follows that T has at most
     12    16
nO(ct log (n)) nodes.

    We are now ready to prove Theorem 1.4.

Proof of Theorem 1.4. Let t be a positive integer, G an n-vertex St,t,t -free graph, and T the recursion
tree generated by IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅). By Lemma 4.21 IND(G, ⊥, |G|, ∅, ∅) returns the weight of
                                                                               12  16
a maximum weight independent set of G and by Lemma 4.32 |T | = nO(ct log (n)) . All that must

                                                      54
be verified then is for each u ∈ T the amount of time spend in the call that correspond to u runs in
polynomial time. We justify this runtime by discussing only the runtime of the steps of IND that
do not clearly run polynomial time.
    That the step of finding X = esd(G) runs in polynomial time was justified in Definition 4.4.
That matching(H, η) runs in polynomial time follows from Lemma 4.7 and the facts that in type 2
extended strip decompositions calls, (H, η) is rigid, and therefore |H| = O(n), and in type 1 extended
strip decomposition calls (H, η) is the extended strip decomposition inferred by some (X ′ , G′ ) and
so |H| = nO(1) (see the discussion after Definition 4.4), and by Lemma 4.7 matching(H, η) runs in
time polynomial in |G| and |H|. Lastly, that the second bullet point of IND, where Lemma 4.8 is
applied runs in polynomial time is stated in Lemma 4.8.


5    Conclusion
Let us point out some possible directions for future research. First, on the structural side, we
believe that Definition 1.7 could be improved so that in the second outcome the balanced separator
is dominated by a constant (depending on t) number of vertices. The only reason why the current
statement has the logarithmic bound is that in Definition 1.6 the number of deleted neighborhoods
is logarithmic. [MMM+ 24] conjectured that Definition 1.6 can actually be improved so that the
number of deleted neighborhoods is constant. Proving this conjecture would immediately yield an
improved version of our Definition 1.7. However, such a stronger version, while being more elegant,
would not give any essentially new algorithmic result: the running time of our algorithms would
still be quasi-polynomial (though a bit faster).
     On the algorithmic side, an obvious natural problem is to provide a polynomial-time algorithm
for MWIS in St,t,t -free graphs, for all t. While we believe that extended strip decompositions are
the right tool to use towards this goal, it seems that decompositions like the ones obtained by
Definition 1.7 would not lead to such a statement. This is because recursing into a polynomial
number of multiplicatively smaller particles inherently leads to a quasi-polynomial running time.
We believe the ultimate goal would be to build an extended strip decomposition where each particle
induces a graph from some “simple” class. In particular, so that we can solve MWIS for each
particle in polynomial time without using recursion. Such decompositions for the simplest case, i.e.,
claw-free graphs, are provided by a deep structural result of Chudnovsky and Seymour [CS08].
     An important milestone on the way towards obtaining a polynomial-time algorithm for MWIS
in St,t,t -free graphs is to solve the case of Pt -free graphs, which is already a very ambitious goal.

Acknowledgments. We would like to thank Amálka Masaříková and Jana Masaříková for useful
discussions while working on this paper. Additionally, we acknowledge the welcoming and produc-
tive atmosphere at Dagstuhl Seminar 22481 “Vertex Partitioning in Graphs: From Structure to
Algorithms,” where a crucial part of the work leading to the results in this paper was done.


References
[ACDR22] Tara Abrishami, Maria Chudnovsky, Cemil Dibek, and Paweł Rzążewski. Polynomial-
         time algorithm for maximum independent set in bounded-degree graphs with no long
         induced claws. In Niv Buchbinder Joseph (Seffi) Naor, editor, Proceedings of the 2022
         ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2022, Virtual Conference, Jan-
         uary 9–12, 2022, pages 1448–1470. SIAM, 2022. doi:10.1137/1.9781611977073.61.



                                                  55
[ACP+ 21]   Tara Abrishami, Maria Chudnovsky, Marcin Pilipczuk, Paweł Rzążewski, and Paul D.
            Seymour. Induced subgraphs of bounded treewidth and the container method. In Dániel
            Marx, editor, Proceedings of the 2021 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
            SODA 2021, Virtual Conference, January 10–13, 2021, pages 1948–1964. SIAM, 2021.
            doi:10.1137/1.9781611976465.116.
[Ale82]     Vladimir E. Alekseev. The effect of local constraints on the complexity of determina-
            tion of the graph independence number. Combinatorial-algebraic methods in applied
            mathematics, pages 3–13, 1982.
[Ale04]     Vladimir E. Alekseev. Polynomial algorithm for finding the largest independent sets
            in graphs without forks. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 135(1):3–16, 2004. Russian
            Translations II. doi:10.1016/S0166-218X(02)00290-1.
[Bak94]     Brenda S. Baker. Approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems on planar
            graphs. J. ACM, 41(1):153–180, 1994. doi:10.1145/174644.174650.
[BLM+ 19] Gábor Bacsó, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx, Marcin Pilipczuk, Zsolt Tuza, and
          Erik Jan van Leeuwen. Subexponential-time algorithms for maximum independent set
          in Pt -free and broom-free graphs. Algorithmica, 81(2):421–438, 2019. doi:10.1007/
          s00453-018-0479-5.
[BM18a]     Andreas Brandstädt and Raffaele Mosca. Maximum weight independent sets for (P7 ,
            triangle)-free graphs in polynomial time. Discret. Appl. Math., 236:57–65, 2018. doi:
            10.1016/j.dam.2017.10.003.
[BM18b]     Andreas Brandstädt and Raffaele Mosca. Maximum weight independent set for ℓclaw-
            free graphs in polynomial time. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 237:57–64, mar 2018.
            doi:10.1016/j.dam.2017.11.029.
[BT01]      Vincent Bouchitté and Ioan Todinca. Treewidth and minimum fill-in: Grouping
            the minimal separators. SIAM J. Comput., 31(1):212–232, 2001. doi:10.1137/
            S0097539799359683.
[CC16]      Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Polynomial bounds for the grid-minor theorem.
            J. ACM, 63(5):40:1–40:65, 2016. doi:10.1145/2820609.
[CFK+ 15]   Marek Cygan, Fedor V. Fomin, Łukasz Kowalik, Daniel Lokshtanov, Dániel Marx,
            Marcin Pilipczuk, Michał Pilipczuk, and Saket Saurabh. Parameterized algorithms.
            Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-21275-3.
[CPPT20]    Maria Chudnovsky, Marcin Pilipczuk, Michał Pilipczuk, and Stéphan Thomassé. Quasi-
            polynomial time approximation schemes for the Maximum Weight Independent Set
            Problem in H-free graphs. In Shuchi Chawla, editor, Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-
            SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2020, Salt Lake City, UT, USA,
            January 5–8, 2020, pages 2260–2278. SIAM, 2020. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975994.
            139.
[CS08]      Maria Chudnovsky and Paul D. Seymour. Claw-free graphs. V. Global structure. J.
            Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 98(6):1373–1410, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2008.03.002.
[CS10]      Maria Chudnovsky and Paul D. Seymour. The three-in-a-tree problem.            Comb.,
            30(4):387–417, 2010. doi:10.1007/s00493-010-2334-4.

                                               56
[CT21]      Julia Chuzhoy and Zihan Tan. Towards tight(er) bounds for the excluded grid theorem.
            J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 146:219–265, 2021. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2020.09.010.
[DF95]      Rod G. Downey and Michael R. Fellows. Fixed-parameter tractability and com-
            pleteness II: On completeness for W[1]. Theoretical Computer Science, 141(1–2):109–
            131, April 1995. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(94)00097-3, doi:
            10.1016/0304-3975(94)00097-3.
[Edm65]     Jack Edmonds. Paths, trees, and flowers. Canadian Journal of Mathematics,
            17:449–467, 1965. doi:10.4153/CJM-1965-045-4.
[Far89]     Martin Farber. On diameters and radii of bridged graphs. Discrete Math., 73(3):249–
            260, 1989. doi:10.1016/0012-365X(89)90268-9.
[FHT93]     Martin Farber, Mihály Hujter, and Zsolt Tuza. An upper bound on the number of
            cliques in a graph. Networks, 23(3):207–210, May 1993. doi:10.1002/net.3230230308.
[FOS11]     Yuri Faenza, Gianpaolo Oriolo, and Gautier Stauffer. An algorithmic decomposition of
            claw-free graphs leading to an O(n3 )-algorithm for the weighted stable set problem. In
            Proceedings of the 2011 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA
            2011), pages 630–646, USA, 2011. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
            doi:10.1137/1.9781611973082.49.
[GHL03]     Michael U. Gerber, Alain Hertz, and Vadim V. Lozin. Stable sets in two subclasses
            of banner-free graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 132(1-3):121–136, 2003. doi:
            10.1016/S0166-218X(03)00395-0.
[GKPP22] Andrzej Grzesik, Tereza Klimošová, Marcin Pilipczuk, and Michał Pilipczuk.
         Polynomial-time algorithm for maximum weight independent set on P6 -free graphs.
         ACM Trans. Algorithms, 18(1):4:1–4:57, 2022. doi:10.1145/3414473.
[GL20]      Peter Gartland and Daniel Lokshtanov. Independent set on Pk -free graphs in quasi-
            polynomial time. In Sandy Irani, editor, 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
            of Computer Science, FOCS 2020, Durham, NC, USA, November 16–19, 2020, pages
            613–624. IEEE, 2020. doi:10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00063.
[GLP+ 21]   Peter Gartland, Daniel Lokshtanov, Marcin Pilipczuk, Michał Pilipczuk, and Paweł
            Rzążewski. Finding large induced sparse subgraphs in C>t -free graphs in quasipoly-
            nomial time. In Samir Khuller and Virginia Vassilevska Williams, editors, STOC ’21:
            53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, Virtual Event, Italy,
            June 21–25, 2021, pages 330–341. ACM, 2021. doi:10.1145/3406325.3451034.
[Gyá75]     András Gyárfás. On Ramsey covering-numbers. In Infinite and finite sets (Colloq.,
            Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erdős on his 60th birthday), Vol. II, number 10 in
            Colloq. Math. Soc. Janos Bolyai, pages 801–816. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[Gyá87]     András Gyárfás. Problems from the world surrounding perfect graphs. In Pro-
            ceedings of the International Conference on Combinatorial Analysis and its Applica-
            tions, (Pokrzywna, 1985), number 19 in Zastos. Mat., pages 413–441, 1987. doi:
            10.4064/am-19-3-4-413-441.
[Hås99]     Johan Håstad. Clique is hard to approximate within n1−ε . Acta Math., 182(1):105–142,
            1999. doi:10.1007/BF02392825.

                                                57
[HLLM20] Ararat Harutyunyan, Michael Lampis, Vadim V. Lozin, and Jérôme Monnot. Maximum
         independent sets in subcubic graphs: New results. Theor. Comput. Sci., 846:14–26,
         2020. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2020.09.010.

[Kar72]    Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Raymond E. Miller
           and James W. Thatcher, editors, Proceedings of a symposium on the Complexity of
           Computer Computations, held March 20-22, 1972, at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Re-
           search Center, Yorktown Heights, New York, USA, The IBM Research Symposia Series,
           pages 85–103. Plenum Press, New York, 1972. doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-2001-2\_9.

[KTW20]    Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. Quickly excluding a non-
           planar graph. CoRR, abs/2010.12397, 2020. arXiv:2010.12397.

[LBS15]    Ngoc Chi Lê, Christoph Brause, and Ingo Schiermeyer. The Maximum Independent Set
           Problem in subclasses of Si,j,k -free graphs. Electron. Notes Discret. Math., 49:43–49,
           2015. doi:10.1016/j.endm.2015.06.008.

[LM05]     Vadim V. Lozin and Raffaele Mosca. Independent sets in extensions of 2K2 -free graphs.
           Discret. Appl. Math., 146(1):74–80, 2005. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2004.07.006.

[LM08]     Vadim V. Lozin and Martin Milanič. A polynomial algorithm to find an independent
           set of maximum weight in a fork-free graph. J. Discrete Algorithms, 6(4):595–604, 2008.
           doi:10.1016/j.jda.2008.04.001.

[LMP14]    Vadim V. Lozin, Martin Milanič, and Christopher Purcell. Graphs without large apples
           and the Maximum Weight Independent Set problem. Graphs Comb., 30(2):395–410,
           2014. doi:10.1007/s00373-012-1263-y.

[LMR15]    Vadim V. Lozin, Jérôme Monnot, and Bernard Ries. On the maximum independent
           set problem in subclasses of subcubic graphs. J. Discrete Algorithms, 31:104–112, 2015.
           doi:10.1016/j.jda.2014.08.005.

[Loz17]    Vadim Lozin. From matchings to independent sets. Discrete Appl. Math., 231:4–14,
           November 2017. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2016.04.012.

[LR03]     Vadim V. Lozin and Dieter Rautenbach. Some results on graphs without long induced
           paths. Inf. Process. Lett., 88(4):167–171, 2003. doi:10.1016/j.ipl.2003.07.004.

[LVV14]    Daniel Lokshtanov, Martin Vatshelle, and Yngve Villanger. Independent set in P5 -
           free graphs in polynomial time. In Chandra Chekuri, editor, Proceedings of the
           Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2014,
           Portland, Oregon, USA, January 5–7, 2014, pages 570–581. SIAM, 2014. doi:
           10.1137/1.9781611973402.43.

[Min80]    George J. Minty. On maximal independent sets of vertices in claw-free graphs. Journal
           of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 28(3):284–304, 1980. doi:https://doi.org/10.
           1016/0095-8956(80)90074-X.

[MMM+ 24] Konrad Majewski, Tomáš Masařík, Jana Masaříková, Karolina Okrasa, Marcin
          Pilipczuk, Paweł Rzążewski, and Marek Sokołowski. Max weight independent set in
          graphs with no long claws: An analog of the gyárfás’ path argument. ACM Transactions
          on Computation Theory, 16(2):8:1–8:18, March 2024. doi:10.1145/3636422.

                                               58
[Mos99]   Raffaele Mosca. Stable sets in certain P6 -free graphs. Discret. Appl. Math., 92(2-3):177–
          191, 1999. doi:10.1016/S0166-218X(99)00046-3.

[Mos08]   Raffaele Mosca. Stable sets of maximum weight in (P7 , banner)-free graphs. Discrete
          Mathematics, 308(1):20–33, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.disc.2007.03.044.

[Mos09]   Raffaele Mosca. Independent sets in (P6 , diamond)-free graphs. Discret. Math. Theor.
          Comput. Sci., 11(1):125–140, 2009. doi:10.46298/dmtcs.473.

[Mos13]   Raffaele Mosca. Maximum weight independent sets in (P6 , co-banner)-free graphs. Inf.
          Process. Lett., 113(3):89–93, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.ipl.2012.10.004.

[Mos21]   Raffaele Mosca. Independent sets in (P4+4 , triangle)-free graphs. Graphs Comb.,
          37(6):2173–2189, 2021. doi:10.1007/s00373-021-02340-7.

[Mos22]   Raffaele Mosca. New results on independent sets in extensions of 2K2 -free graphs.
          Graphs Comb., 38(4), August 2022. doi:10.1007/s00373-022-02532-9.

[MP16]    Frédéric Maffray and Lucas Pastor. Maximum weight stable set in (P7 , bull)-free graphs.
          CoRR, abs/1611.09663, 2016. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.09663.

[NS21]    Paolo Nobili and Antonio Sassano. An O(n2 log (n)) algorithm for the weighted stable
          set problem in claw-free graphs. Mathematical Programming, 186:409–437, 2021. doi:
          10.1007/s10107-019-01461-5.

[PPR21]   Marcin Pilipczuk, Michał Pilipczuk, and Paweł Rzążewski. Quasi-polynomial-time
          algorithm for independent set in Pt -free graphs via shrinking the space of induced
          paths. In Hung Viet Le and Valerie King, editors, 4th Symposium on Simplicity in
          Algorithms, SOSA 2021, Virtual Conference, January 11–12, 2021, pages 204–209.
          SIAM, 2021. doi:10.1137/1.9781611976496.23.

[RS91]    Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. x. obstructions to tree-
          decomposition. J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 52(2):153–190, 1991. doi:10.1016/
          0095-8956(91)90061-N.

[RS95]    Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors XIII. the disjoint paths problem.
          J. Comb. Theory, Ser. B, 63(1):65–110, 1995. doi:10.1006/jctb.1995.1006.

[Sbi80]   Najiba Sbihi. Algorithme de recherche d’un stable de cardinalite maximum dans un
          graphe sans etoile. Discrete Mathematics, 29(1):53–76, 1980. doi:https://doi.org/
          10.1016/0012-365X(90)90287-R.




                                               59
