The Complexity of Finding Coset-Generating
Polymorphisms and the Promise Metaproblem
Manuel Bodirsky #
Institut für Algebra, TU Dresden, Germany
Armin Weiß #
FMI, University of Stuttgart, Germany

      Abstract
We show that the metaproblem for coset-generating polymorphisms is NP-complete, answering a
question of Chen and Larose: given a finite structure, the computational question is whether this
structure has a polymorphism of the form (x, y, z) 7→ xy −1 z with respect to some group; such
operations are also called coset-generating, or heaps.
    Furthermore, we introduce a promise version of the metaproblem, parametrised by two poly-
morphism conditions Σ1 and Σ2 and defined analogously to the promise constraint satisfaction
problem. We give sufficient conditions under which the promise metaproblem for (Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P
and under which it is NP-hard. In particular, the promise metaproblem is in P if Σ1 states the
existence of a Maltsev polymorphism and Σ2 states the existence of an abelian heap polymorphism –
despite the fact that neither the metaproblem for Σ1 nor the metaproblem for Σ2 is known to be in
P. We also show that the creation-metaproblem for Maltsev polymorphisms, under the promise that
a heap polymorphism exists, is in P if and only if there is a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for
CSPs with a heap polymorphism.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation

Keywords and phrases constraint satisfaction problem, coset-generating polymorphisms, metaprob-
lem, heap, abelian heap, uniform polynomial-time algorithm, NP-hardness

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2026.169

Category Track B: Automata, Logic, Semantics, and Theory of Programming

Related Version Previous Version: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00778

Funding Manuel Bodirsky: Received funding from the ERC (Grant Agreement no. 101071674,
POCOCOP). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only and do not
necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency.
Armin Weiß: Supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) grant WE 6835/1-2.


 1      Introduction
After the resolution of the finite-domain constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) dichotomy
conjecture [32] (announced independently by Bulatov [12] and by Zhuk [34]), one of the
central open problems in the area is whether there exists a uniform polynomial-time algorithm
for tractable CSPs, i.e., an algorithm that decides in polynomial time whether there exists
a homomorphism from a given relational structure A to a given relational structure B,
under the assumption that CSP(B) is in P. Here the structures are given by lists of tuples,
that is, one list of tuples for each of the relations. Neither Bulatov’s nor Zhuk’s algorithm
runs uniformly in polynomial time, because the running time of these algorithms depends
superpolynomially on the size of the input structure B.
     The existence of a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for tractable CSPs is already open
under the much stronger assumption that the given structure B has a Maltsev polymorphism,
i.e., a polymorphism m : B 3 → B satisfying m(x, x, y) = m(y, x, x) = y for all x, y ∈ B.
             © Manuel Bodirsky and Armin Weiß;
                                                                                                      EA




             licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
                                                                                                      TC S




53rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2026).
Editors: Sayan Bhattacharya, Danupon Nanongkai, Michael Benedikt, and Gabriele Puppis;
Article No. 169; pp. 169:1–169:18
                    Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
                    Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
169:2   Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


        An important source of such operations are groups as the operation (x, y, z) 7→ xy −1 z with
        respect to some group satisfies these identities; such operations have been called coset-
        generating polymorphisms (terminology used in [15]; for the motivation for this name, see
        Lemma 9), which are also called heaps (see Section 6). For structures B with a Maltsev
        polymorphism, the polynomial-time tractability of CSP(B) has been shown prior to [12, 34]
        and with a simpler algorithm (Bulatov and Dalmau [14]). But again, this algorithm is
        not a uniform polynomial-time algorithm. Nevertheless, the algorithm of Bulatov and
        Dalmau is semiuniform in the sense that, if the algorithm is not only given B but also
        a Maltsev polymorphism of B, then it can answer the question whether there exists a
        homomorphism from A to B in polynomial time.1 Chen and Larose [15] pointed out that a
        uniform polynomial-time algorithm for constraints with a Maltsev polymorphism would thus
        follow from the existence of a polynomial-time algorithm that takes a structure B as input
        and computes a Maltsev polymorphism of B; this problem is called the creation-metaproblem
        (or creation-metaquestion, see [15]) for Maltsev polymorphisms. Conversely, if there exists a
        uniform polynomial-time algorithm for structures B with a Maltsev polymorphism, then
        the creation-metaproblem for Maltsev polymorphisms is in P (a consequence of Theorem 4.7
        in [15]; we use P also for function-P).
            Some of the recently proposed candidates for a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for
        tractable CSPs were refuted using structures with a coset-generating polymorphism: Datalog
        reductions to systems of linear equations over Z (a method proposed in [17]) fail to solve
        the CSP for a structure with the coset-generating polymorphism for the symmetric group
        S18 [25], and singleton BLP+AIP fails to solve the CSP for a structure with the coset-
        generating polymorphism for the dihedral group D8 [33]. It is thus natural to determine
        the complexity of the creation-metaproblem for coset-generating polymorphisms (i.e., heaps)
        instead of Maltsev polymorphisms and the corresponding decision problem, which is simply
        called the metaproblem (or metaquestion). For the latter, the task is to decide whether the
        polymorphisms of a given finite structure B (where the relations are given explicitly by lists
        of tuples) satisfy a certain polymorphism condition such as having a Maltsev polymorphism,
        or having a coset-generating polymorphism. And indeed, Chen and Larose [15, Section 8] ask:
        “Can anything be said about the complexity of deciding the presence of a coset-generating
        polymorphism?”. In this article we prove (in Section 7) that deciding whether a given
        structure has a coset-generating polymorphism is an NP-complete problem, thus answering
        the question of Chen and Larose.

        ▶ Theorem 1. The following problem is NP-complete:
               Input:        A finite structure B.
               Question:     Does B have a coset-generating polymorphism?

           While this does not rule out the existence of a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for
        CSPs with coset-generating polymorphisms, it shows that such a possible algorithm cannot
        use the approach to first compute the coset-generating polymorphism and then use Bulatov
        and Dalmau’s semiuniform algorithm [14].
           One might ask whether the NP-hardness result in Theorem 1 still holds for coset-generating
        polymorphisms with respect to restricted classes of groups. Indeed, our proof only uses
        groups of order 4p for p ⩾ 5 prime – which, in particular, are all metabelian and, indeed,
        have an abelian normal subgroup of index 4.


        1
            Also the polynomial-time algorithms of Zhuk and of Bulatov are semiuniform; instead of a Maltsev
            polymorphism, they work if a so-called weak near unanimity polymorphism of B is part of the input.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                                         169:3


    Coset-generating operations f that come from abelian groups are called abelian heaps. If
B has a polymorphism that is an abelian heap, then a uniform polynomial-time algorithm is
known (based on affine integer programming (AIP) introduced in [7]). We show that this
algorithm can be used to compute in polynomial time for a given finite structure B a Maltsev
polymorphism when the existence of an abelian heap polymorphism is promised.
    More generally, we introduce the promise-metaproblem, which is defined analogously
to the promise CSP (for literature on this very active area, see, e.g., [2, 9]): if Σ1 and Σ2
are polymorphism conditions (formal definitions can be found in Section 2) such that Σ1
implies Σ2 , then PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is the problem of deciding for a given finite structure B
whether Pol(B) satisfies Σ1 , or whether it does not even satisfy Σ2 . For instance, if Σ1 is the
condition to have an abelian heap polymorphism, and Σ2 is the condition to have a Maltsev
polymorphism, then the argument above shows that PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P despite the fact
that neither of the metaproblems for Σ1 and for Σ2 is known to be in P. More generally, we
strengthen a result of Chen and Larose [15, Corollary 4.9] about the tractability of certain
metaproblems and prove that PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P if

    Σ1 is idempotent and there exists a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for CSP(B) for
    structures B with Pol(B) |= Σ1 , and

    Σ2 is a linear strong Maltsev condition (Proposition 7).2
Moreover, under the same conditions and provided that there exists a semiuniform polynomial-
time algorithm for CSPs with polymorphisms satisfying Σ2 , the uniform CSP for Σ1 is in
P if and only if the creation variant of the promise metaproblem is in P.3 In particular,
we conclude that there is a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for CSPs with a coset-
generating polymorphism if and only if the promise creation-metaproblem for coset-generating
polymorphisms and Maltsev polymorphisms is in P.
   Also one of the main hardness results by Chen and Larose about the metaproblem can
be generalized to the larger class of promise metaproblems: we observe that if Σ1 and Σ2 are
non-trivial and consistent height one strong Maltsev conditions (see Section 3 for definitions)
such that Σ1 implies Σ2 , then PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is NP-complete (Proposition 6).
    For a formal discussion of the complexity of uniform algorithms and metaproblems, we
need to be more specific about how relational structures are given to a computer and how
to measure the size of these representations. This can be found in Section 2. In Section 4
we introduce the promise metaproblem and promise creation-metaproblem and observe
that a hardness result of Chen and Larose has a natural extension to the promise setting
(Proposition 6). In Section 5 we discuss the connection between the promise metaproblem
and uniform algorithms for the CSP, and prove a generalization of a known tractability
result for metaproblems to promise metaproblems (Proposition 7). In Section 6 we give some
background on coset-generating polymorphisms, and in Section 7 we prove our main result
about the computational complexity of the metaproblem for coset-generating polymorphisms.
We conclude and discuss open problems for future research in Section 9.



2
  A strong Maltsev condition is simply a finite set of height one conditions, see Section 2 for definitions.
  This is standard terminology, but we will avoid using it to prevent confusing with the Maltsev identities
  mentioned in the introduction. Linear strong Maltsev conditions are also called minor conditions in the
  Promise CSP literature.
3
  Promise metaproblem should not be confused with meta-problems for promise CSPs, as studied
  e.g. in [24].




                                                                                                               ICALP 2026
169:4   Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


            2       Structures, Homomorphisms, Polymorphisms
        Let k ∈ N and τ ∈ Nk . A τ -structure A consists of a set A and for every i ∈ {1, . . . , k} a
        relation RiA ⊆ Aτi . We refer to τ as the signature of A (of size k). All τ -structures considered
        here will be finite, i.e., A is finite. If a τ -structure is considered as the input or output
        of some algorithm, we assume that its relations are represented by lists of tuples, i.e., the
        representation size of A is |A| + k + i∈{1,...,k} (τi · |RiA |). A structure is a τ -structure for
                                                            P

        some signature τ ; if we later write that a computational problem takes a structure as an
        input, we mean that τ and k are part of the input.
             A homomorphism between two structures A and B with the same signature τ of size k
        is a function h : A → B such that for every i ∈ {1, . . . , k} we have (h(a1 ), . . . , h(aτi )) ∈ RiB
        whenever (a1 , . . . , aτi ) ∈ RiA . If A is a τ -structure and m ∈ N, then B := Am is the
        τ -structure with domain Am and
                                                                          j
             RiB := (a11 , . . . , am              1             m                     j       A
                                                                    
                                    1 ), . . . , (aτi , . . . , aτi ) | (a1 , . . . , aτi ) ∈ Ri for all j ∈ {1, . . . , m} .

        A polymorphism of a structure B is a homomorphism from Bm to B, for some m ∈ N. In other
        words, a polymorphism is an operation B m → B for some m that, applied componentwise,
        preserves the relations of B. Note that the set of all polymorphisms of B is a clone, i.e., it
        contains the projections and is closed under composition. A finite structure B is called a
        core if every endomorphism4 of B is an automorphism of B.
            The problem of deciding whether there exists a homomorphism from a τ -structure A to
        a τ -structure B is NP-complete. This problem is sometimes called the uniform CSP (with
        both A and B being the input). If B is a fixed τ -structure, then CSP(B) is the problem of
        deciding whether a given τ -structure A has a homomorphism to B; this is often referred to
        as the non-uniform CSP. The finite-domain CSP dichotomy states that CSP(B) is in P if B
        has a 4-ary Siggers polymorphism, i.e., a polymorphism s satisfying for all a, r, e ∈ B

                s(a, r, e, a) = s(r, a, r, e),

        and is NP-complete otherwise. This specific identity was found by Siggers [30], building
        on results from [4]. The result proved there also implies that if a structure has a Maltsev
        polymorphism, then it also has a 4-ary Siggers polymorphism. Note that unlike some older
        articles, we do not require that Siggers operations are idempotent. We also mention that for
        finite structures B the following are equivalent.
            B has a Siggers polymorphism;
            B has a cyclic polymorphism [3], i.e., a polymorphism c : B k → B for some k ⩾ 2
            satisfying for all x1 , . . . , xk ∈ B

                    c(x1 , . . . , xk ) = c(x2 , . . . , xk , x1 ).

                B has a weak near-unanimity polymorphism [27], i.e., a polymorphism w : B k → B for
                some k ⩾ 2 satisfying for all x, y ∈ B

                    w(y, x, . . . , x) = w(x, y, x, . . . , x) = · · · = w(x, . . . , x, y).

        For every fixed pair of relational τ -structures B and C such that B has a homomorphism to
        C, the Promise CSP for (B, C), denoted by PCSP(B, C), is defined as follows.
                 Input:          A finite τ -structure A.
                 Output:         “Yes” if A has a homomorphism to B, “No” if A has no homomorphism to C.


        4
            An endomorphism of B is a homomorphism from B to B, i.e., a unary polymorphism.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                                               169:5


    If A has a homomorphism to C but no homomorphism to B, then the algorithm solving
PCSP(B, C) might answer arbitrarily. Despite a powerful theory that is available for studying
the complexity of promise CSPs [2,8,9], the complexity of PCSP(B, C) has not been classified
for all pairs (B, C). For instance, if Kℓ is the clique with ℓ vertices, then the complexity of
PCSP(Kn , Km ) has already been studied in [18], and is conjectured to be NP-hard for all
3 ⩽ n < m, but this remains open. There are problems of the form PCSP(A, B) in P where
CSP(A) and CSP(B) are NP-hard [6].

 3      Polymorphism Conditions
Let σ be a set of function symbols. A σ-identity is an expression of the form s ≈ t where s
and t are σ-terms over some common set of variables x1 , . . . , xn . Such an identity is called
    linear if each of the two terms contains at most one function symbol from σ;
    height one if exactly one symbol from σ occurs in each of the terms s and t.
If Σ is a (not necessarily finite) set of σ-identities and C is a set of operations over B, then
we write C |= Σ if we can interpret the function symbols from σ by operations from C such
that for every identity s ≈ t from Σ and every instantiation of the variables in s and t by
elements b1 , . . . , bn from B we have that s(b1 , . . . , bn ) = t(b1 , . . . , bn ). Otherwise, we write
C ̸|= Σ. If Σ = {s ≈ t} consists of a single identity, we also write C |= s ≈ t instead of
C |= {s ≈ t}. If Σ1 and Σ2 are sets of identities, we write Σ1 |= Σ2 if for every clone C with
a finite domain we have that C |= Σ2 whenever C |= Σ1 . A set of σ-identities Σ is called
    idempotent if Σ contains for every f ∈ σ the identity f (x, . . . , x) ≈ x;
    trivial if Proj |= Σ, where Proj is the set of all projections over the set {0, 1} (and
    non-trivial otherwise);
    consistent if for every non-empty finite set D there exist idempotent operations on D
    that satisfy Σ (we use the definition from [15]; also see Lemma 3).

    We say a function g : Dk → D is an extension of f : C k → C for C ⊆ D if g|C k = f where
g|C k denotes the restriction of g to C k .

▶ Lemma 2. Let Σ be a set of linear σ-identities such that Σ ̸|= x ≈ y and let C be a clone
on some domain C such that C |= Σ. Moreover, let D = C ∪ {a} for some a ∈  / C and let D be
the set of all operations that extend some f ∈ C (i.e., D = {f : D → D | k ∈ N, fˆ|C k ∈ C }).
                                                             ˆ    k

Then D is a clone and D |= Σ.

Proof. First, let us observe that D is a clone: Clearly, all projections are in D. Moreover,
if fˆ, ĝ1 , . . . , ĝk ∈ D, then we have f, g1 , . . . , gk ∈ C where f, g1 , . . . , gk denote the respective
restrictions to C ℓ for suitable ℓ. Hence, because C is a clone, also their composition is in C
(which is the same as the restriction of fˆ(ĝ1 , . . . , ĝk )); hence, also fˆ(ĝ1 , . . . , ĝk ) ∈ D and D is
a clone.
      To show that D |= Σ, we define an equivalence relation ≡ on the set of linear σ-
terms over a countable set of variables X . Note that a linear σ-term is either a single
variable or a term of the form f (x1 , . . . , xn ) where f ∈ σ is an n-ary function symbol
and x1 , . . . , xn ∈ X (possibly with repetitions). We can also denote such a linear term in
the form s(y1 , . . . , yk ) = f (yi1 , . . . , yin ) where y1 , . . . , yk are pairwise distinct variables and
i1 , . . . , in ∈ {1, . . . , k}.
      We define ≡ to be the smallest equivalence relation which contains Σ (recall that formally
Σ is a set of pairs of linear σ-terms) and which is closed under substituting variables for
other variables. Thus, in particular, we have Σ |= {s ≈ t | s ≡ t}. Observe that
(1) as Σ ̸|= x ≈ y, we cannot have both f (x1 , . . . , xk ) ≡ xi and f (x1 , . . . , xk ) ≡ xj if xi =     ̸ xj .



                                                                                                                     ICALP 2026
169:6   Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


            We may identify the function symbols in σ with operations in C that witness that C
        satisfies Σ. Using this identification, we further observe that,
        (2) if s(y1 , . . . , yk ) is a linear term where y1 , . . . , yk ∈ X are distinct variables and if
             s(y1 , . . . , yk ) ≡ yi for some i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, then s(c1 , . . . , ck ) = ci for all c1 , . . . , ck ∈ C.
           Now, for each f ∈ σ identified with f : C k → C, let us describe an extension fˆ: Dk → D
        such that the resulting set of functions satisfies Σ. In order to do so, fix a map π : D → C
        which is the identity on C. For f ∈ σ and a1 , . . . , ak ∈ D we define
                                   
                                   ai
                                                              if there exists an injective ξ : {a1 , . . . , ak } → X
           fˆ(a1 , . . . , ak ) :=                             such that f (ξ(a1 ), . . . , ξ(ak )) ≡ ξ(ai )
                                   
                                    f (π(a1 ), . . . , π(ak )) otherwise.
                                   

            By (1), it follows that fˆ is well-defined (note that the definition depends on π, but π is
        fixed – however, it does not depend on ξ, because the relation ≡ is invariant under substitution
        of variables). Moreover, if a1 , . . . , ak ∈ C, we have fˆ(a1 , . . . , ak ) = f (a1 , . . . , ak ) (in the case
        that there exists an injective ξ : {a1 , . . . , ak } → X with f (ξ(a1 ), . . . , ξ(ak )) ≡ ξ(ai ), we rely
        on (2)).
            Finally, the collection of all the fˆ for f ∈ σ satisfies Σ. For identities involving f (x1 , . . . , xk )
        with f (x1 , . . . , xk ) ≡ xi , this is because we defined fˆ(a1 , . . . , ak ) = ai ; for other identities,
        this follows immediately, because the set of all f ’s (with f ∈ σ) already satisfies Σ.                        ◀

            The purpose of the following lemma is to explain the concept of “consistency” for sets
        of linear identities; the second statement illustrates why we cannot drop the idempotence
        assumption in the first statement.
        ▶ Lemma 3. An idempotent set of linear identities Σ is consistent if and only if Σ ̸|= x ≈ y.
        A set of height one identities Σ is consistent if and only if Σ ̸|= f (x) ≈ g(y).
        Proof. Clearly, if Σ |= x ≈ y, then all finite models of Σ have a domain of size one. Hence,
        if D has cardinality n ⩾ 2, then there is no set of operations on D that satisfies Σ, so Σ is
        not consistent. On the other hand, if Σ ̸|= x ≈ y, by Lemma 2, starting with a one-element
        domain, we find clones with arbitrary domain size that satisfy Σ. If Σ is idempotent, then
        we even find idempotent operations that satisfy Σ, so Σ is consistent.
            To see the second statement, observe that if Σ |= f (x) ≈ g(y) and C is a clone such that
        C |= Σ, then C must contain a constant unary operation, which can only be idempotent if
        the domain D of C has at most one element. So Σ is not consistent. Conversely, suppose
        that Σ ̸|= f (x) ≈ g(y). It is known that in this case D |= Σ ∪ ∆, where D is the clone of
        all idempotent operations on a two-element set D (Proposition 3.2.5 in [31]), and ∆ are
        equations that express that all functions mentioned in Σ are idempotent. Let S be a finite
        superset of D; then applying Lemma 2 sufficiently many times we obtain a clone on S which
        also satisfies Σ ∪ ∆. Hence, Σ is consistent.                                              ◀

           Note that the existence of a Siggers polymorphism can be expressed by the height one
        identity
            f (a, r, e, a) ≈ f (r, a, r, e)
        and the existence of a Maltsev polymorphism can be expressed by the idempotent two-element
        set of linear identities
            ΣMaltsev := {m(x, x, y) ≈ y, m(y, x, x) ≈ y}.                                                                (1)
        Both of these sets of identities are non-trivial and consistent.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                               169:7


 4      The Promise Metaproblem
If Σ is a set of σ-identities, then the metaproblem for Σ, denoted by Meta(Σ), is the following
computational problem.
      Input:     A finite structure B.
      Output:    “Yes” if Pol(B) |= Σ, “No” otherwise.
     The following was shown by Chen and Larose [15].

▶ Theorem 4 (Theorem 6.2 in [15]). Let Σ be a non-trivial consistent finite set of height one
identities. Then Meta(Σ) is NP-complete.

    In particular, deciding whether B has a Siggers polymorphism is NP-complete [15]. Note,
however, that this theorem does not make any statement about deciding the existence of an
idempotent Siggers polymorphism or the existence of a Maltsev polymorphism (since the
idempotence of an operation cannot be expressed by a set of height one identities).
    If B is additionally promised to be a core, then it is easy to see that there exists a Siggers
polymorphism if and only if there exists an idempotent Siggers polymorphism. We do not
know whether there exists a polynomial-time algorithm to test whether B has an idempotent
Siggers polymorphism, and the same question is open for Maltsev polymorphisms.
    Similarly to the case of the CSP, we can relax the problem to a promise version as follows.
Let Σ1 and Σ2 be sets of σ-identities such that Σ1 |= Σ2 . Then the promise metaproblem for
(Σ1 , Σ2 ), denoted by PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ), is the following computational problem.
      Input:     A finite structure B.
      Output:    “Yes” if Pol(B) |= Σ1 , “No” if Pol(B) ̸|= Σ2 .
   Moreover, if the set τ ⊆ σ of symbols that appear in Σ2 is finite, then the promise creation-
metaproblem for (Σ1 , Σ2 ), denoted by PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ), is the following computational
problem.
      Input:     A finite structure B.
      Output:    A map f : τ → Pol(B) witnessing that Pol(B) |= Σ2 , if Pol(B) |= Σ1 .
                 If Pol(B) ̸|= Σ1 , the output may be anything.
   Thus, the output consists of an interpretation of each function symbol in τ . The following
observation explains the name PCMeta.

▶ Observation 5. If Σ2 is finite and PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P, then PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P.

   This follows simply by applying the algorithm for PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) and then testing
whether the returned family of operations satisfies Σ2 (this is indeed in P as Σ2 is finite and
not part of the input here). An inspection of Chen and Larose’s proof of Theorem 4 shows
that it proves the following stronger result.

▶ Proposition 6. Let Σ1 and Σ2 be finite sets of height one identities such that Σ1 |= Σ2 ,
Σ1 is consistent, and Σ2 is non-trivial. Then PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is NP-hard.

Note that we only state NP-hardness in Proposition 6, because formally NP only contains
decision problems, not promise problems (Meta(Σ1 ), in contrast, is of course in NP).

Proof sketch. The result is shown by a reduction from graph 3-colorability. For a given finite
graph G, Chen and Larose [15, Lemma 6.6] construct a relational structure B which has the
property that G is 3-colorable if and only if B is not a core. Moreover, if G is 3-colorable,
then the construction is such that the polymorphisms of the core of B satisfy all consistent



                                                                                                     ICALP 2026
169:8   Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


        idempotent sets of linear identities (see [15, Lemma 6.6 (2)]). Thus, the polymorphism clone
        of the core of B and therefore also Pol(B) itself satisfy all consistent sets of height one
        identities. If G is not 3-colorable, then Pol(B) has the property that it does not satisfy any
        non-trivial height one identity (a consequence of [15, Fact 4]). This shows the statement. ◀


         5       Connection with the Uniform CSP
        The question whether certain tractability conditions for CSPs uniformize has been asked
        and studied by Kolaitis and Vardi [22]. Let Σ be a set of identities. The uniform CSP for Σ
        is defined as follows.
              Input:         A pair of finite structures (A, B) of the same signature such that Pol(B) |= Σ.
              Output:        “Yes” if there is a homomorphism from A to B, “No” otherwise.
            If B does not satisfy Σ, then an algorithm for this problem might answer arbitrarily. If Σ
        is the set of identities that states the existence of a Maltsev (or Siggers, etc.) polymorphism,
        then the computational problem introduced above is called the uniform CSP for Maltsev
        constraints (or for Siggers constraints, etc.). It is an open problem whether there is a
        polynomial-time algorithm that solves the uniform CSP for Siggers constraints; this is
        stated as Problem 1 in Zhuk [32] (there, the problem is stated using weak near unanimity
        polymorphisms, which, however, is equivalent as explained in Section 2).
            The following polynomial-time tractability result generalizes the second part of Theorem
        4.7 in [15], which is the special case where Σ1 = Σ2 . Be aware that Σ1 is neither required to
        be finite nor linear.

        ▶ Proposition 7. Let Σ1 be an idempotent set of identities such that the uniform CSP
        for Σ1 is in P, and let Σ2 be a finite set of linear identities such that Σ1 |= Σ2 . Then
        PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) and PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) are in P.

        Proof. Let B be a finite structure and let C be the expansion of B whose signature contains
        a symbol R= for the equality relation and a symbol Rb for every element b ∈ B which denotes
        the unary relation {b}. Note that if B has polymorphisms satisfying Σ1 , then, as they are
        idempotent, these polymorphisms are also polymorphisms of C. Therefore, C |= Σ1 . Since
        Σ1 |= Σ2 and each polymorphism of C must be idempotent, it follows that Σ1 |= Σ2 ∪ ∆ and
        C |= Σ2 ∪ ∆, where ∆ is a set of equations that express that all functions mentioned in Σ2 are
        idempotent. Conversely, if B ̸|= Σ2 , then certainly B ̸|= Σ2 ∪ ∆ and C ̸|= Σ2 ∪ ∆. Therefore,
        from now on we can safely replace Σ2 by Σ2 ∪ ∆ and, hence, assume that Σ2 is idempotent.
            We may suppose without loss of generality that Σ2 is the union of a set of height one
        identities and the identities of the form f (x, . . . , x) ≈ x.
            The following construction is essentially the indicator structure from [21]. For each
        function symbol of arity k that appears in Σ2 , we create a copy of Bk (i.e., the structure
        with domain B k and the relations as defined in Section 2). Let I be the structure obtained
        from the disjoint union over all these copies as follows. For every b ∈ B, we add to RbI
        all tuples of the form (b, . . . , b) in the copies of B. We additionally add for every identity
        f (xi1 , . . . , xik ) ≈ g(xj1 , . . . , xjℓ ) in Σ2 and every function α : {xi1 , . . . , xik , xj1 , . . . , xjℓ } → B
        the constraint c = d where c = (α(xi1 ), . . . , α(xik )) belongs to the copy of Bk created for f ,
        and d = (α(xj1 ), . . . , α(xjℓ )) belongs to the copy of Bℓ created for g (adding the constraint
                                                          I
        c = d means we include (c, d) to R=                 ).
            Observe that if there is a homomorphism h from I to C, then Pol(B) |= Σ2 : each
        restriction of h to a copy of Bk is a polymorphism of B of arity k, and the additional
        equality constraints ensure that the respective operations satisfy the given identities Σ2 . Let
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                            169:9


A denote the uniform polynomial-time algorithm for Σ1 . Run A to determine whether there
is a homomorphism I → C. If A rejects, then return “No”. To see that this is the correct
answer, suppose for contradiction that Pol(B) |= Σ1 . Then the answer of the algorithm A
must be correct. Hence, there is no homomorphism from I to C and, therefore, Pol(B) ̸|= Σ2 ,
a contradiction to the assumption that Σ1 implies Σ2 .
    If A accepts, we proceed like for the well-known self-reduction of SAT. If A accepts, pick
an element x from I. For every b ∈ B, do the following:
    Add the constraint Rb (x), i.e., add x to RbI .
    Run A on the resulting instance.
    If A accepts, then proceed in the same way with another element of I.
If for some variable, A rejects for all elements b ∈ B, then we return “No”. Note that this
answer must be correct: if Pol(B) |= Σ1 , then it is impossible that we run into this case
by the correctness of A if the promise is fulfilled. If Pol(B) ̸|= Σ1 , then the answer “No” is
correct.
    Otherwise, eventually all elements x of I are contained in RbI for some b ∈ B. Thus,
given the promise Pol(B) |= Σ1 , the map x 7→ b is a solution to PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ).
    To solve PMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ), it remains to verify in polynomial time whether the map that
sends x to b is a homomorphism from I to B (see Observation 5). If no, return “No”,
otherwise return “Yes”. These answers are clearly correct.                                   ◀

    A semiuniform algorithm for the CSP for Σ (where Σ is some set of identities) is an
algorithm that takes as input a pair of finite structures (A, B) of the same signature τ such
that Pol(B) |= Σ together with a map f : τ → Pol(B) witnessing that Pol(B) |= Σ and
outputs whether there is a homomorphism from A to B.
    The following can be seen as a form of converse of Proposition 7: there, the existence
of a uniform algorithm for the CSP for Σ1 implies that PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P; here, the
assumption that PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P, together with a polynomial-time semiuniform
algorithm for Σ2 , implies that the uniform algorithm for Σ1 is in P.
▶ Proposition 8. Let Σ1 and Σ2 be sets of σ-identities such that Σ1 |= Σ2 and the set
τ ⊆ σ of symbols that appear in Σ2 is finite. If PCMeta(Σ1 , Σ2 ) is in P and there is a
polynomial-time semiuniform algorithm for the CSP for Σ2 , then the uniform CSP for Σ1 is
in P.
Proof. Given a pair (A, B) of structures of the same signature such that Pol(B) |= Σ1 . By
assumption, we can compute f : τ → Pol(B) witnessing that Pol(B) |= Σ2 . We can then use
the semiuniform algorithm for the CSP for Σ2 to decide in polynomial time whether there is
a homomorphism from A to B.                                                              ◀

 6     Coset-Generating Polymorphisms
A coset-generating operation on a set A is an operation m : A3 → A that can be written as
m(x, y, z) = x ◦ y −1 ◦ z for some operations ◦ and ·−1 such that (A, ◦, ·−1 , e) forms a group
for some element e ∈ A. In the following, we use juxtaposition instead of ◦. Let G be a group.
We write H ⩽ G if H is a subgroup of G. The following is well-known and the motivation
why these operations are called coset-generating; for the convenience of the reader we give a
proof.
▶ Lemma 9. Let k ∈ N. Then a relation R ⊆ Gk is preserved by the operation m : G3 → G
defined by m(x, y, z) = xy −1 z if and only if R = gH for some g ∈ Gk and H ⩽ Gk (i.e., R
is a coset of a subgroup of Gk ).



                                                                                                  ICALP 2026
169:10 Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


       Proof. Let H be a subgroup of Gk . Let g ∈ Gk and h1 , h2 , h3 ∈ H. As usual, we may apply
       m to elements of Gk componentwise; then

          m(gh1 , gh2 , gh3 ) = gh1 (gh2 )−1 gh3 = gh1 h−1
                                                        2 h3 ∈ gH

       so m indeed preserves all cosets of H.
           Conversely, suppose that R ⊆ Gk is preserved by m. Choose y ∈ R arbitrarily. We
       claim that y −1 R is a subgroup H of Gk . This will show that R = yH is a coset of a
       subgroup of Gk . Arbitrarily choose a, b ∈ y −1 R. Then x := ya ∈ R and z := yb ∈ R.
       Hence, m(x, y, z) = yay −1 yb = yab ∈ R, so ab ∈ y −1 R and y −1 R is closed under the group
       operation. Moreover, m(y, ya, y) = y(ya)−1 y = ya−1 ∈ R, so a−1 ∈ y −1 R and y −1 R is also
       closed under taking inverses.                                                              ◀

           A structure B with a polymorphism which is a coset-generating operation is called a
       coset structure (with respect to G). CSPs for coset structures will be called coset CSPs. As
       xx−1 y = y = yx−1 x, every coset-generating operation is a Maltsev operation. Therefore,
       every coset structure has a Maltsev polymorphism, but the converse is not true (see, e.g.,
       the Maltsev polymorphisms that appear in [5]), or the “No”-instances resulting from the
       reduction in Theorem 13. However, we have the following well-known fact.

       ▶ Lemma 10. A relational structure B is a coset structure if and only if it has a Maltsev
       polymorphism m that additionally satisfies for all x, y, u, v, w ∈ B the following associativity
       identity

          m(u, x, m(v, y, w)) = m(m(u, x, v), y, w).                                                 (2)

       Proof. If B is a coset structure and f : (x, y, z) 7→ xy −1 z is the coset-generating polymorph-
       ism of B, then f is a Maltsev operation that clearly satisfies the associativity condition (2).
       Conversely, if m is a Maltsev operation that satisfies (2), then we can pick an arbitrary
       element e ∈ B, and define g : (x, y) 7→ m(x, e, y). It is straightforward to verify that (B; g) is
       a group with identity element e (the inverse of an element x is given by m(e, x, e)), and that
       m is the coset-generating polymorphism with respect to this group.                              ◀

           Ternary Maltsev operations m that satisfy (2) are also called heaps [10] (the concept
       goes back to Prüfer [28] and Baer [1] in the 1920s). Thus, coset-generating polymorphisms
       (terminology used in [15]) and heaps are the same concept; in the following, we use both terms
       interchangeably, but prefer “coset-generating” in the context of polymorphisms, and “heaps”
       in the abstract setting of clones. Note that sometimes also the identity m(u, x, m(v, y, w)) =
       m(u, m(y, v, x), w) is required for heaps. However, this is implied by the other identities,
       which follows from our Lemma 10 and can also be found in [11, Lemma 2.3].
           We write Σheap for the identities that state the existence of a heap operation (i.e., (1)
       together with (2)). Using Proposition 7 and Proposition 8, we obtain the following corollary.

       ▶ Corollary 11. PCMeta(Σheap , ΣMaltsev ) is in P if and only if there is a uniform polynomial-
       time algorithm for coset CSPs.

          In the light of Proposition 6 and [15], it might be interesting to know whether Σheap can
       be enforced by some consistent set of linear identities. As we see next, this is not the case.

       ▶ Proposition 12. Let Σ be a set of linear identities with Σ ̸|= x ≈ y. Then there is a
       structure B without a coset-generating polymorphism such that Pol(B) |= Σ. In particular,
       being a coset structure cannot be defined by linear identities.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                          169:11


Proof. Let A be a structure with domain A such that Pol(A) |= Σ and n := |A| ⩾ 2 (such
an A exists because Σ ̸|= x ≈ y). Define a structure B with domain B = A ∪ {b} and with
relations RiB = RiA ; furthermore, add the unary relation A ⊆ B. Now, Pol(B) clearly consists
of all extensions of polymorphisms of A (meaning that the restriction of each f ∈ Pol(B) of
arity k to Ak is in Pol(A)). Therefore, by Lemma 2, Pol(B) |= Σ.
    It remains to see that B does not contain a coset-generating operation. Suppose otherwise.
Then the corresponding group would have order n + 1. The size of each relation R ⊆ B r of
B needs to divide (n + 1)r : the relation R must be a coset of a subgroup of a group with
domain B r by Lemma 9, and hence |R| must divide |B|r by Lagrange’s theorem. However,
the unary relation A contains n elements, which is coprime to (n + 1)r – thus, Pol(B) cannot
contain a coset-generating operation.                                                      ◀

 7     NP-Hardness of Detecting Heap Polymorphisms
The following is our main result and answers the question of Chen and Larose [15] mentioned
in the introduction.
▶ Theorem 13 (see Theorem 1). The following problem is NP-complete:
     Input:       A finite structure B
     Question:    Is B a coset structure?

▶ Corollary 14. The creation-metaproblem for coset-generating polymorphisms is not in P
unless P = NP.
Proof. A polynomial-time algorithm for the creation-metaproblem can be used to solve
the metaproblem in P by running the algorithm and then checking whether the output is
indeed a coset-generating polymorphism. The latter can be done in polynomial time using
the identities from Lemma 10 (see Observation 5). The statement therefore follows from
Theorem 13.                                                                           ◀

▶ Remark 15. By Corollary 14, if there exists a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for coset
CSPs, it cannot use the approach of first computing the coset-generating polymorphism and
then apply the semiuniform algorithm from [13].
   Note that there still might be a uniform P-time algorithm for coset CSPs. Indeed, [15,
Corollary 4.9] does not apply to this situation, because the property to be a coset structure
cannot be defined by linear identities, as we have seen in Proposition 12.
   Our proof of Theorem 13 is based on a reduction from the following graph problem, which
has been shown to be NP-complete in [16, Theorem 4.9] (where the problem is called (2, 1)
graph coloring; see also [26]).
▶ Lemma 16. The following problem is NP-complete:
     Input:       A finite undirected simple graph G = (V, E)
     Question:    Can E be written as the disjoint union of a matching and the edge set of a
                  bipartite graph?

In other words, the question in the computational problem is whether one can remove a
matching so that the remaining graph becomes bipartite. For convenience of the reader, we
give a proof in the appendix.
    To reduce the computational problem from Lemma 16 to the question whether a given
structure has a coset-generating polymorphism, we need some basic notions from group
theory.



                                                                                                 ICALP 2026
169:12 Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


       Group basics. For n ∈ N \ {0}, we write Cn for the cyclic group of order n. If G and H are
       groups, then we write G × H for the direct product of G and H. Given groups G, H and
       a homomorphism ϕ from H to the automorphism group Aut(G) of G (or equivalently, an
       action of H on G via automorphisms) the semi-direct product G ⋊ϕ H is the group with
       elements {(g, h) | g ∈ G, h ∈ H} and multiplication defined by

          (g1 , h1 ) · (g2 , h2 ) = (g1 ϕ(h1 )(g2 ), h1 h2 ).

       In this case, G (identified with G × {1}) is a normal subgroup of G ⋊ϕ H. Then the map
       π that sends each element f of G ⋊ϕ H to the coset f G of G is a group homomorphism
       G ⋊ϕ H → (G ⋊ϕ H)/G =     ∼ H. The map ι : h 7→ (1, h) is an embedding of H into G ⋊ϕ H
                                       ι         π
       such that the composition H → G ⋊ϕ H → H is the identity (note that ι is not unique with
       this property). For simplicity, we simply write G ⋊ H instead of G ⋊ϕ H and specify ϕ only
       verbally. For instance, if G = Cp and H = C2k , then G ⋊ϕ H with the action by inversion
       means that ϕ is the homomorphism from C2k to Aut(Cp ) which sends the generator a of C2k
       to the map x 7→ x−1 ∈ Aut(Cp ).
           Another example that is relevant later is G = Cp for p ≡ 1 mod 4 and again H = C4 ,
       where G ⋊ϕ H with a faithful action means that ϕ is an injective homomorphism from C4 to
       Aut(Cp ). This means that ϕ maps the generator a of C4 to the map x 7→ xk ∈ Aut(Cp ) for
       k = ±(p − 1)/4. Note that the two different choices of k give isomorphic groups.
           In order to prove our main theorem, we focus on dihedral groups. The dihedral group
       D2n of order 2n for n ⩾ 1, is given by the following group presentation:

          D2n = d, s | dn = s2 = 1, ds = sd−1 .

       It is well-known that D2n is isomorphic to the symmetry group of a regular n-gon and,
       thus, can be understood geometrically (see, e.g., [20, Theorem I.6.13]). Each element of D2n
       has a unique normal form sk dℓ with k ∈ {0, 1} and ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , n − 1}. If k = 1, then sk dℓ
       corresponds to a reflection, otherwise to a rotation. From this normal form, we can see that
       D2n is isomorphic to the semidirect product Cn ⋊ C2 with the action by inversion.

       ▶ Lemma 17. Let m ∈ N. For the dihedral group D4m = d, s | d2m = s2 = 1, ds = sd−1
       the cosets of subgroups of order two are precisely as follows:
            k
            {d , sdℓ } | k, ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , 2m − 1} ∪ {a, adm } | a ∈ D4m .
                                                     


       Proof. The lemma follows from the fact that the subgroups of D4m of order two are the
       subgroups generated by sdk for k ∈ {0, . . . , 2m − 1} (reflections at different axes) and the
       subgroup generated by dm (rotation by 180 degrees).                                         ◀

          In particular, the graph Γ = (V, E) defined by V := D4m and
               
          E := {u, v} | {u, v} is a coset of a subgroup of D4m

       can be written as the union of the complete bipartite graph K2m,2m and a perfect matching
       on both sides.
       ▶ Remark 18. For an odd integer r, the corresponding graph for the dihedral group of
       order 2r is the complete bipartite graph Kr,r (as the dihedral group then does not contain a
       rotation by 180 degrees).
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                                    169:13


Proof of Theorem 13. We reduce the problem from Lemma 16 to our problem.
    Let Γ = (V, E) be a given graph with n = |V |. We may assume without loss of generality
that Γ has a vertex of degree at least four (otherwise, we can add such a vertex to Γ). First,
compute a prime p ⩾ 5 with n ⩽ 2p (this is clearly possible by checking whether any of the
integers between n/2 and n is prime and by the Bertrand–Chebyshev theorem the existence
of such a prime is guaranteed).
    The domain of the structure B will be B := {1, . . . , 4p}; we consider V as a subset of
B. For the signature τ of B, it will be convenient to use the finite set E as the index set
for the entries of the tuple τ , rather than {1, . . . , |E|}; define τ ∈ NE as τ := (1, . . . , 1). For
                        B
{u, v} ∈ E, we have R{u,v}    := {u, v} (thus, in particular, B has only unary relations, each
of which contains exactly two elements; moreover, the elements of B \ V are not contained
in any relation). Clearly, given Γ, the structure B can be computed in logarithmic space.
We claim that B has a coset-generating polymorphism if and only if the edges of Γ can be
partitioned into a bipartite graph and a matching.
    First, assume that B has a coset-generating polymorphism. Then, by Lemma 9, its
relations are cosets of subgroups of some group G of order 4p. It is well known5 that, since
p ⩾ 5 is prime, there are up to isomorphism, at most five groups of order 4p, namely
 1. C2 × C2 × Cp ,
 2. C4 × Cp ∼ = C4p ,
 3. C2 × D2p ∼ = D4p ,
 4. Cp ⋊ C4 with the action by inversion (dicyclic group), and
 5. possibly Cp ⋊ C4 with a faithful action (if p ≡ 1 mod 4).
Clearly, each of these groups has order 4p; the fact that every group of order 4p is isomorphic
to one of the groups in this list can be shown by elementary group theory (essentially the
Sylow theorems; see, e.g. [23, Chapter 1, Section 6]). In particular, one first shows that in
every such group the (unique) p-Sylow subgroup is normal (see [23, Exercise 28]).
    In the abelian cases (Item 1 and 2) and in the case G ∼          = Cp ⋊ C4 with the action by
inversion (Item 4), there are at most three subgroups of order two; therefore, each element
can be contained in at most three relations. Hence, these cases are ruled out, because we
required that Γ has a vertex of degree four.
    In the case Cp ⋊ C4 with the faithful action (Item 5), the subgroups of order two are all
contained in the unique subgroup isomorphic to D2p (this is because under the projection
Cp ⋊ C4 → C4 an element of order two must map to the element of order two in C4 ; thus,
all order-two elements are contained in the unique subgroup of Cp ⋊ C4 that is isomorphic to
Cp ⋊ C2 ). Therefore, according to Remark 18, Γ would have to be a subgraph of the disjoint
union of two copies of Kp,p (one for each coset of D2p ) – in particular, Γ is bipartite.
    Therefore, the only possible group is D4p . In this case, by Lemma 17, we know how the
cosets of subgroups of order two look like. In particular, E can be written as the union of a
bipartite graph and a matching.
    Conversely, assume that Γ can be written as the union of a bipartite graph and a matching.
Write V = C ∪ D where C and D are the two sides of the bipartite graph – meaning that
the edges within C as well as the edges within D form a matching. Then we can choose an
injection f : V → D4p such that
    f (C) ⊆ ⟨d⟩,
    f (D) ⊆ s⟨d⟩, and
    for every edge {u, v} with both u, v ∈ C or both u, v ∈ D we have f (u) = f (v)dp .


5
    See e.g. the groupprops wiki https://groupprops.subwiki.org/wiki/Classification_of_groups_
    of_order_four_times_a_prime_congruent_to_1_modulo_4 (accessed on April 27, 2026)



                                                                                                           ICALP 2026
169:14 Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


       This is possible because |C| , |D| ⩽ |⟨d⟩| and the edges within C and D form a matching.
       Hence, by Lemma 17, all relations of B are cosets of subgroups of D4p ; thus, B has a
       coset-generating polymorphism.                                                        ◀

           Observe that the structure B in this proof always has a Maltsev polymorphism: indeed,
       any map m : B 3 → B satisfying the Maltsev identities leaves the defined relations invariant
       as they are all unary and contain exactly two elements.

           8      Abelian Heap Polymorphisms
       In the context of the metaproblem for coset-generating polymorphisms, Chen and Larose [15]
       also state “One can also ask these questions for restricted classes of groups.” In particular,
       the complexity of the following computational problem remains open.
                Input:        A structure B
                Question:     Is B a coset structure for some abelian group?
            It is easy to see that a structure B is a coset structure for some abelian group if and only
       if it is preserved by a heap operation m which is abelian 6 , i.e., satisfies

               m(x, y, z) ≈ m(z, y, x).

       We write Σabheap for the identities that state the existence of an abelian heap operation.
       ▶ Corollary 19. PMeta(Σabheap , ΣMaltsev ) is in P.
       Proof. If B has an abelian heap polymorphism, then by Lemma 10 it is preserved by
       (x, y, z) 7→ x − y + z with respect to some abelian group G. Hence, for every n ⩾ 2 it is
       also preserved by (x1 , y1 , x2 , y2 , . . . , xn ) 7→ x1 − y1 + x2 − y2 + · · · + xn , which is an example
       of a so-called alternating polymorphism. It is known that for such B, the AIP algorithm
       mentioned in the introduction is a uniform polynomial-time algorithm [2, Theorem 7.19].
       Hence, the statement follows from Proposition 7.                                                         ◀

          Note that PMeta(Σabheap , ΣMaltsev ) is in P despite the fact that the polynomial-time
       tractability of Meta(Σabheap ) and of Meta(ΣMaltsev ) is open.


           9      Conclusion and Open Problems
       In this work we have introduced the promise version of the metaproblem in constraint
       satisfaction, and showed that several known results about the complexity of the metaproblem
       and connection to the existence of uniform polynomial-time CSP algorithms extend naturally
       to this larger setting. We identified a pair of polymorphism conditions (Σ1 , Σ2 ) whose promise
       metaproblem is in P, but where the metaproblem for Σ1 and the metaproblem for Σ2 are
       not known to be in P. We then proved that the problem of deciding whether a given finite
       structure has a coset-generating (i.e., heap) polymorphism is NP-complete, solving an open
       problem of Chen and Larose [15].
           Before the present work, there were several plausible scenarios how the question for the
       uniform complexity for coset CSPs might be settled:


       6
           It is well known and easy to show that abelian heap operations are abelian in the sense of universal
           algebra (we refrain from giving the definition, since we only need it in this footnote), and every heap
           operation which is abelian in the sense of universal algebra is an abelian heap operation; this justifies
           the terminology.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                            169:15


(A) there could be a polynomial-time algorithm that given a finite structure promised to have
      a coset-generating polymorphism actually computes a corresponding group. If this is
      the case, then one obtains a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for such CSPs by using
      Bulatov and Dalmau’s semiuniform algorithm for CSPs with Maltsev constraints [14];
(B) the group structure could be difficult to compute, yet one could compute in polynomial
      time a Maltsev polymorphism (and, again, the algorithm from [14] can be used to decide
      the CSP);
(C) there could be no polynomial-time algorithm to compute a Maltsev polymorphism, but
      still coset CSPs could be uniformly decidable in polynomial time by another algorithm;
(D) the uniform CSP for coset structures could be hard – here, besides being NP-complete,
      there are other hardness results imaginable: for instance, it might be hard for graph
      isomorphism or hard for group isomorphism.
In this work we ruled out possibility (A) by Corollary 14 (unless P = NP) and possibility (C)
by Corollary 11. In particular, if there is a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for coset CSPs,
then a Maltsev polymorphism can be computed in P, but no coset-generating polymorphism
can be computed in general (unless P = NP).
    We ask the following questions that are related to this work.
    Is there a uniform polynomial-time algorithm for coset CSPs?
    What is the answer to this question restricted to domains of size 4p, where p is a prime?
   (This question is motivated by our proof of Theorem 1.)
    What is the complexity of deciding whether a given structure has an abelian heap
    polymorphism?
    What is the complexity of deciding whether a given structure has an abelian Maltsev
    polymorphism?
The complexity of the metaproblem and the uniform CSP for many natural finite sets of linear
identities remains open. We wonder whether the class of (promise) metaproblems for fixed
sets of identities is perhaps a candidate for a class that exhibits a complexity non-dichotomy.


     References
 1   Reinhold Baer. Zur Einführung des Scharbegriffs. Journal für die reine und angewandte
     Mathematik, 160:199–207, 1929.
 2   Libor Barto, Jakub Bulín, Andrei A. Krokhin, and Jakub Opršal. Algebraic approach to
     promise constraint satisfaction. J. ACM, 68(4):28:1–28:66, 2021. doi:10.1145/3457606.
 3   Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Absorbing subalgebras, cyclic terms and the constraint
     satisfaction problem. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 8/1(07):1–26, 2012. doi:10.2168/
     LMCS-8(1:7)2012.
 4   Libor Barto, Marcin Kozik, and Todd Niven. The CSP dichotomy holds for digraphs with
     no sources and no sinks (a positive answer to a conjecture of Bang-Jensen and Hell). SIAM
     Journal on Computing, 38(5), 2009. doi:10.1137/070708093.
 5   Manuel Bodirsky and Andrew Moorhead. Conservative Maltsev constraint satisfaction prob-
     lems, 2025. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2505.11395.
 6   Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. An algorithmic blend of LPs and ring equations
     for promise CSPs. In Timothy M. Chan, editor, Proceedings of the Thirtieth Annual ACM-
     SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2019, San Diego, California, USA, January
     6-9, 2019, pages 436–455. SIAM, 2019. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975482.28.
 7   Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. Symmetric polymorphisms and efficient
     decidability of promise CSPs. In Shuchi Chawla, editor, Proceedings of the 2020 ACM-SIAM
     Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2020, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, January 5-8, 2020,
     pages 297–304. SIAM, 2020. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975994.18.




                                                                                                   ICALP 2026
169:16 Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


        8   Joshua Brakensiek and Venkatesan Guruswami. Promise constraint satisfaction: Algebraic
            structure and a symmetric boolean dichotomy. SIAM Journal on Computing, 50(6):1663–1700,
            2021. doi:10.1137/19M128212X.
        9   Joshua Brakensiek, Venkatesan Guruswami, Marcin Wrochna, and Stanislav Zivný. The
            power of the combined basic linear programming and affine relaxation for promise constraint
            satisfaction problems. SIAM J. Comput., 49(6):1232–1248, 2020. doi:10.1137/20M1312745.
       10   Simion Breaz, Tomasz Brzeziński, Bernard Rybołowicz, and Paolo Saracco. Heaps of modules
            and affine spaces. Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata (1923 -), 203(1):403–445, 2024.
       11   Tomasz Brzeziński. Trusses: Paragons, ideals and modules. Journal of Pure and Applied
            Algebra, 224(6):106258, 2020.
       12   Andrei A. Bulatov. A dichotomy theorem for nonuniform CSPs. In 58th IEEE Annual
            Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October
            15-17, pages 319–330, 2017. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2017.37.
       13   Andrei A. Bulatov and Víctor Dalmau. Towards a dichotomy theorem for the counting
            constraint satisfaction problem. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Foundations of
            Computer Science (FOCS), pages 562–574, 2003.
       14   Andrei A. Bulatov and Víctor Dalmau. A simple algorithm for Mal’tsev constraints. SIAM
            Journal on Computing, 36(1):16–27, 2006. doi:10.1137/050628957.
       15   Hubie Chen and Benoît Larose. Asking the metaquestions in constraint tractability. TOCT,
            9(3):11:1–11:27, 2017. doi:10.1145/3134757.
       16   Lenore Cowen, Wayne Goddard, and C. Esther Jesurum. Defective coloring revisited. J.
            Graph Theory, 24(3):205–219, 1997. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0118(199703)24:3\<205::
            AID-JGT2\>3.0.CO;2-T.
       17   Victor Dalmau and Jakub Opršal. Local consistency as a reduction between constraint
            satisfaction problems, 2023. arXiv:2301.05084.
       18   M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. The complexity of near-optimal graph coloring. J. ACM,
            23(1):43–49, January 1976. doi:10.1145/321921.321926.
       19   Michael Garey and David Johnson. A guide to NP-completeness. CSLI Press, Stanford, 1978.
       20   Thomas W. Hungerford. Algebra. Graduate texts in mathematics 73. Springer, New York, 1.
            print. edition, 1980.
       21   Peter Jeavons, David Cohen, and Marc Gyssens. Closure properties of constraints. Journal of
            the ACM, 44(4):527–548, 1997. doi:10.1145/263867.263489.
       22   Phokion G. Kolaitis and Moshe Y. Vardi. Conjunctive-query containment and constraint
            satisfaction. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 61(2):302–332, 2000. doi:10.1006/jcss.2000.1713.
       23   Serge Lang. Algebra. Springer, 2002. Revised third edition.
       24   Alberto Larrauri. Ineffectiveness for search and undecidability of PCSP meta-problems. In 66th
            IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2025, Sydney, Australia,
            December 14-17, 2025, pages 1313–1350. IEEE, 2025. doi:10.1109/FOCS63196.2025.00070.
       25   Moritz Lichter and Benedikt Pago. Limitations of affine integer relaxations for solving
            constraint satisfaction problems. In 52nd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
            and Programming, ICALP 2025, Aarhus, Denmark, July 8-11, 2025, volume 334 of LIPIcs,
            pages 166:1–166:17. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. doi:10.4230/
            LIPIcs.ICALP.2025.166.
       26   Carlos V. G. C. Lima, Dieter Rautenbach, Uéverton S. Souza, and Jayme Luiz Szwarcfiter.
            Bipartizing with a matching. In COCOA 2018, Proceedings, volume 11346 of Lecture Notes in
            Computer Science, pages 198–213. Springer, 2018. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-04651-4_14.
       27   Miklós Maróti and Ralph McKenzie. Existence theorems for weakly symmetric operations.
            Algebra Universalis, 59(3):463–489, 2008.
       28   H. Prüfer. Theorie der Abelschen Gruppen. I. Grundeigenschaften. Mathematische Zeitschrift,
            20:165–187, 1924. URL: http://eudml.org/doc/167792.
       29   Thomas J. Schaefer. The complexity of satisfiability problems. In Proceedings of the Symposium
            on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 216–226, 1978. doi:10.1145/800133.804350.
M. Bodirsky and A. Weiß                                                                                       169:17


30     Mark H. Siggers. A strong Mal’cev condition for varieties omitting the unary type. Algebra
       Universalis, 64(1):15–20, 2010. doi:10.1007/s00012-010-0082-3.
31     Albert Vucaj. Clones over finite sets and Minor Conditions. PhD thesis, Dresden University
       of Technology, Germany, 2023.
32     Dmitriy Zhuk. A proof of the CSP dichotomy conjecture. J. ACM, 67(5):30:1–30:78, 2020.
       doi:10.1145/3402029.
33     Dmitriy Zhuk. Singleton algorithms for the constraint satisfaction problem, 2025. doi:
       10.48550/arXiv.2509.18434.
34     Dmitriy N. Zhuk. A proof of CSP dichotomy conjecture. In 58th IEEE Annual Symposium
       on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2017, Berkeley, CA, USA, October 15-17, pages
       331–342, 2017. arXiv:1704.01914.


 A       Proof of Lemma 16
For convenience of the reader, we restate and give a proof of Lemma 16.

▶ Lemma 20 (Lemma 16 restated). The following problem is NP-complete:
      Input:          A finite undirected simple graph G = (V, E)
      Question:       Can E be written as the disjoint union of a matching and the edge set of a
                      bipartite graph?


Proof. Let us show a reduction from positive not-all-equal 3SAT [19, 29]. Consider an
instance
        
     Φ = {Li,1 , Li,2 , Li,3 } | i ∈ {1, . . . , m}

of this problem with m clauses and n variables X1 , . . . , Xn (i.e., Li,j ∈ {X1 , . . . , Xn } for
all i ∈ {1, . . . , m} and j ∈ {1, 2, 3}). One may assume without loss of generality that each
variable appears in at least three clauses (by simply duplicating clauses). We construct a
graph (V, E) with vertex set
                                                  
     V = vi,j | i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, j ∈ {1, 2, 3} ∪ xk,ℓ | k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, ℓ ∈ {1, 2}

(i.e. we have one vertex for each literal and two additional vertices for every variable) and
edge set E such that
     {vi,1 , vi,2 , vi,3 } becomes a clique for every i ∈ {1, . . . , m},
     there is an edge {xk,1 , xk,2 } for every k ∈ {1, . . . , n},
     whenever Li,j = Xk , there are the edges {vi,j , xk,1 } and {vi,j , xk,2 }.


                            xk,1



                                            u1        u2   u3 . . .          uq



                            xk,2

    Figure 1 For each variable Xk (k ∈ {1, . . . , n}) we have one of these subgraphs in the proof of
Lemma 16. Here the vertices u1 , . . . , uq correspond to those vertices vi,j where the literal Li,j is the
variable Xk . Note that q ⩾ 3.



                                                                                                              ICALP 2026
169:18 Coset-Generating Polymorphisms


       Thus,
              
          E = {vi,j , vi,k } | i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, j ̸= k ∈ {1, 2, 3}
             
            ∪ {xk,1 , xk,2 } | k ∈ {1, . . . , n}
             
            ∪ {vi,j , xk,ℓ } | i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, j ∈ {1, 2, 3}, k ∈ {1, . . . , n}, ℓ ∈ {1, 2} with Li,j = Xk .

       The edges of the second and third type associated to a single variable Xk are illustrated in
       Figure 1 – the edges of the first type connect these respective gadgets associated to different
       variables. Clearly, this graph can be computed in polynomial time from the given instance Φ.
           We claim that Φ has a solution if and only if the given graph can be written as a disjoint
       union of a matching and the edge set of a bipartite graph. In order to see this, first note
       that each of the cliques {vi,1 , vi,2 , vi,3 } can be written as a union of a bipartite graph and
       a matching (e.g., the edges {vi,j , vi,2 } for j ∈ {1, 3} form a bipartite graph, and the edges
       {vi,1 , vi,3 } form a matching). Moreover, any such edge decomposition must have one vertex
       of each triangle on one side of the bipartite graph and the other two vertices on the other
       side (and there is precisely one matching edge).
           Now assume that Φ has a satisfying assignment σ : {X1 , . . . , Xn } → {0, 1} (i.e., for every
       i ∈ {1, . . . , m} we have 1 ⩽ σ(Li,1 ) + σ(Li,2 ) + σ(Li,3 ) ⩽ 2). Setting

          A = {vi,j | σ(Li,j ) = 1} ∪ {xk,ℓ | σ(Xk ) = 0}

       and B = V \ A gives us a bipartite decomposition of the graph after removing the matching
       consisting of all the edges {xk,1 , xk,2 } for k ∈ {1, . . . , n} and {vi,j vi,k } whenever σ(Li,j ) =
       σ(Li,k ) with i ∈ {1, . . . , m} and j ̸= k ∈ {1, 2, 3}.
           To see the other direction of the correctness proof, observe that in any decomposition
       of E into a matching and bipartite graph, all the edges {xk,1 , xk,2 } must be part of the
       matching. This is because by our assumption xk,1 and xk,2 have at least three common
       neighbours, see Figure 1. (Each of the respective triangles containing the edge {xk,1 , xk,2 }
       must contain one matching edge. Since there are at least three of these triangles, the only
       possibility is the edge {xk,1 , xk,2 }.)
           Now, let V = A ∪ B be a bipartite decomposition of V after removing a suitable matching.
       From the previous observation, we conclude that if Li,j = Lµ,ν , then vi,j and vµ,ν are
       either both in A or both in B, because they are connected by a path of length two that
       cannot contain a matching edge. Therefore, the assignment σ : {X1 , . . . , Xn } → {0, 1} with
       σ(Xk ) = 1 if and only if xk,1 ∈ A is a satisfying assignment.                                       ◀
