Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00454-025-00783-w




An Algorithm for Estimating the Crossing Number of Dense
Graphs, and Continuous Analogs of the Crossing and
Rectilinear Crossing Numbers

Oriol Solé-Pi1

Received: 10 January 2025 / Revised: 17 September 2025 / Accepted: 24 September 2025 /
Published online: 21 October 2025
© The Author(s) 2025


Abstract
We present a deterministic n 2+o(1) -time algorithm that approximates the crossing
number of any graph G of order n up to an additive error of o(n 4 ). We also provide a
randomized polynomial-time algorithm that constructs a drawing of G with cr(G) +
o(n 4 ) crossings. These results yield a 1+o(1) approximation algorithm for the crossing
number of dense graphs. Our work complements a paper of Fox, Pach and Súk [20],
who obtained similar results for the rectilinear crossing number. The results in [20] and
in this paper imply that the (normalized) crossing and rectilinear crossing numbers are
estimable parameters. Motivated by this, we introduce two graphon parameters, the
crossing density and the rectilinear crossing density, and we prove that, in a precise
sense, these are the correct continuous analogs of the crossing and rectilinear crossing
numbers of graphs.

Keywords Geometric graph theory · Crossing numbers · Graph drawing

Mathematics Subject Classification 05C10 · 05C85


1 Introduction

We work with finite, simple and undirected graphs.
   Let G = (V , E) be a graph. A drawing of G is a representation in which the vertices
are mapped to distinct points on the plane and the edges are represented by simple
continuous curves connecting their respective endpoints. We further assume that no
edge goes through a vertex other than its endpoints, no two edges are tangent at any

Editor in Charge: János Pach

    Oriol Solé-Pi
    oriolsp@mit.edu

1   Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 182 Memorial Dr, Cambridge
    02139, Massachusetts, USA


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                  897


point, and no three of them have an interior point in common. A crossing is a common
interior point of two edges in a drawing. The crossing number of G, denoted by cr(G),
is the minimum number of crossing points between edges when the minimum is taken
over all drawings of G. Note that any drawing of G with cr(G) crossings has the
additional property that no two edges cross more than once and no two adjacent edges
cross. A straight-line drawing of G is a drawing such that each edge is represented
by a segment joining the corresponding endpoints. The rectilinear crossing number
of G, cr(G), is the least number of crossings amongst all straight-line drawings of G.
Clearly, cr(G) ≤ cr(G), and it is known that there are graphs for which the inequality
is strict (a rather surprising example was obtained by Bienstock and Dean [8], who
constructed graphs with crossing number 4 but arbitrarily large rectilinear crossing
number).
    The crossing number and the rectilinear crossing number have been studied exten-
sively, and we refer the reader to the surveys of Schaefer [45] and Pach and Tóth [42]
for a review of the existing literature and several interesting questions. One of the
central open problems in the area is the determination of the asymptotic behaviour of
cr(K n ); while it is well known that the limit

                                                   cr(K n )
                                             lim     n 
                                            n→∞
                                                       4

exists (cf. [46]), finding it has proven to be very challenging. Currently, the best known
bounds place this quantity between 0.379972 and 0.380473; these are due to Ábrego
et al. [1] and Fabila-Monroy and López [19], respectively. For the crossing number, it
is conjectured that
                                                 
                                     1 n   n−1 n−2 n−3
                       cr(K n ) =                         ,
                                     4 2    2    2    2

and drawings with this number of crossings have been known for several years (c.f.
Moon [38], Guy [26]), but a proof that this is optimal has remained elusive. Still, the
limit
                                          cr(K n )
                                    lim n 
                                            n→∞
                                                       4
exists and, as evidenced by the aforementioned constructions, is bounded from above
by 3/8. An interesting consequence of this is that this limit differs from the one for
rectilinear crossing numbers. The asymptotic behaviours of cr(K m,n ) and cr(K m,n ) are
not completely understood either (see [45] and the references therein). The rectilinear
crossing number of K n is closely related to k-sets and k-edges1 [4, 36], as well as




1 Given a finite set P of points on the plane, a k-set is a k-element subset S ⊂ P for which there exists
a half-plane H with H ∩ P = S, and a k-edge consists of a pair of points p, q ∈ P such that one of the
closed half-planes determined by the line trough p and q contains exactly k points of P.


                                                                                            123
898                                                   Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


to Sylvester’s four point problem2 [46]. We shall come back to the later of these
connections at the end of Section 4.
   Moving on to the computational aspects of the problem, computing the crossing
number is known to be NP-complete [23], while determining the rectilinear crossing
number is complete for the existential theory of reals [7] (and hence NP-hard). In
fact, there is some c > 0 such that approximating the crossing number of G up to
a factor of 1 + c is NP-hard, even for cubic graphs [10]. However, for any fixed k,
there is a linear time algorithm that decides whether cr(G) ≤ k [27] (in particular,
the crossing number is fixed parameter tractable). A considerable amount of work
has been put into developing approximation algorithms for both cr(G) and cr(G). A
graph drawing technique of Bhatt and Leighton [6], in conjunction with the results
of Leighton and Rao [32] on balanced cuts, can be combined to find, in polynomial
time, a straight-line drawing of any bounded degree n-vertex graph G with no more
than O(log4 n(n + cr(G)) crossings. This was later improved to O(log3 n(n + cr(G))
by Even et al. [18], and then to O(log2 n(n + cr(G)) as a result of the improved
approximation algorithm for optimal balanced cuts by Arora et al. [3]. It wasn’t until
several years later that Chuzhoy [15], using the edge planarization method3 from [14],
found a polynomial-time O(n 9/10 )-approximation algorithm for cr(G) for bounded
degree graphs. Building further on the edge planarization method, Kawarabayashi and
Sidiropoulos [28, 29] improved the approximation ratio to O(n 1/2 ), and then Mahabadi
and Tan [13] found a randomized O(n 1/2−δ )-approximation algorithm, where δ > 0
is a constant.
   The celebrated crossing lemma, discovered simultaneously by Ajtai at al. [2] and
                                         |E|3
Leighton [31], tells us that cr(G) ≥ 64|V    |2
                                                , so long as |E| ≥ 4|V |. An immediate
consequence of this result is that if G is dense (that is, it has (|V |2 ) edges) then
both cr(G) and cr(G) are (|V |4 ). Fox, Pach and Suk [20] presented an algorithm
that constructs a straight-line drawing of G with cr(G) + o(|V |4 ) crossings. More
precisely, they showed the following.
Theorem 1.1 There is a deterministic n 2+o(1) -time algorithm that computes a straight-
line drawing of any given n-vertex graph G with no more than

                                    cr(G) + O(n 4 /(log log n)δ )

crossings, where δ is an absolute and positive constant.
   Note that if G is dense then the number of crossings in the drawing provided by
this algorithm is (1 + o(1))cr(G). We obtain a similar result for the crossing number.
2 Sylvester’s four point problem asks for the probability that four points chosen at random from a region
R of the plane lie in convex position. When R is the whole plane, there are a few natural probability
distributions from which one can choose the points; this led to some different answers being published. See
[44] for an overview of the history of the problem.
3 A subset of the edges of a graph is called planarizing if deleting each of its elements results in a planar
graph. The method can be summarized as follows: First, one tries to find a small planarizing set of edges
and computes a planar drawing of the graph that we get after deleting those edges. Then, the edges of the
planarizing set are carefully added to the drawing one by one until we obtain a drawing of the original
graph.


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                   899


Theorem 1.2 There exists a deterministic n 2+o(1) -time algorithm that for any given
n-vertex graph G approximates cr(G) up to an additive error of O(n 4 /(log log n)δ ).
Furthermore, there is a randomized polynomial-time algorithm that, with probability
1 − o(1), computes a drawing of G with

                                 cr(G) + O(n 4 /(log log n)δ )

crossings. Here, δ denotes an absolute positive constant.
   At a high level, the approximation part of the algorithm follows the strategy devised
by Fox, Pach and Suk for the proof of Theorem 1.1. The main novel ingredient that is
required for the proof of correctness of this algorithm is Theorem 3.3, which provides
a bound on the difference between the crossing numbers of two graphs of the same
order in terms of their distance in the cut norm.
   A consequence of the results in [20] and Theorem 3.3 is that the (normalized)
crossing and rectilinear crossing numbers are estimable/testable parameters, in the
sense of [9]. Motivated by this, we define two graphon parameters, which we call the
crossing density and the rectilinear crossing density, by means of continuous analogs
of the notions of drawings and straight-line drawings of graphs. We show that both of
these parameters are continuous with respect to the cut norm and that, in a precise sense,
they behave as the limits of the crossing number and the rectilinear crossing number of
graphs. This discussion is directly tied to some of the problems we mentioned earlier
about the asymptotic behaviors of crossing numbers. We hope that our results might
prove useful in the study of crossing and rectilinear crossing numbers of dense graphs.

Outline of the Paper

The basic definitions regarding graphons, cut distance and estimable parameters, as
well as some other necessary preliminaries, are included in Section 2. In Section 3,
we prove Theorem 1.2; most of this section is in fact devoted to the proof of Theo-
rem 3.3, which was mentioned above. The crossing and rectilinear crossing densities
of graphons are defined and studied in Section 4. Lastly, we discuss some unanswered
questions in Section 5.


2 Preliminaries

By an edge-weighted graph, we mean a graph G = (V , E) where each edge (u, v) ∈ E
has a weight wG (u, v) ∈ [0, 1] assigned to it. We write wG (u, v) = 0 whenever
(u, v) ∈
       / E. We shall work mostly with edge-weighted graph, and we often refer to
them simply as graphs.

2.1 Crossing Numbers of Edge-Weighted Graphs

Next, we extend the definitions of the crossing and the rectilinear crossing numbers to
edge-weighted graphs. For an edge-weighted graph G(V , E) and a drawing D of G,

                                                                               123
900                                           Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


let C(D) denote the multi-set of all pairs of edges that cross each other in the drawing,
with the proper multiplicity (i.e., if two edges cross each other at k points then this
pair appears k times in C(D)). Now, let
                                          
                       cr(G, D) =                      wG (e1 )wG (e2 )
                                     (e1 ,e2 )∈C(D )


and define cr(G) as the least value of cr(G, D) over all drawings of G. Similarly,
cr(G) is the minimum of cr(G, D) where D ranges over all straight-line drawings of
G. We say that a drawing D of G attains cr(G) if cr(G, D) = cr(G), and that it attains
cr(G) if it is a straight-line drawing and cr(G, D) = cr(G). A drawing such that no
two edges cross more than once and no two adjacent edges cross will be called simple.
Although it is not as self-evident as in the unweighted case, one can readily show
that there must exist a simple drawing which attains cr(G). Note that, for unweighted
graphs, we can assign a weight of 1 to every edge in order to recover the definitions
of crossing number and rectilinear crossing number provided in the introduction.
   We will need the following simple result, which fulfills the same role as Lemma 2 in
[20]. It seems very likely that a result of this kind has explicitly appeared somewhere
else already, but we have been unable to find it.

Theorem 2.1 Let G be an edge-weighted graph on n vertices such that the weight of
each edge can be represented using no more than B bits. Then we can find a drawing
of G that attains cr(G) in 2 O(n log n) + 2 O(n ) B 2 -time.
                                4              2


                          
Proof Given a set C ⊂ E2 , we can determine whether there is a simple drawing D of
G with C(D) = C in the following way: For any given edge e ∈ E, there are less than
n 2 ! possible orders in which the points where e crosses the other edges may appear
along the curve representing e. For a fixed order of the crossings along every edge, we
can test whether it arises from an actual drawing of G by placing a dummy vertex at
each crossing and then using a linear time planarity testing algorithm (see [43]). Thus,
we can test whether C actually comes from a drawing in n 2 ! O(n ) = 2 O(n log n) -time.
                                                                  2          4


     If we are given C(D), then we can compute cr(G, D) in O(n B )-time. Note also
                                                                   2  2

that the number of possible C’s we must check is 2|E| ≤ 2(2) . Hence, we can find a
                                                               n


simple drawing D of G that attains cr(G) in 2 O(n log n) + O(2(2) n 2 B 2 )-time.
                                                   4              n




   In order to study graphons in section 4, it will be convenient to have a normalized
version of the crossing and rectilinear crossing numbers. With this in mind, for an edge-
weighted graph G on n vertices we define its crossing density as cd(G) = cr(G)/n 4
and its rectilinear crossing density as cd(G) = cr(G)/n 4 .

2.2 Cut Distance and Graphons

We expect the reader to be somewhat familiar with the theory of graphons and conver-
gent sequences of dense graphs, but include the required fundamental definitions for
the sake of completeness. We refer the reader to the book by Lovász [34], which we

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                    901


follow rather closely during for the remainder of the section, for an in-depth treatment
of the subject.
    Let G = (V , E) be an edge-weighted graph. For any two subsets S, T ⊂ V , let
E G (S, T ) denote the set of edges with one endpoint in S and the other one in T , and
let eG (S, T ) be the total weight of the elements of E G (S, T ), where edges with both
endpoints in S ∩ T are counted twice.
    Given a positive integer m, the m blow-up G[m] of G is the edge-weighted graph
obtained by replacing each vertex v of G by an independent set Uv with m elements, and
then setting the weight of every edge between Uu and Uv (with u = v) to be wG (u, v).
For any partition P = {V1 , V2 , . . . , Vn } of V , let G P denote the edge-weighted graph
with vertex set V such that

                                                      eG (Vi , V j )
                                    wG (u, v) =
                                                       |Vi ||V j |

whenever u ∈ Vi and v ∈ V j . Also, let G/P denote the graph with vertex set
{1, 2, . . . , n} and edge weights

                                                      eG (Vi , V j )
                                  wG/P (i, j) =                      .
                                                       |Vi ||V j |

  The labeled cut distance between two edge-weighted graphs G 1 and G 2 on the
same finite vertex set V is defined as

                                                 |eG 1 (S, T ) − eG 2 (S, T )|
                     d (G 1 , G 2 ) = max                                     .
                                        S,T ⊂V               |V |2

(Note: The reader who is only interested in the proof of Theorem 1.2 can now skip to
subsection 2.4.)
  If G 1 and G 2 are are defined on possibly different n-element vertex sets, then we
write
                         
                         δ (G 1 , G 2 ) = min d (G 1 , G 2 ),
                                                 G 1 ,G 2

where G 1 and G 2 range over all graphs with vertex set {1, 2, . . . , n} which are isomor-
phic to G 1 and G 2 , respectively. We are now ready to define the cut distance between
two arbitrary graphs. Given two edge-weighted graphs G 1 and G 2 on m and n vertices,
respectively, the cut distance between them is given by

                        δ (G 1 , G 2 ) = lim 
                                              δ (G 1 [kn], G 2 [km]),
                                           k→∞

which can be shown to be well defined. The distance function δ is a pseudometric on
the set of edge-weighted graphs (it is symmetric and satisfies the triangle inequality,
but δ (G 1 , G 2 ) = 0 does not imply that G 1 and G 2 are isomorphic). We say that a
sequence edge-weighted graphs G 1 , G 2 , . . . is convergent if it is Cauchy with respect
to δ .

                                                                                   123
902                                            Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


   Throughout this paper, measurability is always considered with respect to the
Lebesgue σ -algebra, although working with Borel measurability would not make
a significant difference. We denote the Lebesgue measure by λ. A kernel is a
symmetric measurable function W : [0, 1]2 → R (by symmetric, we mean that
W (x, y) = W (y, x)); the space of all kernels is denoted by W. A graphon is a kernel
whose image is a subset of [0, 1], and we denote the space of graphons by W0 .
   The cut norm on W can be written as
                                                                  
                                                                  
                     ||W || = sup             W (x, y) d x d y  ,
                                  S,T ⊆[0,1]   S×T

and the labeled cut distance between two kernels W1 and W2 is d (W1 , W2 ) = ||W1 −
W2 || . A measurable function φ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] is measure preserving if λ(S) =
λ(φ −1 (S)) for every measurable S ⊆ [0, 1]. For a kernel W and a measure preserving
φ : [0, 1] → [0, 1], let W φ denote the kernel with W φ (x, y) = W (φ(x), φ(y)). Now,
for any two kernels W1 and W2 , the cut distance between them is defined as
                                                                  φ
                            δ (W1 , W2 ) = inf d (W1 , W2 ),
                                               φ

where φ ranges over all invertible measure preserving maps from [0, 1] to itself. The
distance function δ is a pseudometric on the space W, and two kernels W1 and W2
are said to be weakly isomorphic if δ (W1 , W2 ) = 0. Thus, δ induces a metric
on the quotient space W0 that arises from W0 after identifying all classes of weakly
isomorphic graphons. One of the central results in the theory of graphons is that
(W0 , δ ) is compact (cf. [35]).
   For every graph G with vertices v1 , v2 , . . . , vn , the graphon WG is constructed by
splitting [0, 1] into n intervals I1 , I2 , . . . , In of measure 1/n and setting WG (x, y) =
wG (vi , v j ) for all x ∈ Ii , y ∈ I j . To be precise, WG depends on both G and an
ordering of its vertices, but this will not be an issue, since any two such graphons
that arise from the same graph are weakly isomorphic. Given any two edge-weighted
graphs G 1 and G 2 , we have that δ (G 1 , G 2 ) = δ (WG 1 , WG 2 ). For every convergent
graph sequence G 1 , G 2 , . . . , the graphons WG 1 , WG 2 , . . . converge, with respect to
δ , to some graphon W (or, rather, to the class of W in W0 ), and we say that the graph
sequence converges to W . Conversely, for every graphon W there exists a convergent
graph sequence G 1 , G 2 , . . . such that WG 1 , WG 2 , . . . converges to W with respect to
δ .
   If W is a kernel and P = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn } is a partition of the unit interval into
measurable sets, then WP denotes the kernel such that

                                         1
                    WP (x, y) =                              W (x, y) d x d y
                                   λ(Si )λ(S j )   Si ×S j

whenever x ∈ Si and y ∈ S j . Let P1 , P2 , . . . be a sequence of partitions of [0, 1] into
measurable sets such that each pair of points of [0, 1] lie in different parts for all but a
finite number of partitions of the sequence. Then, as n goes to infinity, WPn converges
to W almost everywhere for every W ∈ W.

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                     903


   Given a graph F = (V , E) and a kernel W , let


                       t(F, W ) =                       W (xu , xv )         d xu .
                                       [0,1]V (u,v)∈E                  u∈V


    It is well known that two kernels W1 and W2 are weakly isomorphic if and only
if t(F, W1 ) = t(F, W2 ) for every simple graph F. Moreover, a sequence of kernels
W1 , W2 , . . . is convergent with respect to δ if and only if the limit limn→∞ t(F, Wn )
exists for every graph F.

2.3 Estimable Parameters

By a graph parameter, we mean a function that assigns a real number to each graph (or
edge-weighted graph) and is constant on each isomorphism class. A graph parameter
 f is said to be estimable if there is another graph parameter g, which we call a test
parameter for f , with the following property: For every ε > 0 there exist an integer k
such that if G = (V , E) is a graph on at least k vertices and X is a random k-element
subset of V , then
                            P[| f [G] − g(G[X ])| > ε] ≤ ε,

where G[X ] denotes the subgraph of G that is induced by X . It is not hard to see that
if f is estimable then can always use g = f (cf. [9, 24]). As shown by Borgs et al.
[9], the following properties are equivalent for every graph parameter f .

(a) f is estimable.
(b) For every convergent sequence of graphs G 1 , G 2 , . . . , we have that the sequence
    f (G 1 ), f (G 2 ), . . . converges as well.
(c) There exists a functional fˆ on W0 that is continuous with respect to the cut norm
    and such that fˆ(WG ) − f (G) → 0 as the number of vertices of G goes to infinity.

   If f is estimable, then the functional fˆ mentioned in (c) has the property that
limn→∞ f (G n ) = fˆ(W ) whenever G 1 , G 2 , . . . converges to W and the number of
vertices of G n goes to infinity with n. We often refer to a functional on W0 as a graphon
parameter. It was also proven in [9] that the following three properties together are
equivalent to f being estimable.

  (i) For every ε > 0, there exists an ε such that any two graphs G 1 and G 2 on the
      same vertex set with d (G 1 , G 2 ) < ε satisfy | f (G 1 ) − f (G 2 )| < ε.
 (ii) For every graph G, f (G[m]) converges as m goes to infinity.
(iii) | f (G) − f (G ∪ K 1 )| → 0 as the number of vertices of G goes to infinity. Here,
      G ∪ K 1 denotes the graph obtained by adding an isolated node to G.

   This equivalence will come in handy in Section 3, since these properties are easier
to check than (b) and (c) above.

                                                                                      123
904                                                   Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


2.4 The Frieze-Kannan Regularity Lemma

Given a graph G = (V , E), two sets of vertices S, T ⊂ V and some ε > 0, we say
that the pair (S, T ) is ε-regular if for any S ⊂ S, T ⊂ T

                                                          
                                   eG (S , T ) eG (S, T ) 
                                                          
                                   |S ||T | − |S||T |  ≤ ε.


According to Szemerédi’s regularity lemma [48], for every ε > 0 there exists an M(ε)
such that for every graph we can find an equitable partition of its vertices into no more
than M(ε) parts with the property that all but at most an ε fraction of the pairs of
parts are ε-regular. Szemerédi’s regularity lemma is one of the most powerful tools
in the study of dense graphs; unfortunately, it is not very practical for algorithmic
purposes, since M(ε) grows extremely fast as ε goes to 0 (see [25] for details on the
asymptotic behavior of the optimal value of M(ε)). As was done by the authors of [20],
we circumvent this issue by means of a variant of the regularity lemma developed by
Frieze and Kannan [22]. Given a graph G = (V , E), we say that an equitable partition
P = {V1 , V2 , . . . , Vn } of V is a Frieze-Kannan ε-regular partition if d (G, G P ) ≤ ε.
The algorithmic version of the Frieze-Kannan regularity lemma stated below is due
to Dellamonica et al. [17].

Lemma 2.2 There exist a deterministic algorithm and an absolute constant c that, for
any ε > 0 and any n-vertex graph G, computes a Frieze-Kannan ε-regular partition
                                 −c                   ε−c
of G with no more than 2ε             classes in 22         n 2 -time.

2.5 Cycle Separators for Planar Graphs

The planar separator theorem from [33, 50] states that for every n-vertex planar graph
                                                                                  √
G = (V , E) there exists a partition V = A B C such that |B| = O( n),
|A|, |C| ≤ 2n/3, and there are no edges between A and C. This result is a cornerstone
of the study of planar graphs, and several generalizations and variants of it have been
discovered over the years. We will make use of the following version, due to Miller
[37].

Theorem 2.3 Let G be an embedded triangulation4 with a non-negative weight
assigned to each vertex so that the
                                 √ total sum of the weights is 1. Then, there exists a
simple cycle of length at most L n in G such that the vertices that lie in its interior
have total weight at most 2/3 and the same is true for those that belong to its exterior.
Here, L is an absolute positive constant.

4 A triangulation is a maximal planar graph. By an embedded planar graph we simply mean the graph
together with a drawing of it where no two edges cross. Every face of an embedded triangulation has
precisely three vertices on its boundary. We remark that all ways of embedding a triangulation are, in a
precise sense, combinatorially equivalent, so the theorem could have also been stated without ever referring
to a particular embedding.


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                          905


2.6 Triangulating With Small Degrees

In order to make use of Theorem 2.3, we need to be able to transform embedded planar
graphs into embedded triangulations by adding some nodes and edges. Moreover, it
will be important for our purposes that the arising triangulation does not have too
many new vertices, and that degrees of its nodes are not too large. The following
result, which essentially appears as Lemma 2.1 in [41], allows us to do just that.
Lemma 2.4 Let G be a connected, embedded, n-vertex planar graph. Suppose that
every vertex of G has degree at most d for some d ≥ 3. Then, the embedding can be
extended to a triangulation with at most 19n vertices and all degrees bounded from
above by 3d.
Remark The proof of this lemma is rather simple. In [41], the result is stated for two-
connected graphs embedded in a genus g surface. An inspection of the proof reveals
that the two-connectedness is not required for graphs embedded in the plane.


3 Estimating the Crossing Number

3.1 Subdividing Drawings

We say that a drawing D of an edge-weighted graph G is locally optimal if the value
of cr(G, D) cannot be reduced by erasing a single curve that represents an edge and
then redrawing the edge in some other way. If there are no edges of weight 0, then
any locally optimal drawing is necessarily simple. We remark, however, that not every
locally optimal drawing attains the crossing number of the graph. This section begins
with a result about subdividing simple and locally optimal graph drawings, which is
somewhat similar in spirit to the classical cutting lemma for line arrangements5 , and
will play a crucial role in our proof that any two graphs which are close with respect
to d have similar crossing numbers (see Theorem 3.3).
Theorem 3.1 Let G be an n-vertex edge-weighted graph and let D be a simple and
locally optimal drawing of G. Then, for any ε ∈ (0, 1) the plane can be subdivided
into O(1/ε2 ) closed, connected and interior disjoint regions, each of which has the
following properties:
   (I) No vertex lies on its boundary.
  (II) It contains at most ε2 n vertices.
 (III) Any vertex of G and any other point which are both contained in the region can
       be connected by a simple curve that lies completely within the region and does
       not go through any vertex or crossing, and whose relative interior has no more
       than εn 2 intersection points with the curves that represent the edges of G with
       no endpoint in that same region.
5 The cutting lemma is a powerful tool in both discrete and computational geometry. In its two dimensional
version, it can be stated as follows: Let L be a finite family of lines on the plane and let ε > 0. Then, it is
possible to subdivide the plane into O(1/ε 2 ) convex regions, none of which is crossed by more than ε|L|
lines of L. See [5, 11] for various proofs of this result and its higher dimensional variants, as well as several
of their applications.


                                                                                                   123
906                                                  Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


Proof If ε ≤ n −1/2 , the subdivision can be obtained by splitting the plane into n + 1
regions, n of which are very small and contain precisely one vertex each. From now
on, we assume that n −1/2 < ε < 1.
    We begin by subdividing the plane into O(1/ε2 ) closed, connected and interior
disjoint regions which contain no more than ε2 n vertices of G each, and whose
boundaries, which do not contain any vertex of G, have a total of O(n 2 /ε) intersections
with with the edges of D. Here, by an intersection what we really mean is a connected
component of the intersection between an edge and the boundary of one of the regions;
an edge and the boundary of a region can induce multiple intersections, but the number
of intersections between them is always an integer. This will be achieved through
repeated applications of Theorem 2.3 and Lemma 2.4. More precisely, we will build
a sequence R0 , R1 , . . . , Rt of regions as follows:
    Let R0 denote the entire plane. By adding a dummy vertex at each crossing point,
D gives rise to an embedded planar graph. Using Lemma 2.4, this planar graph can
then be transformed into an embedded triangulation T0 . One can readily check that
the original planar graph has at most n 4 /4 vertices, so T0 has at most 19n 4 /4 < 5n 4
vertices, each of degree at most 3n. Assign a weight of 1/n to every vertex of G and
a weight of 0 to every other√vertex and apply Theorem 2.3 to T0 , thus obtaining a
cycle C0 of length less than 5Ln 2 whose interior and exterior each contain at most
2n/3 vertices of G. Every vertex of G that belongs to C0 can be assigned to either
the interior or the exterior of the cycle so that the number of vertices in any of these
two regions plus the number of vertices that have been assigned to it is still no more
than 2n/3. By modifying the triangulation√and the cycle C0 as depicted in Figure 1,
we obtain a new cycle C0 with less than 5Ln 4 + n · 3n nodes which contains no
vertex of G. Denote the two closed regions induced by this curve as R1 and R2 ; these
contain at most 2n/3 vertices of G each.
    For every i, we write n i to denote the number of vertices of G that lie in Ri . Now,
we iteratively subdivide each Ri that contains n i > ε2 n vertices of G and has not
yet been subdivided into smaller regions; the rest of this paragraph describes how
to carry out this subdivision. First, the boundary of Ri and the portion of D that is
contained in this region are turned into an embedded planar graph by adding a dummy
node at every intersection (either between two edges or between the boundary and an
edge). Let m i denote the order of this graph. A face of this embedded planar graph
will be called null if its interior is contained in the complement of Ri . Observe that
there is precisely one null face for each connected component of the complement of
Ri . Once again, Lemma 2.4 allows us to transform this planar graph into an embedded
triangulation with no more than 19m i nodes, each of degree at most 3n. Now, we
modify the triangulation by deleting all nodes and edges added in the interior of each
null face, and then re-triangulating each such face simply by picking one of the vertices
on its boundary and connecting it to all others using curves drawn within the face. This
is possible, since among the vertices on the boundary of any null face there is at least
one (there are at least two, actually6 ) which is adjacent to only two other vertices from
6 In general, given an embedded planar graph this will true of every face whose boundary is a simple curve.
This fact might look more familiar to the reader in its equivalent, “inverted” form: For any set of pairwise
interior disjoint diagonals of a convex polygon, there are at least two nodes of the polygon which are not
incident to any of the diagonals.


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                     907


                         C0                                                   C'0




                          v                                                    v




Fig. 1 A small portion of C0 has been highlighted in red. Assuming that the vertex v of G has been assigned
to the shaded region, we alter the triangulation and the cycle around a small neighborhood of v so that this
point belongs to the interior of the shaded region defined by C0 . This increases the number of nodes of the
cycle (and the whole graph) by less than the degree of v in T0




the said boundary, and any such vertex can be used to draw the edges from. Let Ti be
the triangulation that is obtained in this manner. As mentioned above, the process we
are about to discuss will ensure that no vertex of G ever lies on the boundary of any of
the R j ’s (in particular, this implies that no vertex of G will ever lie on the boundary of
a null face), so it is still true that the degree of every vertex of G in Ti is upper bounded
by 3n. If we assign weight 1/n i to each of the vertices of G in Ri and weight√0 to all
other vertices of Ti , then Theorem 2.3 yields a cycle Ci of length at most L 19m i ,
where m i denotes the order of Ti . As we did  √ for C0 , Ti and Ci can be modified slightly
to obtain a cycle Ci with no more than L 19m i + 3n i nodes that does not go through
any vertex of G and such that the intersections of Ri with both the interior and the
exterior of the cycle each contain at most 2n i /3 vertices of G. From now on, we shall
ignore the edges of Ci that are drawn on the interior of a null face, as well as all nodes
of Ci which are incident to two ignored edges; note that there are at most two of these
edges and one such node for each null face. One could try to use Ci in order to split Ri
into smaller parts, but this may cause the number of regions to blow up in the case that
Ci intersects the boundary of Ri at multiple places. Thus, we first modify Ci as shown
in Figure 2 for every contiguous sequence of nodes and edges that it shares with the
boundary of Ri and lies between     √ two edges of Ci that are draw inside Ri . This results
in a new Ci with at most 4(L 19m i + 3n i ) nodes, which is then used to split Ri into
two smaller connected regions with at most 2n i /3 vertices of G each.
   After enough steps, we reach a subdivision of the plane into closed, connected and
interior disjoint regions, each of which contains at most ε2 n vertices of G. These
regions will be referred to as fundamental regions from now on. An important feature
of above procedure that will prove useful later on is that each connected component
of the boundary of a region R j contains one of the Ci ’s in its entirety (possibly, but
not necessarily, C j itself). The number of fundamental regions is clearly O(1/ε2 ),
but we also require an upper bound on the total number of intersections between their
boundaries and the edges of G in the drawing. A quick inspection of the subdivision

                                                                                               123
908                                                     Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


                       C'i                                                         C''i


                        Ri                                                           Ri

Fig. 2 The region Ri is shaded. A section of Ci (red) is contained in the boundary of Ri , and the two
adjacent arcs of Ci (also in red) lie inside Ri . For every vertex of Ti in this section, consider the edges of
Ti that are incident to it, lie in Ri , and are contained in a curve that represents an edge of G in D. Note that,
since no vertex of G belongs to Ci , there are at most two edges of G going through any of these vertices.
Now, modify Ci as shown above. This increases the number of nodes in the curve by at most three times
the number of nodes that conform the original section of Ci



process reveals that this quantity is at most twice the sum of the numbers of nodes in
C0 and in each of the Ci ’s. The counting argument that is used below to bound this
quantity is similar to the one from the proof of Corollary 5 in [40].
    The level of a region Ri , which we denote by (Ri ), is defined as follows: If Ri
is fundamental, then its level is 0. Otherwise, its level is obtained by adding 1 to the
largest of the levels of the two regions that were created when splitting Ri using Ci .
The key observation here is that any two Ri ’s with the same level are interior disjoint.
This implies that the orders m i of the Ti ’s such that (Ri ) = l for a fixed l add up to
no more than               ⎛                                   ⎞
                                                
                         O ⎝n 4 + |C0 | +                 |Ci |⎠ .
                                                     i>0 with (Ri )>l

The largest level (which is (R0 )) is clearly no more than O(log n), so one can check
inductively that the total complexity of the Ci ’s with level l (i.e., the sum of the orders
of all cycles in this level) is bounded by o(n 3 ), so the above expression is O(n 4 ). Also,
every Ri with level l ≥ 1 contains at least ε2 n(3/2)l−1 vertices of G, so there are
at most ε−2 (2/3)l−1 such regions. Now, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality yields that
the total complexity of the Ci ’s corresponding to regions in level l is bounded from
above by
                                                             l−1
                                                         n2 2 2
                               4(L 19m i + 3n i ) ≤ L                + 12n,
                                                          ε 3
                   i with (Ri )=l

where L is an absolute constant. Adding over all levels, we arrive at an upper bound
of
                                       (R )  (l−1)
                                   n 2 0 2
                 12n · (R0 ) + L                    = O(n 2 /ε),
                                   ε          3
                                                     l=1

where we have used the fact that (R0 ) = O(log ε−1 ) = o(n). Note that the bound on
the number of regions with level l also yields that there are O(1/ε2 ) regions in total,

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                   909


not just at level 0. Indeed, there are at most

                                 (R
                                  0 )
                                         ε−2 (2/3)l−1 = O(1/ 2 )
                                 l=1

regions with level l ≥ 1. This observation will be used later.
   Next, we show how the fundamental regions can be further subdivided into smaller
parts that satisfy the requirements in the statement of the theorem. Let us start by
classifying the edges of G as light or heavy depending on whether or not they are
involved in less than εn 2 /16 crossings, respectively. By applying the crossing lemma
to the subgraph that contains only the light edges, we get that the number of such
edges is O(ε1/2 n 2 ). A simple curve whose relative interior does not pass through any
vertex or crossing point of D will be called clean. Now, for any two points p and q on
the plane, we define the distance dD ( p, q) as follows:
   If p and q belong to the same fundamental region and at least one of them does
not lie on its boundary, then dD is the least positive integer k such that there exists
a clean curve which has endpoints p and q, is contained in that region, and whose
interior has at most k intersection points with the edges of the drawing. Otherwise, set
dD ( p, q) = ∞.
   For any point p on the plane and any positive number k, let BD ( p, k) be the set that
consists of those points q such that dD ( p, q) ≤ k, and note that BD ( p, k) is closed
and connected. We say that an edge of G is encapsulated by BD ( p, k) if both of its
endpoints and all the points where it crosses another edge are contained in BD ( p, k),
and at least one of these points belongs to the interior of this region.

Claim 3.2 For every point p that does not belong to the boundary of a fundamental
region, if BD ( p, εn 2 /4) is not the whole plane then it satisfies at least one of the
properties below.

1. It contains at least εn 2 /16 intersections between the boundary of the fundamental
   region that contains p and the edges of the drawing.
2. It contains one of the Ci ’s in its entirety.
3. At least ε2 n 4 /322 crossing points of D lie in its interior.
4. It encapsulates at least εn 2 /32 light edges.

Proof First, we deal with the case where BD ( p, 3εn 2 /16) contains a point from the
boundary of the fundamental region Rt that contains p. By starting from this point and
walking along the corresponding connected component of the boundary of Rt in both
directions, we will either encounter at least εn 2 /16 intersections between the edges
and the boundary of the region, all of which lie in BD ( p, εn 2 /4) (the fact that no
vertex of G is contained in the boundary of a fundamental region is important here),
or will go around the entirety of one of the Ci ’s. Hence, at least one of the first two
properties holds. From now on, we assume that BD ( p, 3εn 2 /16) does not contain a
point from the boundary of the corresponding fundamental region.
   Suppose now that BD ( p, εn 2 /16) contains a point from a heavy edge e. Then,
we can find at least εn 2 /16 crossing points of D that involve e and are contained in

                                                                              123
910                                           Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


BD ( p, εn 2 /8). Apart from e, the edges involved in these crossings are all distinct due
to the fact that D is simple. If any of these edges is light, then it must be encapsulated
by BD ( p, 3εn 2 /16), so we can assume that at least εn 2 /32 of them are heavy. Each of
these heavy edges takes part in at least εn 2 /16 crossing that lie in BD ( p, 3εn 2 /16).
Summing over all of these edges and dividing by two to account for the fact that each
crossing might be counted up to two times, we get that at least (εn 2 /32)(εn 2 /16)/2
crossing points of D belong to the interior of BD ( p, εn 2 /4).
   It remains to tackle the case where the interior of BD ( p, εn 2 /16) is disjoint from all
the heavy edges. Given a clean curve C, let c1 , c2 , . . . ct denote the intersection points
            t with the edges of G, and let ei be the edge that contains ci ; we define
of its interior
wD (C) as i=1      wG (ei ). Consider a clean curve C p that connects p to a point on the
boundary of BD ( p, εn 2 /16) which is neither a crossing nor a vertex of G, and such that
wD (C p ) is as small as possible amongst all curves of this kind. Furthermore, suppose
that there is no curve with the aforementioned properties which has less intersection
points with the edges of G than C p does. Each of the at least εn 2 /16 points where
the interior of C p intersects an edge must belong to a light edge. Since D is locally
optimal, no two of these points belong to the same edge, as otherwise we would be
able to construct a curve that contradicts the choice of C p by rerouting a portion of
C p along such an edge. Hence, there are at least εn 2 /16 light edges that intersect the
interior of BD ( p, εn 2 /16) and are thus encapsulated by BD ( p, εn 2 /4).

   We go back to the proof of Theorem 3.1. The desired subdivision can now be
obtained by means of a standard covering argument. Indeed, let P = { p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }
be a set of points on the plane such that none of its elements represents a vertex or lies
on an edge or on the boundary of a fundamental region, and which is maximal with
the property that BD ( pi , εn 2 /4) and BD ( p j , εn 2 /4) are interior disjoint whenever
i = j. Given that the total complexity of the boundaries of the fundamental regions is
O(n 2 /ε), the number of BD ( pi , εn 2 /4)’s that satisfy property 1 is O(1/ε2 ). Since the
total number of Ci ’s is O(1/ε2 ) and there can be at most two regions which contain a
specific Ci in its entirety, the same is true for those that satisfy property 2. Because the
BD ( pi , εn 2 /4)’s are interior disjoint, every crossing point of D belongs to the interior
of at most one of them, and no edge can be encapsulated by more than one of them.
Since D is simple, the number of crossing points is O(n 4 ), so at most O(1/ε2 ) of the
BD ( pi , εn 2 /4)’s satisfy property 3. Lastly, as there are no more than O(ε1/2 n 2 ) light
edges, the amount of BD ( pi , εn 2 /4)’s that encapsulate at least at εn 2 /32 light edges
is upper bounded by O(1/ε2 ). This shows that k = O(1/ε2 ).
   Next, notice that for every point q we can find a pi such that such that dD ( pi , q) ≤
εn 2 /2, or else q could be added to P, contradicting its maximality. For each q, let
P(q) ⊆ P denote the set of pi ’s that minimize dD ( pi , q), and let p(q) be the element
of P(q) with the smallest subscript. Define ri as the closure of {q | p(q) = pi } for
every i ∈ {1, . . . , k}. The ri ’s form a subdivision of the plane, and they are closed,
connected and interior disjoint. Moreover, if q ∈ ri and Cq is a clean curve that
connects q to pi such that its interior has precisely dD ( pi , q) intersection points with
the edges of G, then this curve lies completely within ri . It follows that any two points
in ri can be connected by a clean curve that goes through pi and whose interior crosses
at most εn 2 edges. Lastly, the ri ’s can once again be modified using a process similar

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                         911


to the one depicted in Figure 1 so as to ensure that no vertex of G lies on the boundary
of any of them (this final step is where specific wording of property (III) comes into
play). The resulting regions satisfy properties (I), (II) and (III).

3.2 Cut Distance and Crossing Numbers

The proof of Theorem 1.1 by Fox, Pach and Suk relies on a regularity lemma for
semi-algebraic graphs, also by the same authors [21]. In some sense, Theorem 3.1
will act as a purely combinatorial substitute of the said lemma (although this analogy
should not be pushed too far). We will now use this theorem to show that any two
graphs which are close with respect to d have similar crossing numbers.

Theorem 3.3 Let G 1 and G 2 be edge-weighted n-vertex graphs on the same vertex set
V and write d = d (G 1 , G 2 ). If d ≥ n −4 , then

                               | cr(G 1 ) − cr(G 2 )| ≤ Md 1/4 n 4 ,

where M is an absolute constant. Moreover, | cr(G 1 ) − cr(G 2 )| ≤ d 2 n 8 holds uncon-
ditionally.

   We remark that the content of this theorem lies in the first inequality.

Proof Suppose that d ≥ n −4 . By adding edges of weight 0, we can assume that every
two elements of V are adjacent in G 1 . Consider a simple and locally optimal drawing
D of G 1 and apply Theorem 3.1 with ε = d 1/8 to obtain a subdivision of the plane. Let
r1 , r2 , . . . , rk be the regions that contain at least one vertex and, for each i, let Vi ⊂ V
denote the set of vertices that are contained in ri . We have that k ≤ C/ε2 = C/d 1/4 for
some absolute constant C. Since ε ≥ n −1/2 , each of the Vi ’s has at most ε2 n < 2ε2 n
elements. We say that an edge is long if its endpoints belong to different Vi ’s, and that
it is short otherwise.
    We shall use D as a blueprint for constructing a drawing D of G 2 . The elements
of V will be represented by the same points as in D. Next, for every long edge
(u, v) ∈ E G 2 (Vi , V j ), choose a random edge (u , v ) ∈ E G 1 (Vi , V j ), where (x, y)
is chosen with probability wG 1 (x, y)/eG 1 (Vi , V j ) (if eG 1 (Vi , V j ) = 0, then (u , v )
is chosen uniformly at random from E G 1 (Vi , V j )). These selections are carried out
independently from each other for every long edge of G 2 . Consider the points where
the curve that represents (u , v ) in D crosses the union of the boundaries of ri and r j
(if a section of the curve is contained in the union of the boundaries, we take only its
endpoints) and label them as p1 , p2 , . . . , pt in the order that they appear as this curve
is traversed from u to v. If some pi lies on the intersection of the boundaries of ri
and r j , then we write a(u, v) = b(u, v) = pi . Otherwise, we can choose two points
a(u, v) = pi and b(u, v) = pi±1 such that a(u, v) lies on the boundary of ri and
b(u, v) lies on the boundary of r j . The curve that represents (u, v) will be composed
of three sections: one which goes from u to a(u, v), one that goes from a(u, v) to
b(u, v) by following along the curve that represents (u , v ) in D (which is a single
point in the case that a(u, v) = b(u, v)), and one last section from b(u, v) to v. The

                                                                                    123
 912                                                  Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


                                                                      extremal sections
                               p2
                                         v                                                           v
                p1                       v'                                          b(u,v)
                              p3              rj                                                           rj
           u'         p4            p6                                         a(u,v)

       u             p5                                           u
ri                                                           ri

 Fig. 3 On the right, we have the curve that represents (u , v ) in D. Setting a(u, v) = p4 and b(u, v) = p3
 and proceeding as described in the proof, we arrive at a curve that connects u and v. Note that we could
 have also chosen a(u, v) = p1 and b(u, v) = p2 , or a(u, v) = p5 and b(u, v) = p6




 first section will be constructed so that it is fully contained in ri and it has as few
 crossings as possible with the edges of G 1 that have no endpoint in Vi . Analogously,
 we will draw the last section so that it lies within r j and has the least possible number
 of crossings with the edges of G 1 that have no endpoint in V j . The first and last sections
 of every curve that represents a long edge of G 2 will be called extremal. See Figure 3.
 Each short edge with both endpoints in some Vi will be represented by a curve that is
 contained in ri and has the least possible number of crossings with the edges of G 1
 that have no endpoint in Vi .
     Let E i denote the set of curves which consists of the short edges of G 2 with
 endpoints in Vi , and the extremal sections with an endpoint in Vi . By property (III) in
 the statement of Theorem 3.1, the above construction can be carried out so that each
 element of E i has at most εn 2 crossings with the edges of G 1 that have no endpoint in
 Vi , and such that any two elements of E i have a finite number of points in common.
 There might still be some pairs of elements of E i which cross more than once, but
 these multiple crossings can be eliminated by rerouting some of the curves without
 increasing the total number of crossing between the elements of E i and the edges of G 1
 with no endpoint in Vi . Finally, observe that some pairs of long edges of E G 2 (Vi , V j )
 may have infinitely many points in common if their non-extremal sections coincide.
 Thus, in order to obtain an actual graph drawing, we might have to perturb these
 edges slightly, as shown in Figure 4. We point out that the resulting drawing D is not
 necessarily simple.
     The goal now is to bound the expected value of cr(G 2 , D ). A long edge of G 2 will
 be called lonely if it belongs to E G 2 (Vi , V j ) and eG 1 (Vi , V j ) ≤ dn 2 . Note that G 2 has
 no more than dk 2 n 2 ≤ C 2 d 1/2 n 2 lonely edges. Delete all the lonely edges from D ;
 we will later describe how they can be reinserted without creating too many crossings.
 There are four types of crossings in D : the ones that involve two non-extremal sections
 (type 1), those which involve a non-extremal section and the interior of an extremal
 one (type 2), those that involve a short edge and a non-extremal section (type 3), and
 finally the ones that involve only short edges and extremal sections (type 4).
     Every crossing of type 1 in D can be traced back to a crossing in D. If we think
 about it in this way, then a crossing in D between an edge (u, v) ∈ E G 1 (Vi , V j ) and

 123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                   913




                                                    rj                                                 rj



ri                                                              ri

Fig. 4 Edges that share entire non-extremal sections can be modified as shown above. It is important that
these modifications be carried out so that any two extremal sections cross at most once and the number of
crossings between the extremal sections in ri and the edges of G 1 that do not have an endpoint in ri does
not increase (the same goes for r j )



an edge (u , v ) ∈ E G 1 (Vs , Vt ) contributes at most

                         wG 1 (u, v) · wG 1 (u , v ) · eG 2 (Vi , V j ) · eG 2 (Vs , Vt )
                                       eG 1 (Vi , V j ) · eG 1 (Vs , Vt )

to E[cr(G 2 , D )]. Let cD (i, j|s, t) denote the total weighted sum of the crossings
between an edge of E G 1 (Vi , V j ) and an edge from E G 1 (Vs , Vt ) in D. Then, the total
contribution of these crossings to E[cr(G 2 , D )] is upper bounded by

                                    eG 2 (Vi , V j ) · eG 2 (Vs , Vt )
                cD (i, j|s, t)
                                    eG 1 (Vi , V j ) · eG 1 (Vs , Vt )
                                           (eG 1 (Vi , V j ) + dn 2 )(eG 1 (Vs , Vt ) + dn 2 )
                       ≤ cD (i, j|s, t)                                                        .
                                                     eG 1 (Vi , V j ) · eG 1 (Vs , Vt )

Adding over all 4-tuples (i, j, s, t) of numbers in {1, . . . , k} (two tuples are considered
the same if the correspond to the same pairs of parts of P), we get that the expected
weighted sum of the crossings of type 1 in D does not exceed

                                                                                        
                                     eG 1 (Vi , V j )dn 2 + eG 1 (Vs , Vt )dn 2 + d 2 n 4
                cD (i, j|s, t) 1 +
                                                eG 1 (Vi , V j ) · eG 1 (Vs , Vt )
     (i, j,s,t)
               
         ≤           cD (i, j|s, t) + eG 1 (Vi , V j )dn 2 + eG 1 (Vs , Vt )dn 2 + d 2 n 4
          (i, j,s,t)

       ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + k 4 (ε2 n)2 dn 2 + k 4 d 2 n 4 ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + C 4 d 1/2 n 4 + C 4 d 2 n 4
       ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + 2C 4 d 1/2 n 4 .

   Next, we bound the amount of crossings of types 2 and 3 that are contained in ri .
Note that each of them can be traced back to an intersection point between a long edge
of G 1 that has no endpoint in Vi and a either a short edge of G 2 with endpoints in
Vi or an extremal section with endpoint in Vi (in other words, an intersection point
between an edge of G 1 with no endpoint in Vi and an element of E i ). By construction,

                                                                                                   123
914                                            Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


and thanks to property (III) in the statement of Theorem 3.1, we have that on average
each of the at most ε2 nn elements of E i takes part in no more than εn 2 crossings
with the long edges of G 1 that have no endpoint in Vi . On top of this, if the long edge
of G 1 involved in one of these crossings belongs to E G 1 (Vs , Vt ), then the crossing
contributes at most
                          eG 2 (Vs , Vt )  eG (Vs , Vt ) + dn 2
                                          ≤ 1
                          eG 1 (Vs , Vt )     eG 1 (Vs , Vt )
to E[cr(G 2 , D )]. Since the lonely edges were deleted, we may assume that
eG 1 (Vs , Vt ) > dn 2 , and thus the above quantity is less than 2. Whence, the expected
value of the weighted sum of the crossings of types 2 and 3 is upper bounded by
2ε2 nn · εn 2 < 4ε3 n 4 = 4d 3/8 n 4 .
   Lastly, as any two short edges or extremal sections that are fully contained in ri
induce at most 1 crossing, the number of crossings of type 4 does not surpass
                             2  
                             ε n n
                          k          ≤ kε4 n 4 ≤ Cd 1/4 n 4 .
                               2   2

   Now, we add the at most C 2 d 1/2 n 2 lonely edges back into the drawing. In order to
do this, we first transform D into a simple and locally optimal drawing by applying
a sequence of operations that does not increase the weighted sum of the crossings. At
this point, each lonely edge can be represented by a curve that does not cross any non-
lonely edge more than once. We can get rid of multiple crossings between the lonely
edges by rerouting some of the curves without increasing the number of crossings
between lonely and non-lonely edges. At the end, we get a drawing D of G 2 that
satisfies
                                                       
                                                       n
  E[cr(G 2 , D )] ≤ E[cr(G 2 , D )] + C 2 d 1/2 n 2       ≤ E[cr(G 2 , D )] + C 2 d 1/2 n 4
                                                       2
                   ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + 2C 4 d 1/2 n 4 + 4d 3/8 n 4 + Cd 1/4 n 4 + C 2 d 1/2 n 4
                   ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + Md 1/4 n 4 ,

where M is an absolute constant. As this can be repeated for every drawing D of G 1 ,
we arrive at cr(G 2 ) ≤ cr(G 1 )+ Md 1/4 n 4 . Analogously, cr(G 1 ) ≤ cr(G 2 )+ Md 1/4 n 4 .
This proves the first part of the statement.
   For the second part, a direct computation yields cr(G 2 , D) ≤ cr(G 1 , D) + d 2 n 8
(that is, we do not need to modify the drawing of G 1 at all to get the desired inequality),
and we can finish as above .

   Next, we address how taking the blow-up of a graph affects the crossing number.

Theorem 3.4 For any edge-weighted n-vertex graph G = (V , E) and any positive
integer m, we have that

                          0 ≤ cr(G[m]) − m 4 cr(G) ≤ n 3 m 4 .

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                       915


Remark This was shown to be true for the rectilinear crossing number (instead of the
crossing number) in [20]; the proofs are very similar, and the fact that this holds also
for the crossing number was already known to Fox, Pach and Suk.
Proof We begin by proving the inequality on the left. Consider a simple drawing D of
G[m] which attains cr(G[m]). From this drawing, we obtain a drawing D of G in the
following way: Independently for each v ∈ V , choose uniformly at random an element
v from Uv (see the definition of G[m] in Section 2.2); the point pv that represents v
in D will be used to represent v in D . Once all these points have been chosen, notice
that for every two adjacent vertices u and v of G the points pv and pu are connected
by a curve in D; this is the curve that will represent the edge (u, v) in D . Clearly, D is
simple. For any two non-adjacent edges e1 = (a, b), e2 = (c, d) ∈ E, the probability
that they cross in D is c(Ua , Ub |Uc , Ud )/m 4 , where c(Ua , Ub |Uc , Ud ) denotes the
number of quadruples (a , b , c , d ) with a ∈ Ua , b ∈ Ub , c ∈ Uc , d ∈ Ud such
that the edges (a , b ) and (c , d ) cross each other in D. From this, we get that

                    E[cr(G, D )] ≤ cr(G[m], D)/m 4 = cr(G[m])/m 4 .

Since cr(G) ≤ E[cr(G, D )], the result follows.
   Now we prove the inequality on the right. Take a drawing D of G that attains cr(G)
and let ε be a very small positive real (this will be made more precise in a moment).
We obtain a drawing D of G[m] as follows: For every v ∈ V , replace the point that
represents v by a set of m distinct points, each of them at distance at most ε from the
original one; these points will represent the elements of Uv . For each (u, v) ∈ E, we
draw all the edges between Uu and Uv by following along the curve that represents
(u, v) in D (this makes sense if ε is small enough), making sure that no two edges
of G[m] cross each other more than once. We call a 4-tuple (a, b, c, d) of vertices of
G[m] bad if two of its elements belong to the same Uv , and good otherwise. If ε is
small enough, then for any good 4-tuple (a, b, c, d) with a ∈ Ua , b ∈ Ub , c ∈ Uc ,
d ∈ Ud the edges (a, b) and (c, d) cross in D if and only if (a, b) and (c, d) cross in
D.
  On
     the
          other hand, the number of crossings coming from bad 4-tuples is less than
n m2 nm2 , so we have that
                                                        
                                                       m nm
  cr(G[m]) ≤ cr(G[m], D ) ≤ m 4 cr(G, D) + n                 ≤ m 4 cr(G) + n 3 m 4 .
                                                       2  2



    By theorems 3.3 and 3.4, the crossing density of graphs satisfies properties (i) and (ii)
in Section 2.3, and it clearly satisfies (iii) as well. This implies that the crossing density
is an estimable graph parameter. That the rectilinear crossing density is estimable was
already shown in [20].
Theorem 3.5 The crossing and rectilinear crossing densities are estimable graph
parameters. As a consequence, there exist two functionals g and g on W0 such that
limn→∞ cd(G n ) = g(W ) and limn→∞ cd(G n ) = g(W ) whenever G 1 , G 2 , . . . con-
verges to W and the number of vertices of G n goes to infinity with n.

                                                                                  123
916                                          Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


3.3 The Algorithm

Here, we present the algorithm that was promised in Theorem 1.2. The first three
steps of the algorithm are completely standard and, in particular, very similar to the
algorithm from [20] (see Theorem 1.1).
1. We are given an n-vertex graph G = (V , E) as input.
                         1
2. Set ε = (log log n)− 2c and use Theorem 2.2 to find an equitable   √
                                                                        Frieze-Kannan
   ε-regular partition P = {V1 , V2 , . . . , Vk } of G, where k ≤ O(2 log log n ) (here, c
   denotes the constant in the satement of the said theorem). This takes n 2+o(1) time.
3. Consider the edge-weighted graph G/P and compute its crossing number using
                                                                                  4
   Theorem 2.1. Then, output cr(G/P) · (n/k)4 . This can be done in 2 O(k log k) =
   n o(1) time.
      Proof of Correctness Let H denote the blow-up graph (G/P)[n/k]. By Theo-
      rem 3.4, the crossing number of H satisfies:

                 cr(G/P)(n/k)4 ≤ cr(H ) ≤ cr(G/P)(n/k)4 + n 4 /k.

      The graph H can be obtained from G P by removing less than k vertices (along
      with the attached edges), thus

                            cr(H ) ≤ cr(G P ) ≤ cr(H ) + kn 3 .

      Finally, P was chosen so that d (G, G P ) ≤ ε, so Theorem 3.3 yields |cr(G) −
      cr(G P )| ≤ Mε1/4 n 4 . Together, these inequalities imply that
                                                                                             
                                                                                  n4
      |cr(G/P)(n/k) − cr(G)| ≤ n /k + kn + Mε
                       4                4         3
                                                               n =O
                                                           1/4 4
                                                                                         1
                                                                                                  .
                                                                             (log log n) 8c

4. Write δ = 1/8c. In order to find a drawing of G with cr(G) + O(n 4 /(log log n)δ )
   crossings, we first need access to a simple and locally optimal drawing of G P (or
   of a graph that is very close to G P with respect to d ) with crossing number at
   most cr(G P ) + O(n 4 /(log log n)δ ). A drawing D of G P with this many cross-
   ings can be obtained by combining the drawing of G/P provided by 2.1 with the
   technique used in the proof of the right hand side inequality in the statement of
   Theorem 3.4 (that is, we produce a blow-up of this drawing). Note that D might
   not be locally optimal.
   Next, we round the weights of the edges of G P so that they can be written as
   an integer divided by some fixed integer s of order (log log n)δ , thus obtain-
   ing a new graph G P whose crossing number differs from that of G P by at most
   O(n 4 /(log log n)δ ). Note that D acts also as a drawing of G P . In order to con-
   struct a locally optimal drawing of G P , we iteratively refine D by using Dijkstra’s
   algorithm to redraw the edges until it is no longer possible to reduce the crossing
   number of the drawing in this manner. Each step reduces the weighted sum of
   the crossings by at least 1/s 2 , so the whole process takes polynomial time. The

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                    917


    resulting locally optimal drawing will be called D .
    Now, we use D as a blueprint and following the proof of Theorem 3.3, which is
    essentially algorithmic, to obtain a random drawing of G. At some point during this
    procedure, we also require a locally optimal drawing of a certain subgraph of G;
    this drawing can be constructed just as we did for G P , since every step will reduce
    the weighted sum of the crossings by at least 1. The expected number of crossings
    in the resulting random drawing of G is at most cr(G) + O(n 4 /(log log n)δ ), and
    the probability that the algorithm fails to deliver a drawing with crossing num-
    ber close to this quantity can be bounded from above using Markov’s inequality
    together with the fact that no drawing with crossing number less than cr(G) can
    ever be generated. Indeed, if X denotes the crossing number of the drawing that
    is produced, then the random variable X − cr(G) is non-negative and satisfies

                               E[X − cr(G)] ≤ A · n 4 /(log log n)δ

    for some absolute constant A > 0. It follows that
                                                              1
                         P X − cr(G) ≥ 2 A · n 4 /(log log n)δ ≤ ,
                                                                2
    as desired.
    Remark The only step in part 4 of the above algorithm at which we produce
    an actual graph drawing is at the end. Before that, drawings are processed not
    as geometric objects, but combinatorial ones (in the sense that they are stored
    as planar maps with a vertex for each crossing point and for each vertex of the
    original graph). The final drawing can be constructed using any efficient algorithm
    for drawing planar graphs (see Chapter 6 in [49] for many such algorithms).


4 Crossing Densities of Graphons

4.1 Defining the Crossing and Rectilinear Crossing Densities of Graphons

Our first goal in this section will be to introduce the rectilinear crossing density of a
graphon. Let us start with some preliminary definitions:
    For any four (not necessarily distinct) points x, y, z, w ∈ R2 , let I (x, y, z, w) = 1
if conv{x, y} ∩ conv{z, w} = ∅ and I (x, y, z, w) = 0 otherwise. We claim that I , as
a function from (R2 )4 to R, is measurable. This follows from the fact that I −1 (1) can
be thought of as an algebraic subset of R8 . Alternatively, we can let

X = {(x, y, z, w) ∈ (R2 )4 : |{x, y, z, w}| ≤ 3 or x, y, z, w are contained in a line}.

The set X is measurable, and the restriction of I to X can easily be seen to be measurable
too. Hence, it suffices to show that I −1 (1)\X ⊂ (R2 )4 is measurable. For every
positive integer m, consider a grid-like subdivision of the plane into interior disjoint
squares of side length 1/m, which we denote by Sm,1 , Sm,2 , . . . in any order. Let

                                                                                123
918                                                   Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


Am ⊂ N4 be the set of all 4-tuples of distinct indices (a, b, c, d) such that I (x, y, z, w)
must equal 1 whenever x ∈ Sm,a , y ∈ Sm,b , z ∈ Sm,c , w ∈ Sm,d . Write
                                      
                         Bm =                   Sm,a × Sm,b × Sm,c × Sm,d .
                                 (a,b,c,d)∈Am


By definition, I (Bm ) = 1, and it is not hard to see that the measurable set B = ∪i=1       ∞ B
                                                                                                i
          −1                  −1
covers I (1)\X . Thus, I (1)\X = B\X , which implies the claim.
    As a consequence of the above result, if f : [0, 1] → R2 is measur-
able then the function I f : [0, 1]4 → [0, 1] defined by I f (x, y, z, w) =
I ( f (x), f (y), f (z), f (w)) is measurable too. Denote the family of all bounded mea-
surable functions from [0, 1] to R2 by F. Given a graphon W and a function f ∈ F,
let
                                                                                    4
                         1
          cd(W , f ) =             W (x1 , x2 )W (x3 , x4 )I f (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )   d xi .
                         8 [0,1]4
                                                                                         i=1

By the discussion above, this integral is well defined. The function f can be thought
of as a straight-line drawing of W ; in fact, the definition of cd(W , f ) is essentially the
continuous (and normalized) analog of the definition of cr(G, D) given in Section 2.
Note that we divide by 8 to make up for the fact the each crossing is counted eight
times by the integral. The rectilinear crossing density of W is now defined as

                                      cd(W ) = inf cd(W , f ).
                                                    f ∈F


Remark We could have defined F as the set of measurable functions from [0, 1] to
the unit square [0, 1]2 . This would have no effect on the values taken by the parameter
cd, nor the discussions contained in the rest of this section.

   The definition of the crossing density of a graphon is somewhat more intricate. Let
C denote the family of all curves c : [0, 1] → R2 that are either simple or constant7 .
A simple graphon drawing is a function D : [0, 1]2 → C such that the following
properties hold:

1. For any x, y, t ∈ [0, 1], D(x, y)(t) = D(y, x)(1 − t).
2. For every x ∈ [0, 1], the image of D(x, x) is a single point, which we denote by
   D(x).
3. For any x, y ∈ [0, 1], D(x, y)(0) = D(x) and D(x, y)(1) = D(y).
4. For any x1 , x2 , y1 , y2 ∈ [0, 1], if the images of D(x1 , y1 ) and D(x2 , y2 ) have
   nonempty intersection (as subsets of R2 ), then their intersection is connected.

   For a simple graphon drawing D and x, y, z, w ∈ [0, 1], let ID (x, y, z, w) = 1 if the
curves D(x, y) and D(z, w) have at least one point in common, and ID (x, y, z, w) = 0
otherwise. Let DW denote the family of all simple graphon drawings D such that ID

7 Up to this point, we had used the term curve to refer to the image of a continuous function from an interval
to the plane. From here on out, both the function and its image will be referred to as curves.


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                         919


is measurable. Given a graphon W and a drawing D ∈ DW , write

                                                                                              4
                            1
          cd(W , D) =                     W (x1 , x2 )W (x3 , x4 )ID (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )          d xi .
                            8    [0,1]4                                                      i=1

The crossing density of W is defined as

                                     cd(W ) =          inf cd(W , D).
                                                    D∈DW

Remarks. Multiple remarks are in order. For starters, condition 4 in the definition of
simple graphon drawings should be interpreted as a continuous analogue of the condi-
tion that no two edges of a simple graph drawing cross more than once. When defining
simple graph drawings, we made the additional assumption that no two adjacent edges
cross. This second requirement would be of little consequence in the continuous set-
ting, as the set of pairs of edges which share an endpoint has measure 0 (as a subset of
[0, 1]4 ). On another note, we feel the need to clarify that, even though we make a slight
abuse of notation by using each of cd and cd to denote both a graph parameter and a
functional on W0 , it is not necessarily true that cd(G) = cd(WG ) or cd(G) = cd(WG )
(see Theorem 4.3). Lastly, while it is not completely evident from the definitions that
cd(W ) ≤ cd(W ), this inequality does hold for every W ∈ W0 .
   It is natural to ask whether for every graphon W there is an f ∈ F such that
cr(W ) = cr(W , f ), or a D ∈ DW such that cd(W ) = cd(W , D) (in other words, can
the infimum be substituted by a minimum in the above definitions?). Unfortunately,
we do not know the answer to either of these question. The following result, however,
is an immediate consequence of the Banach-Alaoglu theorem.
Lemma 4.1 There exist two families I and I of measurable functions from R4 to R
such that, for every W ∈ W0 , we have

                                                                                              4
                             1
           cd(W ) = min                     W (x1 , x2 )W (x3 , x4 )I (x1 , x2 , x2 , x4 )         d xi
                        I ∈I 8     [0,1]4                                                    i=1

and
                                                                                              4
                        1
          cd(W ) = min                      W (x1 , x2 )W (x3 , x4 )I (x1 , x2 , x2 , x4 )         d xi .
                   I ∈I 8         [0,1]4                                                     i=1
Furthermore, these families can be chosen so that all of their elements take values in
[0, 1].
Proof Consider the sets A = {I f | f ∈ F} and B = {ID | D ∈ DW }. By Banach-
Alaoglu, any sequence of elements of A has a subsequence that is convergent in the
weak* topology8 , and the same is true for B. Now, let W ∈ W0 and take a sequence

8 A sequence f , f , . . . of integrable functions defined on [0, 1]4 is weak* convergent if for any integrable
                1 2                                          
function g defined on the same set we have that  f n , g = [0,1]4 f n g d x converges as n goes to infinity.


                                                                                                      123
920                                                  Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


 f 1 , f 2 , . . . of elements of F such that limn→∞ cr(W , f n ) = cr(W ). We can pass to a
subsequence f 1 , f 2 , . . . such that I f1 , I f2 , . . . converges in the weak* topology to a
measurable function I , which can clearly be chosen so that it takes values in [0, 1]. I
satisfies

                                                                                       4
                        1
            cd(W ) =                 W (x1 , x2 )W (x3 , x4 )I (x1 , x2 , x2 , x4 )         d xi .
                        8   [0,1]4                                                    i=1


Hence, setting I to be the set formed by all elements of A and all sequential limit
points of A with respect to the weak* topology which have image in [0, 1] does the
job. In the same way, we can show that the set I which consists of all elements of B
and all of its sequential limit points with image in [0, 1] has the required properties.

   For every W ∈ W0 , let I W ∈ I and IW ∈ I denote two functions that attain the
minimums in the statement of Lemma 4.1. The questions above can now be restated
as follows. Given a graphon W , can the functions I W and IW always be chosen so
that I W = I f for some f ∈ F and IW = ID for some D ∈ DW ? We will come back
to this in Section 5.

4.2 Continuity with Respect to d and Connection to Graphs

Here, we prove that the crossing and rectilinear crossing densities are continuous with
respect to d , and that they extend the corresponding graph parameters in a precise
sense (see Theorem 4.4). We must first establish a weaker sort of continuity for cd and
cd.

Lemma 4.2 If W1 , W2 , . . . is a sequence of graphons that converges to another
graphon W almost everywhere, then

                    lim cd(Wn ) = cd(W ) and lim cd(Wn ) = cd(W ).
                   n→∞                                  n→∞


Proof The tensor product of two graphons W1 and W2 is the function W1 ⊗ W2 :
[0, 1]4 → [0, 1] defined by (W1 ⊗ W2 )(x, y, z, w) = W1 (x, y)W2 (z, w).
   Consider a sequence of graphons W1 , W2 , . . . that converges to W ∈ W0
almost everywhere. Clearly, the sequence W1 ⊗ W1 , W2 ⊗ W2 , . . . converges to
W ⊗ W almost everywhere. Choose a subsequence W1 , W2 , . . . of W1 , W2 , . . . with
limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = lim inf n→∞ cd(Wn ) and, for every n, let f n be an element of F
such that cd(Wn , f n ) ≤ cd(Wn ) + 1/2n . By Banach-Alaoglu, we can pass to a further
subsequence Ws(1) , Ws(2) , . . . of W1 , W2 , . . . such that I fs(1) , I fs(2) , . . . converges to
some I ∈ I in the weak* topology. This way,

                                                                       4
               1
cd(Ws(n) ) ≤           (W    ⊗ Ws(n) )I f s(n) (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )     d xi ≤ cd(Ws(n) ) + 1/2s(n)
               8 [0,1]4 s(n)
                                                                    i=1


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                            921


for every positive integer n, and so the expression in the middle converges to

                     lim cd(Ws(n) ) = lim cd(Wn ) = lim inf cd(Wn )
                    n→∞                       n→∞                n→∞

as n goes to infinity.
   On the other hand, a standard argument from analysis shows that the sequence
(Ws(1) ⊗ Ws(1) ) · I fs(1) , (Ws(2) ⊗ Ws(2) ) · I fs(2) , . . . converges to (W ⊗ W ) · I in the
weak* topology. Putting everything together, we get that

                lim inf cd(Wn ) = lim cd(Ws(n) ) = cd(W , I ) ≥ cd(W ).
                 n→∞                  n→∞

   Now, observe that

                                                                                 4
                              1
                cd(Wn ) ≤                  (Wn ⊗ Wn )I W (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )         d xi
                              8   [0,1]4                                        i=1


for every n. Since the expression on the right converges to cd(W ) as n goes to infinity,
we arrive at lim supn→∞ cd(Wn ) ≤ cd(W ), but we also had lim inf n→∞ cd(Wn ) ≥
cd(W ); this can only occur if limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = cd(W ).
   The fact that limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = cd(W ) follows verbatim.

   Next, we establish a connection between the crossing densities of graphons and the
crossing densities of graphs.

Theorem 4.3 For every edge-weighted graph G on n vertices, we have that

            0 ≤ cd(WG ) − cd(G) ≤ 1/n and 0 ≤ cd(WG ) − cd(G) ≤ 1/n.

Proof Let v1 , v2 , . . . , vn denote the vertices of G and I1 , I2 , . . . , In be the correspond-
ing subintervals of [0, 1] (see the definition of WG in Section 2.2). The argument is
similar to the one in the proof of Theorem 3.4. We begin by showing the inequalities
for rectilinear crossing densities.
   Given any f ∈ F, we obtain a drawing D f of G as follows: For every vi , choose
uniformly at random an element xi from Ii ; the point f (xi ) will represent vi . Draw
every edge of G as a segment joining its endpoints and, if necessary, perturb the vertices
slightly so that no three of them lie on a line and no three edges have a common interior
point. Note that the vertex perturbation step can be carried out without creating new
crossings. A straightforward computation shows that

                                  E[cd(G, D f )] ≤ cd(WG , f ).

Since this holds for any f ∈ F, we get that cd(G) ≤ cd(WG ).
   Suppose now that we are given a rectilinear drawing D of G. This drawing induces
an f D ∈ F, which is defined by setting f D (x) = pi , where i is such that x ∈ Ii and
pi is the point that represents vi in D. The value of cd( f D , WG ) is upper bounded by

                                                                                             123
922                                            Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


cd(G) + 1/n, where the 1/n accounts for the crossings coming from the 4-tuples of
points in [0, 1] which contain two elements in the same Si (these 4-tuples are similar
to the bad 4-tuples in the proof of Theorem 3.4). This yields cd(WG ) ≤ cd(G) + 1/n.
    The proof of the second part of the statement proceeds in essentially the same way.
Let D ∈ DW and construct a drawing D of G by placing vi at D(x), where x is
chosen uniformly at random from Ii , and then using the curve D(xi , x j ) to represent
the edge (vi , v j ). Again, we might have to tweak the drawing slightly so that no edges
goes through a vertex, no two edges are tangent, and no three edges cross each other
at the same point. As above, we have that

                              E[cd(G, D )] ≤ cd(WG , D),

which implies cd(G) ≤ cd(WG ).
   Finally, for every drawing D of G we obtain an element D of DW in the following
way: For every x ∈ Ii , let D (x) be the point that represents vi in D. For every
x, y ∈ [0, 1] with x ∈ Ii , y ∈ I j and i = j, set D (x, y) to be the curve that represents
the edge (vi , v j ). As in the case of rectilinear crossing densities, this graphon drawing
satisfies cd(WG , D ) ≤ cd(G) + 1/n.
   Theorems 3.5 and 4.3 can now be combined to obtain the main result of this section.
Theorem 4.4 The crossing density and the rectilinear crossing density are continuous
with respect to the cut norm d . Furthermore, if G 1 , G 2 , . . . is a convergent sequence
of edge-weighted graphs and the number of vertices of G n goes to infinity with n, then
limn→∞ cd(G i ) exists and is equal to cd(W ), where W denotes the limit of the graph
sequence. The same is true with cd in place of cd.
Proof Let W ∈ W0 . We shall exhibit a sequence of graphs G 1 , G 2 , . . . such that
WG 1 , WG 2 , . . . converges to W and limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = cd(W ), limn→∞ cd(Wn ) =
cd(W ). Suppose for a moment that such a sequence exists. Then, it must be the case
that cd and the functional g mentioned in Theorem 3.5 are one and the same, and this
also true for cd and g. Since g and g are continuous with respect to d , so too are cd
and cd.
   In order to construct this graph sequence, we introduce some notation. For any
W ∈ W and any partition P = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn } of the unit interval into measur-
                    diag                           diag
able sets, let WP be the graphon such that WP (x, y) = WP (x, y) if x and y
                                      diag
lie in different parts of P, and WP (x, y) = 0 otherwise. The advantage that we
                         diag
gain from using WP instead of WP is that if P is a partition of [0, 1] into inter-
                                   diag
vals of the same length, then WP = WG for some graph G. Note that if we let Pn
be the partition into intervals of length 1/n for every positive integer n, then each
pair of distinct points in [0, 1] is separated by all but a finite amount of the Pi ’s.
As a consequence, the sequence WP1 , WP2 , . . . converges to W almost everywhere.
Observe that for every point (x, y) ∈ [0, 1]2 with x = y there exists an integer N
                              diag
such that WPn (x, y) = WPn (x, y) whenever n ≥ N . This implies that the sequence
  diag    diag
WP1 , WP2 , . . . converges to W almost everywhere too. Let G 1 , G 2 , . . . be edge-
                                        diag
weighted graphs such that WG n = WPn for every n. Then, WG 1 , WG 2 , . . . converges

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                      923


to W almost everywhere and Lemma 4.2 implies that limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = cd(W ) and
limn→∞ cd(Wn ) = cd(W ). Since convergence almost everywhere implies conver-
gence with respect to d , the result follows.

   A graphon parameter g is said to be invariant if g(W1 ) = g(W2 ) whenever W1 and
W2 are weakly isomorphic. As an immediate consequence of the above theorem, we
get that cd and cd are invariant.

Corollary 4.5 The crossing density and the rectilinear crossing density of graphons
are invariant.

  We point out that this corollary can also be deduced in a more direct manner without
having to recur to crossing densities of graphs and Theorem 3.5.

4.3 Some Other Properties of the Crossing Densities

Let W p denote the constant graphon defined by W p (x, y) = p for all x, y ∈ [0, 1].
Theorem 4.4 also has the following corollary, which ties together the crossing densities
with some of the problems we briefly mentioned during the introduction.

Corollary 4.6 We have that

                              cr(K n )
                        lim     n  = 24 lim cd(K n ) = 24cd(W 1 )
                       n→∞                       n→∞
                                 4

and, similarly
                                           cr(K n )
                                     lim     n  = 24 cd(W 1 ).
                                  n→∞
                                             4

   Clearly, if c ≥ 0 and W1 and W2 are graphons with W1 = cW2 , then cd(W1 ) =
c2 · cd(W2 ) and cd(W1 ) = c2 · cd(W2 ). Crossing numbers of random graphs have
received considerable attention (see, for example, [47]). A sequence G 1 , G 2 , . . . of
edge-weighted graphs is said to be quasi-random with density p if the orders of the
graphs go to infinity with n and WG 1 , WG 2 , . . . converges to W p . There are many other
equivalent (and often more practical) definitions of quasi-randomness (see [12, 34]),
but this one is the best suited for our purposes. The results in [20] directly imply that the
rectilinear crossing densities of any quasi-random sequence of graphs converge. We
can show that the same is true for the crossing density. In fact, if we write K = cd(W 1 )
and K = cd(W 1 ), then cd(W p ) = K p 2 and cd(W p ) = K p 2 , and so Theorem 4.4
yields the following.

Corollary 4.7 Let p ∈ [0, 1]. Then, for any sequence G 1 , G 2 , . . . of edge-weighted
graphs that is quasi-random with density p, we have that limn→∞ cd(G n ) = K p 2
and limn→∞ cd(G n ) = K p 2 .

  Below, we obtain some additional properties of the crossing densities. The next
observation is a direct consequence of the definitions of cd and cd.

                                                                                  123
924                                                        Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


Observation 4.8 Let W , W1 and W2 be graphons such that W = W1 + W2 . Then
cd(W ) ≥ cd(W1 ) + cd(W2 ) and cd(W ) ≥ cd(W1 ) + cd(W2 ).
Proof We only prove the first inequality, as the second one can be deduced almost
identically. For any f ∈ F, we have that cd(W , f ) equals

                                                                                                     4
  1
           [W1 (x1 , x2 ) + W2 (x1 , x2 )][W1 (x3 , x4 ) + W2 (x3 , x4 )]I f (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )     d xi
  8 [0,1]4
                                                                                                  i=1
                                                                                                      4
          1
      ≥            [W1 (x1 , x2 )W1 (x3 , x4 ) + W2 (x1 , x2 )W2 (x3 , x4 )]I f (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 )     d xi
          8 [0,1]4
                                                                                                     i=1

                        = cd(W1 , f ) + cd(W2 , f ) ≥ cd(W1 ) + cd(W2 ),
and the result follows.
   This can be used to prove the following more interesting result.
Theorem 4.9 Let W be a graphon and P = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sn } a partition of the unit
interval into measurable sets. Then, we have that cd(W ) ≤ cd(WP ) and cd(W ) ≤
cd(WP ).
Proof The technique below was also used in the proof of Proposition 14.13 in [34].
   By Corollary 4.5, we may assume that each Si is an interval. For every i, let ai and
bi be the endpoints of Si and let φi : Si → Si be the measure preserving map defined
by φi (x) = ai + [2(x − ai )(mod bi − ai )]. Let φ : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be the measure
preserving map defined by φ| Si = φi . The point of this is that the map from Si × S j
to itself given by φ(x, y) = (φ(x), φ(y)) is ergodic for every i, j. For every positive
integer n, define a graphon Wn with

                                                 1
                                                       n
                                Wn (x, y) =         W (φ t (x), φ t (y)).
                                                 n
                                                    t=0

By Observation 4.8,
                                               1
                                                   n
                                                  cd(W φ ) = cd(W ).
                                                        t
                                cd(Wn ) ≥
                                               n
                                                  t=0
The sequence W1 , W2 , . . . converges to WP almost everywhere by the choice of φ,
hence cd(WP ) = limn→∞ cd(Wn ) ≥ cd(W ). The result for crossing densities follows
from an analogous argument.
                                                                   
Corollary 4.10 Let p ∈ [0, 1]. Among all graphons W with ||W ||1 = [0,1]2 W (x, y) d x
dy = p, W p achieves the largest crossing density, as well as the largest rectilinear
crossing density.
  It might seem inconvenient that the definitions of F and DW allow for “degenerate"
configurations. However, it is possible to add several more restrictions to these families
without altering the crossing densities. We provide an example of this.
  We say that a function f ∈ F is nice if it is measure preserving and bounded.

123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                     925


Theorem 4.11 Let W be a graphon. Then,

                                    cd(W ) = inf cd(W , f ),
                                                  f


where f ranges over all nice elements of F.

Proof Combining the ideas in the proofs of theorems 4.3 and 4.4, we can obtain a
sequence f 1 , f 2 , . . . of elements of F, each of which arises from a rectilinear drawing
of a graph (as did f D in our proof that cd(WG ) ≤ cd(G) + 1/n for every n vertex
graph G), and such that limn→∞ cd(W , f n ) = cd(W ). Each of these elements of F
maps each of the intervals in some partition of [0, 1] to a distinct point on the plane.
We can rescale f n so that the points corresponding to the images of any two of these
intervals are arbitrarily far away from each other. For every maximal subinterval of
[0, 1] that is mapped to a single point by f n , we can now reconstruct f n so that its
restriction to the subinterval is instead measure preserving and its image is a disk.
This modification can be carried out so that the rectilinear crossing density increases
by an arbitrarily small amount. Repeating this process for every subinterval with the
above property and then for every n, we arrive at a new sequence f 1 , f 2 , . . . of nice
elements of F such that limn→∞ cd(W , f n ) = cd(W ).

   We mentioned in the introduction that the crossing number of complete graphs is
connected to Sylvester’s four point problem. To finish this section, we describe how
this connection is, in some sense, a consequence of the interplay between rectilinear
crossing densities of graphons and rectilinear crossing numbers of graphs.
   Given a bounded region R ⊂ R2 of positive measure, let λ R be the probability
measure that arises from restricting the Lebesgue measure to R and then normalizing.
For any probability measure P on the Lebesgue σ -algebra of R2 , let c(P) denote
the probability that four points sampled independently from P can be labeled by
a, b, c, d so that I (a, b, c, d) = 1 (that is, conv{a, b} ∩ conv{c, d} = ∅). It was shown
by Scheinerman and Wilf [46] (although it is worded in a slightly different manner in
their paper) that
                                       cr(K n )
                                  lim n  = inf c(λ R ),
                                  n→∞                     R
                                             4

where R ranges over all bounded regions of positive measure.
   Now, for f ∈ F, let λ f denote the corresponding pushforward probability measure
on Rd (i.e., λ f (A) = λ( f −1 (A)) for every measurable A ⊆ R2 ). Every probability
measure of the form λ R corresponds to a standard probability space, and thus each λ R
can be written as λ f for some nice f ∈ F. Furthermore, if f is nice then λ f = λ R
for some R. This implies that

                                     inf c(λ f ) = inf c(λ R ),
                                      f               R


where f ranges over all nice elements of F. On top of this, it is not hard to see that
24cd(W 1 , f ) = c(λ f ) for all nice f (since the set f −1 () ⊂ [0, 1] has measure 0 for

                                                                                 123
926                                                   Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


every line  on the plane). This observation, along with Theorem 4.11, implies that

                                      24cd(W 1 ) = inf c(λ R ).
                                                         R

By the first part of Corollary 4.6, this is actually equivalent to the result of Scheinerman
and Wilf.


5 Open Problems

 • Unlike the algorithm from [20], our drawing algorithm in Theorem 1.2 is not
   deterministic.
      Problem 5.1 Is there a deterministic polynomial-time algorithm that for every n-
      vertex graph G produces a drawing of G with cr(G) + o(n 4 ) crossings?
 • While Theorem 4.4 shows that the graphon parameters cd and cd are the“correct"
   discrete analogs of the rectilinear crossing density and the crossing density of
   graphs, there are several ways in which we could have defined them. Indeed, as
   we exemplified at the end of the previous section, minor tweaks to the definitions
   of F and DW will often have no influence whatsoever on the graphon parameters
   cd and cd (see Theorem 4.11). Since the definition of DW is rather artificial (the
   set is made up of all the simple graphon drawings such that ID measurable), it
   makes sense to ask whether this family can be substituted by a more natural set of
   functions from [0, 1]2 to C without altering cd.
 • As mentioned near the end of Section 4.1, we do not know whether for every
   graphon W there is an f ∈ F such that cr(W ) = cr(W , f ) or a D ∈ DW such
   that cd(W ) = cd(W , D). We believe that the answer to the first of these questions
   is negative, and we make the following conjecture.
      Conjecture 5.2 There exists no f ∈ F such that cd(W 1 , D) = cd(W 1 , f ). In
      particular, the infimum in

                                              cr(K n )
                                        lim     n  = inf c(λ R )
                                       n→∞                   R
                                                  4

      cannot be substituted by a minimum.
 • The definition of a simple graphon drawing can also be modified to obtain con-
   tinuous analogs of other kinds of crossing numbers. For example, if we get rid of
   condition 4, we obtain a sort of pair crossing density9 for graphons, while adding a
   fifth condition which requires that each D(x, y) is x-monotone results in a mono-
   tone crossing density10 . Even though several of our arguments carry over to these

9 The pair crossing density of a graph G is the least number of pairs of crossing edges over all drawings
of G.
10 A curve is x-monotone if every vertical line intersects it in at most one point. A graph drawing is said
to be monotone if every edge is represented by an x-monotone curve. The monotone crossing number of a
graph is the least number of crossings that can be attained by a monotone drawing.


123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                  927


   variants, we do not know whether a result along the lines of Theorem 3.3 holds
   for other kinds of crossing numbers.
 • For any p ∈ [0, 1], the set of graphons with ||W ||1 = p is clearly closed with
   respect to d . Since (W0 , δ ) is compact and the crossing densities are invariant,
   the following problem is well posed.
    Problem 5.3 For every p ∈ [0, 1], find two graphon W1 and W2 with ||W1 ||1 =
    ||W2 ||1 = p such that

                                  cd(W1 ) =           min            cd(W )
                                                W ∈W0 ,||W ||1 = p

    and
                                  cd(W2 ) =           min            cd(W ).
                                               W ∈W0 ,||W ||1 = p

    Corollary 4.10 provides an answer to the variant of this problem where the mini-
    mums are substituted by maximums. We expect both of the above questions to be
    difficult to answer, but we believe that doing so might be an important step towards
    determining the so-called midrange crossing constant 11 .
    Let S2 denote a 2-dimensional sphere in R3 with total surface area 1. We will
    now describe a graphon defined on S2 instead of [0, 1], but we remark that it can
    be transformed to an equivalent graphon in W0 by means of a measure preserv-
    ing transformation, and so the theory we have developed still applies to it. Fix
    p ∈ [0, 1] and let τ p denote the unique real number such that, for any x ∈ S2 ,
    the intersection of S2 with the ball of radius τ p centered at x has surface area p.
    Define WS2 , p : S2 × S2 → [0, 1] by setting WS2 , p (x, y) = 1 if x and y are at
    distance at most τ p and WS2 , p (x, y) = 0 otherwise. Inspired by the main result of
    [16], we make the following conjecture.
    Conjecture 5.4 For every p ∈ [0, 1], we have that

                                cd(WS2 , p ) =          min           cd(W ).
                                                 W ∈W0 ,||W ||1 = p

 • Finally, motivated by the Kuratowski-Wagner Theorem [30, 51] (which states that
   a graph is planar if and only if it doesn’t contain a subdivision of K 5 or K 3,3 as a
   subgraph), we ask the following question.
    Problem 5.5 Let W be a graphon. What can be said about cd(W ) and cd(W )
    just from knowing the homomorphism densities t(F, W ) where F ranges over all
    subdivisions of K 5 and K 3,3 ?
Acknowledgements We thank the anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments.

Funding Open Access funding provided by the MIT Libraries.

Data Availibility Statement This manuscript has no associated data.
11 Let κ(n, e) denote the minimum crossing number among all n-vertex graphs G with e edges. It was
shown by Pach, Spencer and Tóth [39] that there exists a constant κ (the midrange crossing constant) such
that, under the assumption that n  e  n 2 , limn→∞ κ(n 2 /e3 ) = κ. An analogous result holds for
rectilinear crossing numbers.


                                                                                            123
928                                                    Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included
in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.



References
 1. Ábrego, B.M., Cetina, M., Fernández-Merchant, S., Leaños, J., Salazar, G.: On ≤ k-edges, crossings,
    and halving lines of geometric drawings of kn . Discrete & Computational Geometry 48(1), 192–215
    (2012)
 2. Ajtai, M., Chvátal, V., Newborn, M., Szemerédi, E.: Crossing-free subgraphs. North-holland Mathe-
    matics Studies 60, 9–12 (1982)
 3. Arora, S., Rao, S., Vazirani, U.: Expander flows, geometric embeddings and graph partitioning. Journal
    of the ACM (JACM) 56(2), 1–37 (2009)
 4. Balogh, J., Salazar, G.: K-sets, convex quadrilaterals, and the rectilinear crossing number of kn . Discrete
    & Computational Geometry 35(4), 671–690 (2006)
 5. BERG, M.D., Schwarzkopf, O.: Cuttings and applications. International Journal of Computational
    Geometry & Applications 5(04), 343–355 (1995)
 6. Bhatt, S.N., Leighton, F.T.: A framework for solving vlsi graph layout problems. J. Comput. Syst. Sci.
    28(2), 300–343 (1984)
 7. Bienstock, D.: Some provably hard crossing number problems. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Annual
    Symposium on Computational Geometry, 253–260 (1990)
 8. Bienstock, D., Dean, N.: Bounds for rectilinear crossing numbers. Journal of Graph theory 17(3),
    333–348 (1993)
 9. Borgs, C., Chayes, J.T., Lovász, L., Sós, V.T., Vesztergombi, K.: Convergent sequences of dense graphs
    i: subgraph frequencies, metric properties and testing. Adv. Math. 219(6), 1801–1851 (2008)
10. Cabello, S.: Hardness of approximation for crossing number. Discrete & Computational Geometry
    49(2), 348–358 (2013)
11. Chazelle, B.: Cuttings. In: Handbook of Data Structures and Applications, pp. 397–404. Chapman and
    Hall/CRC, ??? (2018)
12. Chung, F.R.K., Graham, R.L., Wilson, R.M.: Quasi-random graphs. Combinatorica 9(4), 345–362
    (1989)
13. Chuzhoy, J., Mahabadi, S., Tan, Z.: Towards better approximation of graph crossing number. In: 2020
    IEEE 61st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 73–84 (2020). IEEE
14. Chuzhoy, J., Makarychev, Y., Sidiropoulos, A.: On graph crossing number and edge planarization. In:
    Proceedings of the Twenty-second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, 1050–
    1069 (2011). SIAM
15. Chuzhoy, J.: An algorithm for the graph crossing number problem. In: Proceedings of the Forty-third
    Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 303–312 (2011)
16. Czabarka, É., Singgih, I., Székely, L., Wang, Z.: Some remarks on the midrange crossing constant.
    Stud. Sci. Math. Hung. 57(2), 187–192 (2020)
17. Dellamonica, D., Kalyanasundaram, S., Martin, D.M., RÖDL, V., Shapira, A.: An optimal algorithm for
    finding frieze–kannan regular partitions. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing 24(2), 407–437
    (2015)
18. Even, G., Guha, S., Schieber, B.: Improved approximations of crossings in graph drawings and vlsi
    layout areas. SIAM J. Comput. 32(1), 231–252 (2002)
19. Fabila-Monroy, R., López, J.: Computational search of small point sets with small rectilinear crossing
    number. arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.1288 (2014)
20. Fox, J., Pach, J., Suk, A.: Approximating the rectilinear crossing number. In: International Symposium
    on Graph Drawing and Network Visualization, 413–426 (2016). Springer




123
Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930                                                   929


21. Fox, J., Pach, J., Suk, A.: Density and regularity theorems for semi-algebraic hypergraphs. In: Pro-
    ceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, 1517–1530
    (2014). SIAM
22. Frieze, A., Kannan, R.: Quick approximation to matrices and applications. Combinatorica 19(2), 175–
    220 (1999)
23. Garey, M.R., Johnson, D.S.: Crossing number is np-complete. SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete
    Methods 4(3), 312–316 (1983)
24. Goldreich, O., Trevisan, L.: Three theorems regarding testing graph properties. Random Structures &
    Algorithms 23(1), 23–57 (2003)
25. Gowers, W.T.: Lower bounds of tower type for szemerédi’s uniformity lemma. Geometric & Functional
    Analysis GAFA 7(2), 322–337 (1997)
26. Guy, R.K.: A combinatorial problem. Nabla (Bulletin of the Malayan Mathematical Society) 7(68–72),
    8 (1960)
27. Kawarabayashi, K.-i., Reed, B.: Computing crossing number in linear time. In: Proceedings of the
    Thirty-ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 382–390 (2007)
28. Kawarabayashi, K.-i., Sidiropoulos, A.: Polylogarithmic approximation for euler genus on bounded
    degree graphs. In: Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing,
    164–175 (2019)
29. Kawarabayashi, K.-i., Sidiropoulos, A.: Polylogarithmic approximation for minimum planarization
    (almost). In: 2017 IEEE 58th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),
    779–788 (2017). IEEE
30. Kuratowski, C.: Sur le probleme des courbes gauches en topologie. Fundam. Math. 15(1), 271–283
    (1930)
31. Leighton, F.T.: Complexity Issues in VLSI: Optimal Layouts for the Shuffle-Exchange Graph and
    Other Networks. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (1983)
32. Leighton, T., Rao, S.: Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use in designing approx-
    imation algorithms. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 46(6), 787–832 (1999)
33. Lipton, R.J., Tarjan, R.E.: A separator theorem for planar graphs. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 36(2), 177–189
    (1979)
34. Lovász, L.: Large Networks and Graph Limits vol. 60. American Mathematical Soc., ??? (2012)
35. Lovász, L., Szegedy, B.: Szemerédi’s lemma for the analyst. GAFA Geom. Funct. Anal. 17(1), 252–270
    (2007)
36. Lovász, L., Vesztergombi, K., Wagner, U., Welzl, E.: Convex quadrilaterals and k-sets. Contemp. Math.
    342, 139–148 (2004)
37. Miller, G.L.: Finding small simple cycle separators for 2-connected planar graphs. In: Proceedings of
    the Sixteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, 376–382 (1984)
38. Moon, J.W.: On the distribution of crossings in random complete graphs. J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math.
    13(2), 506–510 (1965)
39. Pach, J., Spencer, J., Tóth, G.: New bounds on crossing numbers. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth
    Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, 124–133 (1999)
40. Pach, J., Tardos, G.: Untangling a polygon. In: International Symposium on Graph Drawing, 154–161
    (2001). Springer
41. Pach, J., Tóth, G.: Crossing number of toroidal graphs. In: International Symposium on Graph Drawing,
    334–342 (2005). Springer
42. Pach, J., Tóth, G.: Thirteen problems on crossing numbers. Geombinatorics 9(4), 194–207 (2000)
43. Patrignani, M.: Planarity Testing and Embedding. (2013)
44. Pfiefer, R.E.: The historical development of J.J. Sylvester’s four point problem. Mathematics Magazine
    62(5), 309–317 (1989)
45. Schaefer, M.: The graph crossing number and its variants: A survey. The electronic journal of combi-
    natorics, 21 (2012)
46. Scheinerman, E.R., Wilf, H.S.: The rectilinear crossing number of a complete graph and sylvester’s
    “four point problem” of geometric probability. Am. Math. Mon. 101(10), 939–943 (1994)
47. Spencer, J., Tóth, G.: Crossing numbers of random graphs. Random Structures & Algorithms 21(3–4),
    347–358 (2002)
48. Szemerédi, E.: Regular partitions of graphs. Technical report, Stanford Univ Calif Dept of Computer
    Science (1975)
49. Tamassia, R.: Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization. CRC press, ??? (2013)



                                                                                             123
930                                                Discrete & Computational Geometry (2026) 76:896–930


50. Ungar, P.: A theorem on planar graphs. J. Lond. Math. Soc. 1(4), 256–262 (1951)
51. Wagner, K.: Über eine eigenschaft der ebenen komplexe. Math. Ann. 114(1), 570–590 (1937)


Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.




123
