Analytic Property Testing:
Directed Isoperimetry and
      Monotonicity
                      by



      Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr.




                      A thesis
    presented to the University of Waterloo
               in fulfillment of the
      thesis requirement for the degree of
              Doctor of Philosophy
                         in
                Computer Science




       Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2025


      © Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr. 2025
                      Examining Committee Membership

The following served on the Examining Committee for this thesis. The decision of the
Examining Committee is by majority vote.



External Examiner:        Dor Minzer
                          Assistant Professor, Department of Mathematics,
                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology




Supervisor:               Eric Blais
                          Associate Professor, Cheriton School of Computer Science,
                          University of Waterloo




Internal Members:         Sepehr Assadi
                          Associate Professor, Cheriton School of Computer Science,
                          University of Waterloo

                          Lap Chi Lau
                          Professor, Cheriton School of Computer Science,
                          University of Waterloo




Internal-External Member: David C. Del Rey Fernández
                          Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics,
                          University of Waterloo




                                         ii
                                Author’s Declaration

This thesis consists of material all of which I authored or co-authored: see Statement
of Contributions included in the thesis. This is a true copy of the thesis, including any
required final revisions, as accepted by my examiners.

I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the public.




                                           iii
                             Statement of Contributions

The results in this thesis have appeared in the following works:

  1. The results in Chapter 4 appeared in the paper [Fer23], which was solely authored
     by me.

  2. The results in Chapters 5 and 7 appeared in the paper [Fer24], which was solely
     authored by me.

  3. The results in Chapter 6 were developed in collaboration with Lap Chi Lau, and
     appear in the manuscript [FF25], authored by Yumou Fei and myself (in submission
     at the time of this writing). Those results should be considered as equal collaboration
     between the co-authors.




                                            iv
                                            Abstract

    Property testing is a computational paradigm that aims to design algorithms for ex-
tremely fast decision-making about massive inputs. Property testing has been studied for
nearly three decades, primarily with a focus on testing properties about discrete objects
such as Boolean functions and graphs. In this thesis, we study property testing for in-
herently continuous objects, namely functions with real-valued domain and range—which
we call the analytic setting. We study the central problem of monotonicity testing in this
setting, where the input is a continuous function f : [0, 1]d → R and the algorithm must
decide whether f is monotone with respect to its input coordinates, or far from monotone
in the appropriate sense (namely with respect to the Lp distance).
    The central theme of this thesis is a connection between monotonicity testing and
directed isoperimetric inequalities, which are analogues of classical isoperimetric inequalities
that have been shown to be intimately related to monotonicity testing in discrete settings.
Indeed, many algorithmic advances in monotonicity testing over the last decade have been
obtained via new directed isoperimetric inequalities.
    We show that the connection between directed isoperimetry and monotonicity also holds
in the analytic setting, and indeed reveals new relationships between property testing and
areas of mathematics such as partial differential equations and optimal transport theory.
The main results in this thesis are the directed Poincaré inequality distmono
                                                                          2    (f )2 ≲ E [|∇− f |2 ]
for Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R defined over the solid unit cube, where distmono   2  (f )
denotes the L distance to monotonicity of f and the “directed gradient” operator ∇− f
               2

measures the local violations
                           √ of monotonicity of f ; and a monotonicity tester for this setting
with query complexity O( d). We obtain the directed Poincaré inequality by studying a
                         e
new partial differential equation called the directed heat equation.
    In our study of monotonicity testing and its connection to directed isoperimetry, we
also systematize classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities in continuous and discrete
settings; obtain a variety of upper and lower bounds for monotonicity testing of Lipschitz
functions in other settings of interest such as the one-dimensional line and the hypergrid;
and develop directed Poincaré inequalities for directed graphs by studying a dynamical
process called the directed heat flow via directed analogues of classical spectral theory.




                                                 v
                                  Acknowledgements

   This thesis would not exist if not for a number of important people in my life.
   First and foremost, I am indebted to my advisor, Eric Blais, who one day graciously
accepted my cold call and promptly welcomed me to his research group. Eric has unfailingly
taken me seriously and entertained my ideas—even more than I would, at times—and
provided me with a friendly and supportive environment for growth and self-discovery in
my research career.
   I am also thankful to all the members of my thesis committee for taking the time to serve
on my committee, and giving me the opportunity to hear their invaluable perspectives. I
am grateful to Lap Chi Lau for his supportive presence since my first year, and for taking
the time to digest my work and inviting me for a series of stimulating research discussions
that led to the development of Chapter 6 of this thesis. I also thank Sepehr Assadi, who
has always been willing to offer feedback and advice on my work and career.
   I am ever grateful to Nathan Harms, who is not only a close friend but also a mentor
and inspiring presence. Nathan taught me much of what I know about how to do research,
and his taste and intuition have been a gift to our fun collaborations.
   I am also grateful to Vahid Asadi, Mohammad Hossein Ebtehaj, Parth Mittal, Argyris
Mouzakis, Cameron Seth, Vihan Shah, Janani Sundaresan, and all the members of our
Algorithms and Complexity group for their support and companionship throughout these
years. I also thank Michael Kapralov for hosting me for a visit to EPFL, and for the
Theory Group at EPFL for welcoming me during that time.
    I was fortunate to have the opportunity to visit Sofya Raskhodnikova at Boston Uni-
versity for a term, and I am grateful for her welcoming attitude, advice, and insight in
our collaboration. A number of people made my time in Boston special and productive,
including Mark Bun, Rathin Desai, Yumou Fei, Esty Kelman, Ephraim Linder, Cassandra
Marcussen, Elchanan Mossel, Shivam Nadimpalli, Diptaksho Palit, Ronitt Rubinfeld, and
Adam Smith.
    Finally, I must warmly acknowledge my family and my partner, who have always been
by my side and who make everything else worthwhile. You have made the best moments
all the better, and helped me get through the most difficult ones. Thank you.




                                             vi
Table of Contents

Examining Committee Membership                                                               ii

Author’s Declaration                                                                         iii

Statement of Contributions                                                                   iv

Abstract                                                                                      v

Acknowledgements                                                                             vi

List of Tables                                                                                x

1 Introduction                                                                                1
   1.1   Property testing in the analytic setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     2
   1.2   Monotonicity testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
   1.3   Directed isoperimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
   1.4   Main results and organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     10

2 Preliminaries                                                                              15
   2.1   General notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
   2.2   Sets and measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   16
   2.3   Lp spaces and Lipschitz functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16


                                              vii
   2.4   Distance to constant and monotonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
   2.5   Directed partial derivatives and gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
   2.6   Monotonicity testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     18
   2.7   Classical and directed Poincaré inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    19

3 Prior work                                                                                  20
   3.1   Monotonicity testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20
   3.2   Classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
   3.3   Lp testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   26
   3.4   Algebraic property testing over the reals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      27
   3.5   Testing properties of parametric models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28


Part I: Monotonicity testing in the analytic setting                                          30

4 Testing with O(d) queries via rearrangements                                                30
   4.1   Results and main ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
   4.2   Directed Poincaré inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    35
   4.3   Monotonicity testers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44
   4.4   L1 -testing monotonicity on the line . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     46
   4.5   Lower bounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     50
   4.6   Comparison with prior work on Lp testing for bounded-range functions . .             56
   4.7   Discussion and open questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      59
                  √
               e d) queries, conditional on (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
5 Testing with O(                                                                             61
   5.1   Algorithm and upper bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        63
   5.2   Lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      68




                                              viii
Interlude                                                                                   72

6 Directed isoperimetry on graphs via the directed heat flow                                 72
  6.1   Spectral theory and heat flow for directed graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        74
  6.2   The dynamical spectral gap of the directed hypercube . . . . . . . . . . . .         89
  6.3   Reverse directed Poincaré inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94


Part II: Continuous setting via PDEs and optimal transport                                  97

7 An L2 directed Poincaré inequality via the directed heat equation                         97
  7.1   Proof ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    97
  7.2   Directed heat semigroup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
  7.3   Directed transport-energy inequality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
  7.4   Directed Poincaré from Wasserstein and Kantorovich . . . . . . . . . . . . 177

8 Conclusion                                                                                190
  8.1   Monotonicity testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
  8.2   Further directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193

References                                                                                  195

APPENDICES                                                                                  210

A Nonadaptive lower bound from prior work on Hamming testing                                211

B Missing proofs from Chapter 7                                                             213




                                             ix
List of Tables

 3.1   Classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   25

 4.1   Query complexity bounds for testing monotonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34




                                            x
Chapter 1

Introduction

                                           “But equations belong to everybody. We’re going
                                           to roll up our sleeves and give it our best shot.”
                                                        Cédric Villani, Birth of a Theorem: A
                                                                       Mathematical Adventure


    When is it possible to make reliable decisions using an extremely small amount of
information? Can we derive knowledge about a system purely from local observations of
it? In philosophy, this kind of question dates back to Hume’s treatment of the problem
of induction [Hum08], i.e. the problem of deducing laws about the natural world from
experience. In that context, Hume posited that any such process must be predicated
on some form of regularity of nature: the expectation – which cannot be ascertained from
experience alone – that local observations made today reflect general principles that extend
through time and space, thus enabling the acquisition of knowledge.
    This thesis considers a computational instantiation of this general question: how can
algorithms make reliable decisions about extremely large inputs using only a small number
of local observations? Specifically, we study the ability of algorithms to draw conclusions
about continuous objects, whose infinite-dimensional nature appears to pose a formidable
challenge to any finite observer. Nevertheless, under reasonable assumptions of mathemat-
ical regularity, we will uncover local to global phenomena which algorithms can exploit to
achieve the foregoing goal.
   The computational paradigm of making decisions by looking at only a small portion of
the input is called property testing [RS96; GGR98]. The setting is the following. Suppose
we have access to an input object x from a universe X , and we would like to check whether

                                             1
x satisfies some property P ⊂ X while reading only a small portion of x. This goal is too
ambitious as stated: if x does not satisfy property P but only differs from some y ∈ P in
a few bits, then no algorithm can hope to catch this difference without inspecting most of
x. However, as we will see, the following two relaxations suffice to arrive at a tractable
problem:

   1. Distance: we only require to distinguish between objects x ∈ P and those that are
      far from P, i.e. they are substantially different from every y ∈ P (in a precise sense
      specified by the problem formulation).

   2. Randomness: we allow ourselves to make randomized decisions, and admit a small
      probability of error.

Algorithms that accomplish this relaxed task are called property testers.


1.1      Property testing in the analytic setting
Property testing has been an explicit topic of study for about three decades [RS96; GGR98]
(see also the books [Gol17; BY22]), with origins tracing back to program checking [BLR90]
and probabilistically checkable proofs [BFLS91]. At a high level, most existing work in
property testing can be classified under one or more of the following broad themes:1

   1. Algebraic: the input is a function f taking values in a field, and the goal is to check
      whether f satisfies some algebraic property such as linearity or being a low-degree
      function; see e.g. [BLR90; RS96; KS08; RS97; FY20; ABFKY23] and the survey
      [KMS00].

   2. Combinatorial : here we may distinguish between two salient areas with combinatorial
      flavour. In one line of study, the input is a combinatorial object such as a graph or
      hypergraph, and the goal is to test properties such as bipartiteness, k-colorability, ex-
      istence of a large clique, connectivity, and planarity or minor-freeness; see e.g. [Gol97;
      GGR98; GR02; FN05; ELR24; BS24; SS24; Set25]. In another line of work, the in-
      put is a Boolean or real-valued function on a discrete domain such as the hypercube,
      and properties of interest include being a junta [FKRSS04; Bla09] (i.e. completely
   1
   It is impractical to give a full account of past works under all of these themes, so we give a small
sample of pointers to the literature instead.


                                                  2
     determined by only a few input variables), a decision list or tree [DLMORSW07],
     or a monotone function [EKKRV98; Ras99; DGLRRS99; GGLRS00; CS13; CS16;
     KMS18; BCS23a].

  3. Geometric: the input is typically a Boolean function f , and the goal is to check
     whether f can be captured by a “simple” geometric concept such as a halfspace, an
     intersection of halfspaces, or a low-degree polynomial threshold function [MORS10;
     BBBY12; DMN19; Har19; BFH21]. Closely related perspectives ask whether the set
     f −1 (1) satisfies properties such as convexity [RV04; CFSS17; BB20; HY22; BBH24;
     CDNSW25] or connectedness [Ras03; BMRR24], or whether real-valued f satisfies a
     property such as convexity [BBB20].

  4. Statistical : here, the input is a probability distribution p, and the algorithm typically
     only has access to independent samples from p (or perhaps certain kinds of con-
     ditional samples). We may ask about properties such as uniformity [GR11; DK16;
     VV17a], independence [BFFKRW01] or support size [VV17b; WY19; AFL24; FH25],
     or versions of the properties mentioned above applied to probability distributions,
     e.g. monotonicity [AGPRY19; RV20; CCRSW25]. See also the survey [Can22].

    Of course, the lines between these categories are not sharp, and some problems (and
associated mathematical techniques) do straddle them. For example, in distribution-free
testing [HK07], distance between the input f and the property P is measured against an
unknown input probability distribution from which the algorithm can only take samples,
so statistical considerations play a key role in this setting along with the other themes.
Property testing of Boolean functions is also intimately connected with Fourier analysis,
which lends an analytic flavour to this area of study.
    One common feature of the themes above, and indeed of most prior works in property
testing, is some form of discreteness – either of the underlying domain, e.g. a graph or the
Boolean hypercube; or of the range, e.g. Boolean-valued functions (but see Chapter 3 for
a discussion of related work, including research initiated by [FY20] on algebraic property
testing in the real-valued setting). In this thesis, we ask: what kinds of decisions are
algorithms able to make in the fully continuous setting, where the input function f has
real-valued domain and range? Can we obtain query-efficient property testers, despite
the fact that any finite number of queries only captures a measure-zero portion of any
continuous object?
    This thesis explores an instantiation of the question above which we call analytic prop-
erty testing. This setting is characterized by two features of the problem description.


                                              3
First, the input is a real-valued function defined on Euclidean space, for example a func-
tion f : [0, 1]d → R over the solid unit cube; typically, we require some regularity from f
such as Lipschitz continuity. Second, we measure distance between the input f and the
property P according to Lp distance (for some appropriate choice of p). In contrast with
the Hamming distance, which is more common in discrete settings, the Lp distances are
a natural fit for the continuous nature of the analytic setting, since they are sensitive not
only to the presence of errors but also to their magnitude2. These features imply a third
characteristic of the analytic setting, which is that new mathematical techniques must be
brought to bear compared to previous work in the other settings. Indeed, this thesis ob-
tains its computational results (new algorithms) by recruiting tools from real and functional
analysis, ordinary and partial differential equations, and optimal transport theory.
   We initiate research into analytic property testing with a study of monotonicity testing,
which we introduce next.


1.2       Monotonicity testing
Monotonicity testing has been a central topic of study in property testing for over 25
years [Ras99; DGLRRS99; GGLRS00], and continues to be a prominent object of recent
research. Very informally, the problem asks: given a function f , is it true that the value
f (x) can only grow larger when we make the input x larger? We may motivate the study
of this problem from at least three perspectives:

   1. As a simple instantiation of property testing. In theoretical research, it is often
      sensible and productive to understand the simple cases of a theory as well as possible
      as a first step toward more elaborate settings. Monotonicity testing, as we will
      see below, is a natural problem with a simple statement, and therefore provides an
      excellent testbed for property testing research more generally.
   2. As a natural problem connected to real-world concepts. The question of whether one
      or more variates are positively associated with a response variable is fundamental to
      much of empirical science, and parametric forms of this question have been exten-
      sively studied in statistics [BJG98; Che19]; property testing offers a complementary
      angle on this class of problems. From a more contemporary standpoint, monotonicity
      has also been proposed and studied as a desirable characteristic of machine learning
      models due to fairness, interpretability, and quality assurance considerations [SW20].
   2
    Indeed, in the statistical setting of distribution testing, the standard notion of distance is the total
variation or L1 distance.


                                                     4
  3. As a source of theoretical insights and innovation. Many mathematical tools have
     been developed, or found novel applications, in the course of research in monotonicity
     testing. A non-exhaustive list includes routing on the hypercube [LR01; BCGM12],
     isoperimetric inequalities [CS16; KMS18; BCS23b; BKKM23], analysis of random
     walks [BCS23a], domain reduction techniques [BCS20; HY22], Ramsey theory [Fis04],
     and constructions of Ruzsa-Szemerédi graphs [FLNRRS02]. This thesis adds to this
     list topics such as partial differential equations (PDEs) and optimal transport theory.

   Here, we briefly summarize the landscape of monotonicity testing, and then provide a
more systematic review in Chapter 3. The general formulation of the problem is as follows.
Let (X, ⪯) be a partially-ordered set, i.e. X is a ground set and ⪯ is a partial order on
X. Let R be a totally ordered set (which is typically either {0, 1} or R). Then, given an
input function f : X → R, the goal of a monotonicity testing algorithm is to distinguish
between the following two cases:

  1. f is monotone, that is, for every x, y ∈ X satisfying x ⪯ y, we have f (x) ≤ f (y).

  2. f is far from monotone, meaning that dist(f, g) > ε for all monotone g : X → R,
     where dist is a fixed distance metric on functions from X to R and ε > 0 is an
     input parameter. (Most often, dist has been the relative Hamming distance, i.e. the
     fraction of inputs on which f and g disagree.)

The algorithm may access f via queries to an oracle, which typically takes an arbitrary
element x ∈ X as input and provides the value f (x) back to the algorithm. The goal of the
algorithm is to reach a correct decision about f using as few queries as possible, i.e. with
the smallest possible query complexity. Specifically, the algorithm should accept when f
is monotone and reject when f is far from monotone, both with probability3 at least 2/3.
(When f is neither monotone nor far from monotone, either outcome is acceptable. As
already remarked, this flexibility is key to making efficient property testing possible.)
    One fundamental setting for monotonicity testing is the fully Boolean regime, where
1) the partially-ordered set is the Boolean hypercube {0, 1}d , under the natural partial order
whereby x ⪯ y if xi ≤ yi for all i ∈ [d]; and 2) we take Boolean range R = {0, 1}. The
first works on monotonicity testing [Ras99; DGLRRS99; GGLRS00] studied this setting,
as well as the generalizations where the domain is allowed to be the hypergrid [n]d and the
range is allowed to be any set R. A hallmark result established that, in the fully Boolean
case, monotonicity can be tested using O(d/ε) queries [Ras99; GGLRS00].
  3
      This probability may be amplified to any desired level 1 − δ by repeating the test O(log(1/δ)) times.


                                                     5
    Since then, a vast array of works has continued to drive progress on this problem.
                                                                                     √ 2A
series of works on the Boolean case has pushed the query complexity down to O( d/ε )
                                                                                   e
[KMS18], and more recent works have obtained similar results for the case of Boolean-
valued functions on the hypergrid [BCS23a]; monotonicity testing of real-valued functions
on the hypercube and hypergrid has also been studied [CS13; BKR24]; and the challenging
setting of general partially-ordered domains was studied in early work and recently revisited
[FLNRRS02; LRV22; LV23].


1.2.1      Monotonicity testing in the analytic setting.
As already mentioned, in this thesis we study monotonicity testing in the analytic setting.
Specifically, we consider functions f : [0, 1]d → R defined on the solid unit cube, and make
the following modelling choices.


Lp distance. First, we let the distance metric dist be an Lp metric, such as L1 or L2 .
This is a more natural choice for our continuous setting than the Hamming metric because
it captures not only whether two functions disagree at a point x, but also by how much
they disagree. For example, by slightly perturbing a monotone function f , we may obtain
a function fe which is Ω(1)-far from monotone in Hamming distance even though any algo-
rithm will observe, via its queries, an output that is consistent with a monotone function4.
In this example, the perturbed function fe is indeed arbitrarily close to f in Lp distance,
in line with our intuition that this notion of distance is a better fit to our setting. This
choice follows the work of [BRY14a], who introduced Lp testing with a similar motivation
and indeed studied monotonicity testing (for functions with discrete domain), along with
other problems (we review this and other prior work in Chapter 3).


Lipschitz regularity. Even after choosing an appropriate distance metric, it turns out
that continuous space is too unwieldy to permit testability without further assumptions
on f . For example, we may perturb f in an arbitrarily small region by an arbitrarily large
amount to obtain a function fe that is very far from monotone, yet indistinguishable from
f . We consider Lipschitz regularity to be a natural enough constraint on f which, as we
will see, is also sufficient to enable efficient testers as well as mediate connections between
   4
   Formally, for any nonadaptive algorithm A, i. e. one that determines all of its queries in advance, we
may make the perturbation to f fine enough so that A will not observe any violations of monotonicity.
We may extend this argument to adaptive testers under reasonable assumptions, e. g. that A only uses a
bounded number of bits of precision from each output before making its next query.


                                                   6
monotonicity and well-established areas of mathematical analysis such as isoperimetric
inequalities, rearrangements, partial differential equations, and optimal transport.
      Therefore, our problem is the following:

  Given oracle access to an M -Lipschitz function f : [0, 1]d → R, distinguish between
  1) f is monotone; and 2) f is far from every monotone g : [0, 1]d → R in Lp distance.

  To complete the specification of the problem, we must define the oracle access in this
model. We consider two types of oracle:

      Value oracle: Given point x, this oracle outputs the value f (x).
      Directional derivative oracle: Given point x and vector v ∈ Rd , this oracle outputs
      the derivative of f along v at point x, given by ∇v f (x) = v · ∇f (x), as long as f is
      differentiable at x. Otherwise5, it outputs a special symbol ⊥.

A directional derivative oracle is weaker than a full first-order oracle, which would return
the entire gradient [BV04], and it seems like a reasonable model for the high-dimensional
setting; for example, obtaining the full gradient costs d queries, rather than a single query.
This type of oracle has also been studied in optimization research, see e.g. [CWZ21].
Finally, we remark (in Chapter 5) that, under reasonable assumptions, these oracle queries
may be simulated by value queries in our applications, so we consider directional derivative
queries to be a primitive that is both natural and reasonable in our model.


1.3        Directed isoperimetry
Since the introduction of monotonicity testing and especially over the last decade, a series
of works has revealed striking connections between monotonicity testing and directed ana-
logues of well-studied and ubiquitous isoperimetric inequalities such as Poincaré, Margulis,
and Talagrand inequalities. Directed isoperimetric inequalities and their role in monotonic-
ity testing were first recognized and formalized in the breakthrough work of [CS16], and
lie at the core of a number of subsequent advances [KMS18; BCS23b; BKKM23; BKR24].
This thesis builds upon these ideas by showing that continuous functions also enjoy di-
rected isoperimetric phenomena, which underlie algorithms for monotonicity testing in the
analytic setting.
  5
     By Rademacher’s theorem, a Lipschitz function is differentiable almost everywhere, so non-
differentiability will never be a concern for us.


                                                 7
    Before summarizing the connections between directed isoperimetry and monotonicity
and previewing our contributions, let us start with an example that will already motivate
the overall picture by returning to the classic monotonicity tester of [GGLRS00] for the
fully Boolean case of functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1}.
   The tester of [GGLRS00] is remarkably simple: first, sample a vertex x ∈ {0, 1}d and
another vertex y directly “above” x, i.e. y is obtained from x by flipping a single bit of x
from 0 to 1; we call (x, y) an edge. If f (x) > f (y), i.e. f violates monotonicity along this
edge, reject. If no violating edge is found after repeating this test O(d/ε) times, accept.
This algorithm is called the edge tester.
    Why should this algorithm work? Certainly it accepts whenever f is monotone, so the
point is to argue that this algorithm samples a violating edge with good probability when
f is far from monotone. A key result in [GGLRS00] shows exactly that:

Theorem 1.1 ([Ras99; GGLRS00]). Suppose f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1} is ε-far from monotone
in relative Hamming distance. Let V (f ) denote the number of violating edges in f . Then

                                        V (f ) ≥ ε · 2d .

  Thus, when f is ε-far from monotone, at least an Ω(ε/d)-fraction of the edges violates
monotonicity. Hence O(d/ε) queries suffice to detect one of them and successfully reject.
    Broadly speaking, isoperimetric phenomena are relationships between the volume and
surface area of sets or, under suitable interpretation, functions. As first observed by [CS16],
statements such as Theorem 1.1 may be seen as directed analogues of classical isoperimetry.
Indeed, if we think of “distance to monotonicity” as a notion of volume (e.g. the volume of
the smallest set where f needs to change to reach any monotone function), and “violating
edges” as a notion of surface area, then Theorem 1.1 is a lower bound on (directed) surface
area in terms of (directed) volume.
    In this thesis, we observe that the family of Poincaré inequalities provides a suitable
framework for discussing, systematizing, and extending this connection between classical
isoperimetry, directed analogues, and monotonicity testing, as we now preview.
   Let p, q ≥ 1. We say a (classical) (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequality is an inequality of the
form
                              distconst (f )p ≤ C E ∥∇f ∥pq
                                                           
                                  p

for, say, all functions f : {0, 1}d → R on the Boolean cube, or all functions f : [0, 1]d → R
on the unit cube, or perhaps only the Boolean-valued functions on these domains. Here
distconst
    p     (f ) denotes the Lp distance of f to the closest constant function when the domain

                                               8
is given uniform probability measure. Then the following isoperimetric results are classical
Poincaré inequalities:

  1. for functions f : {0, 1}d → R, the classical Poincaré inequality Var [f ] ≤ C Inf [f ],
     where Inf [f ] denotes the total influence of f , is an (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality (see
     e.g. [O’D14]);

  2. in the same setting, the Talagrand inequality [Tal93] is an (L1 , ℓ2 ) inequality;

  3. for smooth functions f : [0, 1]d → R, the (L2 , ℓ2 ) inequality is often called the Poincaré
     inequality, especially in mathematical analysis (see e.g. [BGL14]); and

  4. in the same setting, the (L1 , ℓ2 ) inequality was proved by Bobkov & Houdré [BH97].

    Now, let distmono
                  p    (f ) denote the Lp distance of f to the closest monotone function. Then
a directed (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequality is an inequality of the form

                                  distmono (f )p ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥pq ,
                                                               
                                      p                                                   (1.1)

where ∇− f := min{0, ∇f }, the directed gradient of f , captures the local violations of
monotonicity of f . Note that both the classical and directed inequalities relate a local
property (violations of the “constant” or “monotone” property, captured by the gradient)
to a global one (distance to a constant or monotone function).
   As observed by [CS16] and mentioned above, it turns out that many classical isoperi-
metric inequalities enjoy directed analogues. For example,

  1. Theorem 1.1 above is a directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality for functions f : {0, 1}d →
     {0, 1};

  2. [KMS18] proved the stronger (L1 , ℓ2 ) inequality for functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1}, in
     analogy with Talagrand’s result in the classical setting; and

  3. Related directed isoperimetric statements include a directed analogue of the Mar-
     gulis inequality by [CS16], and isoperimetric inequalities for real-valued functions on
     the Boolean cube [BKR24] and for Boolean functions on the hypergrid [BCS23b;
     BKKM23]. We review these in Chapter 3.

   What makes the story above especially compelling is that each new directed isoperi-
metric inequality also enabled an algorithmic result, namely a monotonicity tester with

                                               9
improved query complexity in the same setting. While we defer a more detailed review to
Chapter 3, one central example is that, for functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1}, the celebrated
work
   √ of 2[KMS18] essentially resolved the question for nonadaptive testers by giving an
O( d/ε ) query tester.
 e
    Previously, directed isoperimetric inequalities and their applications to monotonicity
testing were only known in discrete domains. On the other hand, ever since the origi-
nal “isoperimetric problem” about shapes in Euclidean space, isoperimetric inequalities
have enjoyed a rich and fruitful history with connections to mathematical physics, geom-
etry, probability theory, diffusion processes, optimal transport, and so on; see e.g. [Vil09;
BGL14]. Closest to our subject, the Poincaré inequality itself first appeared in the study
of partial differential equations arising in mathematical physics by Poincaré [Poi90]. Thus,
if there are unifying principles underlying both classical and directed isoperimetric phe-
nomena, as well as the connection to monotonicity, it seems reasonable to expect such a
principle to manifest itself in the analytic setting.
    Accordingly, this thesis strengthens the connection between classical isoperimetry, di-
rected isoperimetry, and monotonicity testing by extending it to the analytic setting. We
show that sufficiently regular (e.g. Lipschitz) functions f : [0, 1]d → R satisfy directed
Poincaré inequalities, and that this implies query-efficient monotonicity testers for such
functions. Toward this goal, we extend the aforementioned classical connections between
isoperimetry and other areas of mathematical analysis to the directed setting. For exam-
ple, in Chapter 7 we introduce a new nonlinear partial differential equation, the directed
heat equation, whose convergence properties we use to prove a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
inequality for functions f : [0, 1]d → R via optimal transport theory.


1.4      Main results and organization
In Chapter 2, we introduce notation and technical preliminaries used throughout the thesis,
and formally define the problem of monotonicity testing in the analytic setting. Chapter 3
summarizes prior work relevant to this thesis. After that, the main body of the thesis can
be roughly divided into three parts, which proceed as follows.


Part I: Monotonicity testing in the analytic setting. This part encompasses Chap-
ters 4 and 5. In Chapter 4, we begin our study of directed isoperimetry by giving directed
(L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequalities in discrete and continuous settings, and study their implica-
tions to monotonicity testing. We give upper and lower bounds for testing monotonicity of

                                              10
functions over the unit cube [0, 1]d and the hypergrid [n]d , including nearly-tight bounds
for the one-dimension cases of the discrete and continuous line. The main result from
Chapter 4 is an O(d)-query tester for monotonicity of Lipschitz functions on the unit cube:

Theorem 1.2 (Testing monotonicity with O(d) queries). There is a nonadaptive L1 mono-
tonicity tester for M -Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with query complexity O dM
                                                                                      
                                                                                    ε
                                                                                        and
one-sided error.

    Theorem 1.2 is shown via a directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality, which is conceptually
similar to how Theorem 1.1 is used to show the classical O(d/ε) bound for monotonicity
testing of Boolean functions. Specifically, the tester from Theorem 1.2 works by sampling
points x and coordinates i ∈ [d] uniformly at random, and using directional derivative
queries to reject if f is decreasing in direction i at point x. Correctness is shown using
the directed Poincaré inequality, which says that if f is far from monotone, then the
total magnitude of its negative partial derivatives must be large – and since each partial
derivative is bounded thanks to the Lipschitz assumption, the partial derivatives must be
strictly negative in a set of large measure, which the tester stands good chance of hitting
with the given query complexity.
     Theorem 1.2 suggests a natural follow-up question: can we obtain a o(d)-query tester?
A complementary lower bound result of Chapter 4 shows that any tester that works as
above, i.e. by sampling directional derivatives aligned with a single direction i one at a time,
cannot do better than Theorem 1.2. Hence any tester with sublinear query complexity, if
it is based on directional derivatives, must make use of directional derivative queries that
are not aligned with any single direction i – intuitively, the tester would need to “probe”
many directions at once.
    Chapter 5 shows that this strategy can indeed work, if we show a different directed
Poincaré inequality, namely an (L2 , ℓ2 ) inequality (which is indeed more standard in the
                                                                              2 2
classical, undirected case). Specifically, we show that assuming a directed
                                                                          √ (L ,2 ℓ )-Poincaré
                                                                       e dM /ε2 ) queries.
inequality, monotonicity of M -Lipschitz functions can be tested using O(
Intuitively, note that directional derivative queries are inner products between a query
vector v and a (directed) gradient vector ∇− f (x), so it may not be entirely unexpected
that a guarantee in terms of ℓ2 geometry is better suited to proving bounds on such inner
products. The main task left to the rest of the thesis, then, is to prove such an (L2 , ℓ2 )
inequality.

Interlude: Directed isoperimetry on graphs via the heat equation. Our ap-
proach to proving the (L2 , ℓ2 ) inequality will be to analyze a certain dynamical system –

                                              11
the directed heat equation – and show that its convergence properties imply the desired
inequality. This idea draws from the original motivation of the Poincaré inequality itself,
which, as we already mentioned, arose from Poincaré’s work on partial differential equations
in mathematical physics [Poi90], including the classical heat equation. The novel aspect
of our approach, then, is to instantiate and study the appropriate directed analogues of
these classical connections. At a high level, we will study dynamical systems which take
an initial state f (our input function) and converge, over time, to an equilibrium state f ∗
which is monotone. Then, by characterizing the rate of convergence of this process, we may
place an upper bound on the distance between f and f ∗ in terms of an “energy functional”
which, it turns out, is precisely the right-hand side in our desired Poincaré inequality (1.1).
   However, before moving to the setting of nonlinear PDEs – whose rigorous study brings
about a host of technical considerations – we first study, in Chapter 6, a version of this
approach for discrete domains, with the goal of first showing a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
inequality for real-valued functions f : {0, 1}d → R defined on the Boolean cube.
    In fact, it is convenient and informative to consider the more general setting of directed
graphs. In this setting, the appropriate dynamical system is given by a directed version of
the classical Laplacian operator from spectral graph theory, whose study was initiated by
[Yos16] in the context of network analysis. We show that the dynamical system (heat flow)
generated by the directed Laplacian yields a directed Poincaré inequality for any directed
graph; this inequality is made quantitative by the dynamical spectral gap of the graph,
which characterizes the convergence rate of the dynamical system. Chapter 6 concludes by
exactly characterizing the dynamical spectral gap of the (directed) Boolean cube, which
implies the directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for that domain, and by showing a family
of reverse Poincaré inequalities quantifying the extent to which our directed isoperimetric
inequalities are tight.

Remark 1.3. In the manuscript [FF25], we combined the directed Poincaré inequalities
from Chapter 6 with an approximate version of the FKG inequality [FKG71] to obtain im-
proved bounds on the mixing time of random walks on monotone subsets of the hypercube.
That application falls outside the scope of this thesis, so we refer to [FF25] for details.


Part II: The continuous setting via PDEs and optimal transport. The final
Chapter 7 executes the plan outlined above to obtain a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality
                                  d
                                √ → R on the unit cube, and therefore a monotonicity tester
for Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]
for this setting using roughly d queries. The following two theorems summarize the main
results that follow from this chapter.


                                              12
Theorem 1.4 (Directed Poincaré inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such that, for all Lipschitz f : [0, 1]d → R,

                                distmono (f )2 ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥22 .
                                                             
                                     2                                                  (1.2)
                                                   √
Theorem 1.5 (Testing monotonicity with O(        e d) queries). There exists a nonadaptive,
directional derivative√L2 monotonicity tester for M -Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with
query complexity O(e dM 2 /ε2 ) and one-sided error.

    (In comparison with Theorem 1.2, we note that an L2 tester is also an L1 tester, because
L2 -distance over a probability space is larger than L1 -distance. See Chapter 2 for formal
definitions, and Chapter 5 for further discussion.)
    As mentioned above, the proof of Theorem 1.4 proceeds via the analysis of a dynamical
system which takes f into a monotone equilibrium f ∗ ; informally, we show that this process
convergences exponentially fast, which implies that the initial “energy” of f – namely the
right-hand side of (1.2) – yields an upper bound on the distance from f to f ∗ , and hence
on distmono
       2    (f ). However, the analysis of the continuous case is more intricate than in the
discrete setting of the Boolean cube from Chapter 6, as we outline next.
    The first step is to define and analyze a nonlinear PDE, the directed heat equation,
whose behaviour matches the description above. However, even in one dimension, the
nonlinear aspect of this process proves surprisingly resistant to standard arguments, and
showing basic results such as existence, uniqueness and regularity of solutions already re-
quires a number of targeted technical arguments. Therefore, we constrain our PDE analysis
to the one-dimensional case. We analyze the directed heat equation in the formalism of
gradient flows and maximal monotone operators [Bre73; AC84]. To handle the nonlinear
nature of our system, we introduce a canonical decomposition u = u↑ + u↓ of a function
u : [0, 1] → R into a nondecreasing u↑ and a nonincreasing u↓, which allows us to isolate
the phenomena we can control in u↓ (and in fact recover a bit of linearity), and deal with
the less well-behaved u↑ only when necessary.
    To promote the conclusions of this study to our multidimensional setting of interest,
we draw from another area of mathematics – optimal transport. At a high level, optimal
transport is concerned with the “cost” of transforming a source probability measure µ
into a target probability measure ν, both over an underlying metric space Ω, when we
measure cost as a combination of 1) how much probability mass is moved and 2) how
far each “particle” of mass moves in Ω. The connection to our PDE study is natural:
a PDE stipulates, at each moment in time, how mass must be flowing at each point in
the system. By tracking this flow over time, we recover an optimal transport picture

                                             13
of the directed heat equation; then, by sequentially applying our one-dimensional results
to each direction i = 1, 2, . . . , d in turn, we can reason – in optimal transport terms –
about the total distance travelled by each “particle” at the end of the entire process. This
study yields a Poincaré-type inequality that is indeed multidimensional, but which bounds
optimal transport distance as opposed to L2 distance. Fortunately, there exist relatively
standard analytical arguments to translate back and forth between these two flavours of
inequalities, and we conclude the proof of Theorem 1.4 by showing that the appropriate
directed analogue of such an argument does hold in our setting.


Conclusion. Finally, Chapter 8 concludes this thesis with some reflections on the results
obtained, concrete open questions suggested by our results, and broader directions for
future research.




                                            14
Chapter 2

Preliminaries

2.1      General notation
In this thesis, N denotes the set of strictly positive integers {1, 2, . . . }. Throughout this
thesis, d ∈ N denotes the dimension of the ambient space Rd unless otherwise specified.
For m ∈ N, we write [n] to denote the set {i ∈ N : i ≤ n}.
   For any x ∈ R, we write x+ for max{0, x} and x− for max{0, −x}, and we extend this
notation to vectors u ∈ Rd in the natural way: u+ , u− ∈ Rd are given by u+i := (ui )
                                                                                     +
       −       −
and ui := (ui ) . For real numbers a and b, we use the notation a ∧ b := min(a, b) and
a ∨ b := max(a, b).
   We write 1 [·] for the indicator function, which takes value in {0, 1}. We write ei for
the i-th basis vector, i.e. ei ∈ {0, 1}d satisfies ei (j) = 1 [i = j] for all j. Given a vector
u ∈ Rd and q ≥ 1, we write ∥u∥q for its ℓq -norm and |u| := ∥u∥2 for its Euclidean norm.
   For a vector u ∈ Rd , we let supp(u) ⊆ [d] denote the set of indices where u is non-zero,
and write ∥u∥0 := |supp(u)|.
    For two points x, y ∈ Rd , we write x ⪯ y if xi ≤ yi for every i ∈ [d], and y ⪰ x if
x ⪯ y. Given set Ω ⊂ Rd and function f : Ω → R, we say f is monotone if, for all x, y ∈ Ω
satisfying x ⪯ y, we have f (x) ≤ f (y).
                             ?
                                     ?
   We use the notation a ≤ b, a = b, etc. within a proof to denote (in)equalities that
have not yet been established. We write a ≲ b to denote that a ≤ c · b for some absolute
constant c > 0, and similarly for a ≳ b. We write a ≍ b to denote that a ≲ b and b ≲ a.


                                              15
2.2      Sets and measures
We denote the closure of a set D ⊂ Rd by D.
    We write dx for the “natural” measure for integration in a particular context, namely
the Lebesgue measure or discrete measure when we are working with continuous or discrete
domains, respectively, as follows. In continuous contexts, where Ω ⊂ Rd is a Lebesgue- R
measurable set (e.g. Ω = [0, 1]d ), and for Lebesgue integrable f : Ω → R, we write Ω f dx
for the Lebesgue integral of f over Ω. In discrete contexts,
                                                    R        where Ω ⊂ Zd is a finite set (e.g.
Ω = [n]d ), and for function f : Ω → R, we write Ω f dx := x∈Ω f (x). It will always be
                                                               P
clear from context whether we are working with the continuous or discrete setting. We will
occasionally employ similar notation with other variable names, such as dy or dt, which
should be understood in the same way.
   When we need to refer to the Lebesgue measure of a set Ω explicitly, we write L(Ω).
   Throughout this thesis, all measures on Rd are Borel measures. We say that measure
µ over Ω ⊂ Rd is absolutely continuous if it is absolutely continuous with respect to
the Lebesgue measure, i.e. if there exists a measurable function f : Ω → R≥0 satisfying
dµ = f dx. In this case, f is called the Radon-Nikodym derivative, or density of µ.


2.3      Lp spaces and Lipschitz functions
                                                                                R
For a measure space (Ω, Σ, µ) and measurable function f : Ω → R, we write Ω f dµ for the
Lebesgue integral of f over this space when this integral exists. Then for 1 ≤ p < +∞, the
space Lp (Ω, µ) is the setR of measurable   functions f such that |f |p is Lebesgue integrable
with respect to µ, i.e. Ω |f |p dµ < +∞, and we write the Lp norm of such functions as
               R          1/p
∥f ∥Lp (Ω,µ) = Ω |f |p dµ      . When µ is the Lebesgue or counting measure, we also shorten
this notation and simply write Lp (Ω).
    Let q ≥ 1, and let Ω ⊂ Rd be a set endowed with the ℓq distance metric (note that
Ω could be a discrete set). Given function f : Ω → R and parameter M > 0, we say f
is (ℓq , M )-Lipschitz, or M -Lipschitz with respect to the ℓq geometry if, for every x, y ∈ Ω,
we have |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ M ∥x − y∥q . We say that f is Lipschitz if it is (ℓq , M )-Lipschitz
for some choice of M (in which case this also holds for any other choice of geometry ℓq
and appropriate choice of M ′ ). When we are considering the standard ℓ2 (Euclidean)
geometry, we also omit q from the notation and simply say that f is M -Lipschitz (which
is the standard notion in the continuous setting).


                                              16
Remark 2.1. If p ≤ q and f is (ℓq , M )-Lipschitz, then f is also (ℓp , M )-Lipschitz.

Remark 2.2. If Ω ⊂ Rd is a bounded, convex open set, then every Lipschitz function
f : Ω → R is bounded, and hence Lebesgue integrable and in space Lp (Ω) for every p ≥ 1.
If Ω ⊂ Zd is a finite set, then every function f : Ω → R is Lipschitz.

  We also recall that Lipschitz functions over an open set are differentiable almost every-
where, i.e. outside of a set of measure zero:

Theorem 2.3 (Rademacher’s theorem). If Ω ⊂ Rd is an open set and f : Ω → R is
Lipschitz, then f is differentiable almost everywhere in Ω.


2.4       Distance to constant and monotonicity
Let Ω be either a bounded Lebesgue-measurable set endowed with Lebesgue measure, or
a finite discrete set endowed with the counting measure, and let ν denote the Lebesgue
or counting measure, respectively. Let µ be the probability measure on Ω obtained by
                                          ν(S)
rescaling the measure ν, that is, µ(S) := ν(Ω) for all measurable S ⊆ Ω. We call µ the
uniform measure over Ω.
     Given p ≥ 1 and a function f ∈ Lp (Ω), we define the Lp distance to monotonicity of f
as
              distmono (f ) := inf ∥f − g∥Lp (Ω,µ) : g ∈ Lp (Ω, µ) monotone ,
                                  
                   p
                                       1/p
                                            = E [|f (x) − g(x)|p ]1/p by definition. Similarly,
                         R
where ∥f − g∥Lp (Ω,µ) = Ω |f − g|p dµ
                                                 x∼µ
we define the Lp distance from f to a constant function by

               distconst (f ) := inf ∥f − g∥Lp (Ω,µ) : g ∈ Lp (Ω, µ) constant .
                                    
                   p




2.5       Directed partial derivatives and gradients
Continuous setting. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be an open set, and let f : Ω → R be Lipschitz. Then
by Rademacher’s theorem f is differentiable almost everywhere in Ω. For each x ∈ Ω where
f is differentiable, let ∇f (x) = (∂1 f (x), . . . , ∂d f (x)) denote its gradient, where ∂i f (x) is
the partial derivative of f along the i-th coordinate at x. Then, let ∂i− := 0 ∧ ∂i , i.e. for
every x where f is differentiable we have ∂i− f (x) = − (∂i f (x))− . We call ∂i− the directed

                                                 17
partial derivative operator in direction i. Then we define the directed gradient operator by
∇− := (∂1− , . . . , ∂d− ), again defined on every x where f is differentiable. Note that ∇− f ⪯ 0.
We also similarly define ∂i+ := 0 ∨ ∂i and ∇+             +            +
                                                   i := (∂1 , . . . , ∂d ).



Discrete setting. Now considering the hypergrid domains, let f : [n]d → R. Fix x ∈ [n]d
and i ∈ [d]. We then define the (discrete) partial derivative of f along the i-th coordinate
at x by ∂i f (x) := f (x + ei ) − f (x) if xi < n, and ∂i f (x) := 0 if xi = n. We then define its
discrete gradient by ∇ := (∂1 , . . . , ∂n ). Their directed counterparts are defined as above:
∂i− := min{0, ∂i } and ∇− := (∂1− , . . . , ∂n− ), and similarly for ∂i+ and ∇+ .


2.6      Monotonicity testing
Here, we define monotonicity testing of Lipschitz functions against the Lp distance, which
is the main problem studied in this thesis. Our definition follows the original definition of
Lp testing by [BRY14a], with the differences that 1) [BRY14a] focused on functions with
bounded range, whereas we focus on Lipschitz functions whose range can grow with the
dimension d; and 2) [BRY14a] focused on the discrete setting, whereas we will cover both
discrete and continuous settings (and focus on the latter).

Definition 2.4 (Monotonicity tester). Let p, q ≥ 1. Let Ω be either the unit cube [0, 1]d
(continuous setting) or the hypergrid [n]d for some n ∈ N (discrete setting). Given pa-
rameters M, ε > 0, we say a randomized algorithm A is an Lp monotonicity tester for
(ℓq , M )-Lipschitz functions with query complexity m = m(Ω, M, ε) if, for every (ℓq , M )-
Lipschitz input function f : Ω → R, algorithm A makes m oracle queries to f and 1) accepts
with probability at least 2/3 if f is monotone; 2) rejects with probability at least 2/3 if
distmono
     p   (f ) > ε.

    As stated in Chapter 1, oracle queries may be either value queries or directional deriva-
tive queries:

   Value query Given point x, this oracle outputs the value f (x).

   Directional derivative query Given point x and vector v ∈ Rd , this oracle outputs
   the derivative of f along v at point x, given by ∇v f (x) = v · ∇f (x), as long as f is
   differentiable at x. Otherwise, it outputs a special symbol ⊥.


                                                18
   A monotonicity tester is nonadaptive if it decides all its queries in advance before seeing
any output from the oracle; otherwise, it is adaptive. A monotonicity tester has one-sided
error if it accepts monotone functions with probability 1; otherwise, it has two-sided error.


2.7         Classical and directed Poincaré inequalities
Let Ω be either a bounded open subset of Rd endowed with Lebesgue measure, or the
hypergrid [n]d endowed with the counting measure. Let µ be the uniform measure over Ω.
   Given p, q ≥ 1, we say a (classical) (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequality is an inequality of the
form
                               distconst (f )p ≤ C E ∥∇f ∥pq
                                                             
                                   p

for all Lipschitz1 functions f : Ω → R. A directed (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequality is an
inequality of the form
                              distmono (f )p ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥pq
                                                            
                                  p

for all Lipschitz functions f : Ω → R.
    Note that the parameter p determines the order of integration, whereas q determines
the geometry in which we measure the norms of gradient vectors. These are orthogonal
concerns, and we may vary each parameter independently to obtain stronger, weaker, or
incomparable inequalities. In general, making q larger yields stronger inequalities for a
fixed p, while varying p yields incomparable inequalities for a fixed q.




  1
      Our results hold under a relaxed condition, but we state the Lipschitz condition here for simplicity.


                                                     19
Chapter 3

Prior work

In this chapter, we summarize the lines of research that are most closely related to the work
in this thesis. We start with an overview of the landscape of monotonicity testing; give
some background on classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities in continuous and
discrete domains; describe prior work on property testing with respect to Lp distances;
and conclude by outlining a closely related line of works on testing algebraic properties of
functions in the real-valued setting, and other recent work on testing properties of functions
in real-valued settings.


3.1      Monotonicity testing
We first summarize results on testing monotonicity with respect to the Hamming distance,
which is the most prevalent notion of distance in prior works in property testing. We also
point the reader to the recent thesis of Black [Bla23] as an excellent resource.


Boolean-valued functions. Goldreich et al. [GGLRS00] formally introduced the prob-
lem of monotonicity testing, and that work and the Master’s thesis [Ras99] gave testers for
functions on the hypergrid [n]d with query complexities O(d log(n)/ε) and O((d/ε)2 ); note
that the latter bound is independent of n, and the query complexity of testers with this
property was subsequently improved to O((d/ε) log2 (d/ε)) by Dodis et al. [DGLRRS99]
and to O((d/ε) log(d/ε)) by Berman, Raskhodnikova and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14a]. For
functions on the Boolean cube {0, 1}d , Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [CS16] gave the first
o(d) tester, subsequently improved by Chen, Servedio and Tan [CST14], culminating in

                                             20
       √
     e d/ε2 ) tester of Khot, Minzer and Safra [KMS18], which essentially resolved the
the O(
question for nonadaptive testers. Whether adaptivity helps in monotonicity testing is still
an open question; see the lower bounds below, and also work of Chakrabarty and Se-
shadhri [CS19] on a connection between the query complexity of monotonicity testing and
the total influence of the input function.
    Returning to hypergrid domains [n]d , Black, Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [BCS18; BCS20]
established first testers with o(d) query complexity and, via a domain reduction tech-
nique, also obtained o(d) testers for product distributions on Rd (and the alternative
proof of Harms and Yoshida [HY22] improves the number of samples drawn by the tester
when the distribution is unknown). Subsequent works of Black, Chakrabarty and Se-
shadhri [BCS23b] and Braverman et al. [BKKM23] attained the optimal     √ dependence on d
at the cost of a dependence on n, with upper bounds of the form O( d poly(n)). Most
                                                                      e
recently, Black, Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [BCS23a] gave a tester with query complexity
O(d1/2+o(1) /ε2 ), which is almost optimal for nonadaptive algorithms, and again extends to
product measures on Rd .

Real-valued functions. Ergün et al. [EKKRV98] gave a tester with query complexity
O(log(n)/ε) for real-valued functions on the line [n]; the tight query complexity of this
problem was more recently shown to be Θ(log(εn)/ε) by Belovs [Bel18]. As for functions on
the hypergrid [n]d , the early works on monotonicity testing [GGLRS00; DGLRRS99; Ras99]
also gave testers for larger ranges, but the query complexity depends on the size of the
range. Then, Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [CS13] gave a nonadaptive tester with one-sided
error and (optimal) query complexity O(n log(d)/ε). On the Booleancube,nBlack, Kalemaj
                                                                              √          o
and Raskhodnikova [BKR24] gave a tester with query complexity O    e min r d/ε2 , d/ε
for real-valued functions f with image size r, and showed that this is optimal (for constant
ε) for nonadaptive testers with one-sided error.

Lower bounds. We briefly summarize the known lower bounds for these problems; all
lower bounds listed are for testers with two-sided error unless noted otherwise. For Boolean
                                                                                     √
functions on the Boolean cube {0, 1}d , there is a near-optimal lower bound of Ω(  e d) for
nonadaptive testers by Chen, Waingarten and Xie [CWX17], which improves on a line of
prior results [FLNRRS02; CST14; CDST15]. For adaptive testers, Belovs and Blais [BB16]
gave the first polynomial lower bound of Ω(d  e 1/4 ), since improved to Ω(d
                                                                           e 1/3 ) by Chen,
Waingarten and Xie [CWX17].
   Turning to real-valued functions, Fischer [Fis04] combined Ramsey theory arguments
with a result of Ergün et al. [EKKRV98] to show a Ω(log n) lower bound for adaptive testers

                                            21
on the line [n]. On the Boolean cube, Briët et al. [BCGM12] gave a Ω(d/ε) nonadaptive one-
sided lower bound, and Blais, Brody and Matulef [BBM12] gave an adaptive lower bound
of Ω(d). On the hypergrid, Blais, Raskhodnikova and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14b] gave a non-
adaptive lower bound of Ω(d log n) by communication complexity arguments, Chakrabarty
and Seshadhri [CS14] showed the optimal lower bound of Ω(d log(n)/ε − log(1/ε)/ε) for
adaptive testers using Ramsey theory (which involves functions with large range), and
Belovs[Bel18] gave an alternative proof of this bound that does not use Ramsey theory.


Other settings and models of testing. This thesis focuses on monotonicity testing
with respect to the uniform distribution over product domains (the Boolean cube, hyper-
grids, and the solid unit cube), when the algorithm is allowed to query the input function
at arbitrary points. Each of these conditions may be altered to obtain different, usually
more challenging settings. While we refrain from a full review here, we give some pointers
to the literature. If we drop the assumption that the distribution over the input domain is
uniform, but rather allow it to be an arbitrary unknown distribution D to which the algo-
rithm gets sample access, we obtain the challenging distribution-free testing setting, which
was defined in the early work of [GGR98] and directly studied by Halevy and Kushile-
vitz [HK07], who already showed that monotonicity testing requires exp(Θ(d)) queries in
this setting. We may instead keep the uniform distribution but require that our access to
the input f come from uniformly sampled points x only, rather than arbitrary points x.
This setting is called sample-based testing [GR16], and in this case, the number of samples
required is again known to be exponential in Θ(d) [GGLRS00; Bla24]. Finally, early work
[FLNRRS02] studied the challenging setting where the domain of f is a general partially-
ordered set, and recent work on proper learning of monotone functions has also obtained
progress in this setting [LRV22; LV23].


3.2         Classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities
The central object of study of this thesis is the connection between monotonicity and
directed analogues of classical isoperimetric inequalities. Let us trace here an extremely
brief history of developments that are most relevant to our study. We start with the
original work of Poincaré [Poi90], which yields inequalities of the type ∥f − E [f ] ∥Lp (Ω) ≤
C(Ω)∥|∇f |∥Lp (Ω) , i.e. (Lp , ℓ2 )-inequalities in our notation, for sufficiently smooth domains
Ω and sufficiently integrable1 functions f . The optimal constant C(Ω), also called the
  1
      More precisely, for f in the appropriate Sobolev space.


                                                     22
Poincaré constant of Ω, depends on properties of this domain2, and often the goal is to
establish the sharp constant for families of domains Ω. Payne and Weinberger [PW57] and
Acosta and Durán [AD04] (see also [Beb03]) showed that, for convex domains in the cases
p = 2 and p = 1 respectively, C(Ω) is essentially upper bounded by the diameter of Ω,
and this bound is tight in general. However, for specific structured domains such as the
product domain [0, 1]d , the diameter characterization falls short of yielding a dimension-free
inequality (see also the literature on logarithmic Sobolev inequalities [Gro75]).
    Making progress on this front in the discrete setting, the landmark work of Talagrand
[Tal93] gave an (L1 , ℓ2 )-inequality for domain Ω = {0, 1}d , with C = C(Ω) independent of
d, and established connections with earlier works of Margulis on graph connectivity [Mar74]
and Pisier on probability in Banach spaces [Pis86]. (More recently, Fourier-analytic proofs
of Talagrand’s inequality have also been given [KKKMS21; EKLM24].) In continuous set-
tings, similar results were first established for the Gaussian measure in connection with
the Gaussian isoperimetric inequality [Bob97; BL96; ST78; Bor75; Lat03]. Tying back
to our present settings of interest, Bobkov and Houdré [BH97] showed that a dimension-
independent Poincaré inequality also holds for product measures in Rn , implying in par-
ticular an (L1 , ℓ2 )-inequality (analogously to Talagrand’s result) for domain [0, 1]d .
    As outlined in Chapter 1, it is these dimension-free isoperimetric inequalities for dis-
crete and continuous product measures whose directed analogues have implications for the
structure of monotone functions and therefore for monotonicity testing. This connection
was first explicitly observed by Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [CS16], who obtained the first
o(d) query tester for monotonicity of functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1} by showing a directed
analogue of the Margulis inequality for such functions. That inequality is similar to the
Poincaré inequalities we have discussed so far, but its guarantee is a combination of an
“edge boundary size” and a “vertex boundary size”, as follows. For each vertex x, write3
Γf (x) := 1 [∇− f (x) ̸= 0]. Chakrabarty and Seshadhri showed that, for Boolean functions
f , we have                                      − 2
                             distmono
                                 2    (f )2
                                            ≲ E  ∥∇ f ∥2 · E [Γf (x)] .                 (3.1)
                                                                      √ 2
Later on, Khot, Minzer and Safra [KMS18] obtained their O(         e d/ε ) tester for Boolean
                                           1 2
functions by showing the directed (L , ℓ )-Poincaré inequality (up to a logarithmic factor,
   2
     For example, it is characterized by the first nontrivial eigenvalue of the Laplacian operator on smooth
bounded Ω. There are additional considerations relating the assumptions made of f on the boundary
∂Ω and the (Dirichlet or Neumann) boundary conditions associated with the Laplacian; see [KN15] for a
survey.
   3
     We could in fact make this stronger by assigning Γf (x) = 0 whenever f (x) = 0, but we omit this detail
for simplicity. See also the remark below on robust inequalities.



                                                    23
which was later removed by Pallavoor, Raskhodnikova and Waingarten [PRW22])

                             distmono (f ) ≲ E ∥∇− f ∥2 .
                                                      
                                 2                                                           (3.2)

By writing ∥∇− f (x)∥2 = ∥∇− f (x)∥2 · Γf (x) and applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
we see that (3.2) implies (3.1).
   Recent work [BCS23b; BKKM23; BKR24] has also explored close analogues of these
inequalities to tackle the problems of testing monotonicity of Boolean functions on the hy-
pergrid and real-valued functions on the Boolean cube (with respect to Hamming distance),
as we now briefly summarize.
   Define the vector-valued operators ϕ and ϕ− on functions f : [n]d → R as follows: for
each x ∈ [n]d and i ∈ [d],

          (ϕf (x))i := 1 [∃y : (x ⪯i y or y ⪯i x) and f (x) ̸= f (y)] ,
         (ϕ− f (x))i := 1 [(∃y : x ⪯i y, f (x) > f (y)) or (∃y : y ⪯i x, f (y) > f (x))] ,

where we write x ⪯i y if xj = yj for every j ̸= i, and xi ≤ yi . Compared to the
gradient, these operators 1) are only sensitive to the order relation between function values
(which suits the setting of Hamming testing); and 2) capture “long range” violations
of monotonicity (accordingly, the corresponding hypergrid testers are not edge testers).
Then, Poincaré-type inequalities where the gradient ∇ is replaced with ϕ (and similarly
for their directed counterparts) were given by Black, Chakrabarty and Seshadhri [BCS23b]
and Braverman et al. [BKKM23] for Boolean functions on the hypergrid, and by Black,
Kalemaj and Raskhodnikova [BKR24] for real-valued functions on the Boolean cube; and
these works gave monotonicity testers in the respective settings.
    One important aspect omitted in the discussion above is the notion of robustness for
isoperimetric inequalities in discrete settings, introduced by Khot, Minzer and Safra [KMS18]
and subsequently featuring in most other monotonicity testing results as well. At a high
level, the idea is that a directed isoperimetric inequality can be used to obtain an efficient
monotonicity tester by establishing the existence of a “good subgraph” of violating edges,
which is a generalization of a matching. However, even under a directed Poincaré inequal-
ity, it could informally be the case that a few vertices are responsible for many violating
edges, which seems insufficient to yield the existence of such a good subgraph (indeed, a
similar difficulty was already tackled in [CS16]). The idea of robustness, then, is to assign
each edge (x, y) a colour, red or blue, and then break up the directed gradient ∇− into two
components – a “red component” ∇−       red , which counts red edges but only at the vertices x
with f (x) = 1, and a “blue component” ∇−        blue , which counts blue edges but only at the


                                                24
                                           Setting                     Discrete                       Continuous

Inequality                                             {0, 1}d → {0, 1}         {0, 1}d → R            [0, 1]d → R
                         dconst
                          1     (f ) ≲ E [∥∇f ∥1 ]        * [Tal93]               * [Tal93]             * [BH97]
 (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré
                        dmono
                         1    (f ) ≲ E [∥∇− f ∥1 ]       [GGLRS00]             Theorem 4.2            Theorem 4.1
                         dconst
                          1     (f ) ≲ E [∥∇f ∥2 ]        * [Tal93]               [Tal93]                [BH97]
 (L1 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
                        dmono
                         1    (f ) ≲ E [∥∇− f ∥2 ]     [KMS18; PRW22]           [CCRSW25]            Conjecture 4.43
                         dconst (f )2 ≲ E ∥∇f ∥22
                                                 
                          2                                   *            Classical, see [O’D14]   Classical [Poi90]
 (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
                        dmono (f )2 ≲ E ∥∇− f ∥22
                                                  
                         2                               [GGLRS00]             Theorem 6.25           Theorem 7.1

      Related            dmono
                          H    (f ) ≲ E [∥ϕ− f ∥2 ]                    For f : {0, 1}d → R [BKR24]
    inequalities         dmono (f ) ≲ E [∥ϕ− f ∥2 ]               For f : [n]d → {0, 1} [BCS23b; BKKM23]
                          H



Table 3.1: Classical and directed isoperimetric inequalities on discrete and continuous
domains. Cells marked with * indicate inequalities that follow from another entry in the
table. For simplicity, logarithmic factors in the inequalities are ignored. We write d for
dist, and write dH to denote relative Hamming distance.

vertices y with f (y) = 0. A robust inequality holds if E ∥∇−
                                                                          −      
                                                                red ∥2 + E ∥∇blue ∥2 is large
for every colouring of the edges, and this yields the desired stronger structural guarantees.
We refer to [KMS18] for further details on robust isoperimetric inequalities.
    Finally, in a recent development subsequent to the work in this thesis, Chakrabarty et
al. [CCRSW25] extended the (L1 , ℓ2 )-inequality of Khot, Minzer and Safra [KMS18] from
Boolean-valued functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1} to all real-valued functions f : {0, 1}d → R,
using a thresholding argument of Berman, Raskhodnikova and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14a].
This answered (up to a logarithmic factor) a question left open by the work of Chap-
ter 4 [Fer23]. The authors used this inequality to establish an exciting new connection to
monotonicity testing of probability distributions, rather than functions, in a certain “sub-
cube conditioning” sampling model.
    Table 3.1 summarizes the situation described in this section by showing, for each of the
settings discussed above, the best-known classical and directed Poincaré-type inequalities,
including the results given in this thesis.




                                                           25
3.3     Lp testing
We have mentioned that the analytic setting of property testing, which we study in this the-
sis, departs from most previously-studied settings by making two complementary choices:
1) the input functions have real-valued domain and range; and 2) we measure distance with
respect to the Lp distance, rather than Hamming distance. The latter choice puts us in the
field of “Lp testing”, which was first systematically investigated by Berman, Raskhodnikova
and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14a]. We briefly summarize that work here, and then discuss the
connection with our results in more detail in Chapter 4.
   In [BRY14a], the authors initiated the systematic study of Lp testing of real-valued
functions defined on hypergrid domains, i.e. f : [n]d → R. Some type of regularity must be
assumed if one wishes to perform Lp testing of real-valued functions, and in [BRY14a] the
authors assumed that f has bounded range: their results are stated for functions taking
values in [0, 1], and other ranges [0, r] may be handled by appropriately rescaling both
the input function f and the parameter ε. They studied the properties of monotonicity,
Lipschitzness, convexity and submodularity.
     For monotonicity specifically, the authors gave nonadaptive Lp monotonicity testers
with one-sided error on the hypergrid [n]d with query complexity O((d/εp ) log(d/εp ))—
note this is independent of n, bypassing the Hamming testing lower bound—and a lower
bound of Ω((1/εp ) log(1/εp )) for nonadaptive testers with one-sided error; on the line [n],
they showed there is an O(1/εp ) nonadaptive tester with one-sided error and a matching
lower bound for adaptive testers with two-sided error. They also gave a reduction, based
on a thresholding argument, from L1 monotonicity testing to Hamming testing of Boolean
functions for nonadaptive one-sided testers, so in particular L1 testing functions with range
[0, 1] is no harder than Hamming testing functions with Boolean range. Finally, they stud-
ied the problem of approximating the L1 distance of f to monotonicity (i.e. the tolerant
testing framework of Parnas, Ron and Rubinfeld [PRR06]), and gave approximation al-
gorithms up to additive error δ with poly(1/δ) query complexity for the line (d = 1) and
two-dimensional grid (d = 2).


Parameterized testing. We also remark that our problem, which is parameterized by
the upper bound M on the Lipschitz constant of input functions, lies under the umbrella
of parameterized property testing, formally introduced by Pallavoor, Raskhodnikova and
Varma [PRV17], and refer to [PRV17] for an introduction to, and results on this type of
tester.



                                             26
3.4       Algebraic property testing over the reals
Another recent line of research [FY20; ABFKY23; AKM25], which is closely related to
the topic of this thesis, has revisited classic problems from algebraic property testing in
the fully real-valued setting: given query access to a function f : Rd → R, the goal is to
test whether f satisfies is a property such as linearity, or being a low-degree multivariate
polynomial.
     Specifically, Fleming and Yoshida [FY20] initiated this line of investigation by giv-
ing a linearity tester for functions f : Rd → R using O(1/ε)
                                                         e       queries. Then, Arora et
al. [ABFKY23] obtained a tester for degree-k functions using poly(k/ε) queries, and Arora,
Kelman and Meir [AKM25] simplified some of the techniques from the previous works while
eliminating logarithmic factors from the query complexity.
    The main difference between those works and ours lies in the notion of distance in the
formulation of the problem: the works [FY20; ABFKY23; AKM25] considered Hamming
distance with respect to an underlying distribution D over Rd , that is, the distance between
two functions f, g : Rd → R is
                                   dist(f, g) = P [f (x) ̸= g(x)] .
                                                 x∼D

In fact, those works studied the distribution-free testing setting studied by Halevy and
Kushilevitz [HK07], where the distribution D with respect to which distances are measured
is an unknown input, to which the algorithm only has sample access. Building upon the
“self-correct and test” approach of Halevy and Kushilevitz, they augmented central ideas
from algebraic property testing with a host of arguments and tools to handle the challenges
of the real-valued setting.
     In contrast, in this thesis we build upon earlier work of Berman, Raskhodnikova and
Yaroslavtsev [BRY14a] and measure distance according to the Lp norm, which contem-
plates not only whether functions f and g disagree at a point x, but also by how much.
While we make this choice primarily for conceptual reasons – Lp testing is a natural compu-
tational task – it is also interesting to observe the technical ramifications of such a choice:
Hamming testing and Lp testing seem to call for different mathematical tools that reveal
different aspects of our problems of interest, with Hamming distance being a more natural
fit for combinatorial and algebraic arguments, and Lp distance showing better affinity with
analytic arguments.4
   4
    Nevertheless, in Chapter 4 we will also see that the Lipschitz condition provides a bridge of sorts
between these two scenarios, indeed leading to a nearly-tight characterization of the query complexity of
L1 monotonicity testing on the line, by a reduction to the classic problem of testing sortedness [EKKRV98].


                                                    27
3.5     Testing properties of parametric models
Motivated by linear regression and sparse recovery, [CDS20] studied the problem of deciding
whether a noisy linear model y = w · x + η is k-sparse, meaning that the unknown weight
vector w ∈ Rd is supported on at most k elements, or whether w is ε-far from every k-
sparse vector in normalized ℓ2 distance. The algorithm receives samples (x, y = w · x + η),
where x is distributed according to a fixed product distribution D = X d and the noise η
is sampled independently at random from a fixed distribution, and must make its decision
using only these samples (rather than arbitrary queries). The main result of [CDS20] is
an algorithm whose sample complexity depends only on the one-dimensional marginal X
of D and on the distribution of the noise η, but not on d.
    The main similarity between the work of [CDS20] and this thesis is that [CDS20] also
applied the framework of property testing in a fully real-valued setting, i.e. the “noisy
function” x ∈ Rd 7→ w · x + η ∈ R. Since the input is assumed to come from a linear
model with added noise, we may see their result as an application of property testing to
a parametric setting in the language of statistics. Accordingly, their notion of distance for
testing is defined in terms of the parameter vector w ∈ Rd . In contrast, in this thesis we
apply property testing to Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with no parametric specifi-
cation, and in this setting the natural notion of distance is in terms of the outputs of f
instead. One interesting connection between these two settings is that, in certain para-
metric situations, the Lipschitz condition assumed in our work could be derived a priori or
otherwise approximately tested by using the model specification.




                                             28
Part I: Monotonicity testing in the
         analytic setting




                 29
Chapter 4

Testing with O(d) queries via
rearrangements

In this chapter, we begin our investigation of directed (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequalities by
studying the (L1 , ℓ1 ) setting, which we use to derive upper bounds for L1 monotonicity
testing of Lipschitz functions defined on the hypergrid [n]d and solid unit cube [0, 1]d .
The main results in this chapter are a directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality for Lipschitz
functions f : [0, 1]d → R (Theorem 4.1), and an L1 monotonicity tester for M -Lipschitz
functions f : [0, 1]d → R using O(dM/ε) queries (Theorem 4.3). We also give lower bounds
for these problems, derive tighter results for the special case of the discrete and continuous
lines (i.e. d = 1), and compare our results to what can be derived from prior work on Lp
testing by Berman, Raskhodnikova and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14a].


4.1      Results and main ideas

4.1.1     Directed Poincaré-type inequalities
Our first result is a directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality for Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d →
R. This result may be seen as a continuous analogue of Theorem 1.1, which says that
Boolean functions which are far from monotone have many violating edges. Indeed, our
argument is inspired by the proof in [Ras99; GGLRS00], and the monotonicity tester we
will obtain from our inequality is a continuous analogue of the O(d) monotonicity tester
for Boolean functions.

                                                30
Theorem 4.1. Let f : [0, 1]d → R be a Lipschitz function with monotone rearrangement
f ∗ . Then
                      distmono (f ) ≍ E [|f − f ∗ |] ≲ E ∥∇− f ∥1 .
                                                                
                          1                                                     (4.1)

    As hinted in the statement, a crucial tool for this result is the monotone rearrangement
f ∗ of f . We construct f ∗ by a sequence of axis-aligned rearrangements R1 , . . . , Rn ; each Ri
is the non-symmetric monotone rearrangement operator along dimension i, which naturally
generalizes the sorting operator of [GGLRS00] to the continuous case. For each coordinate
i ∈ [d], the operator Ri takes f into an equimeasurable function Ri f that     is  monotone    in
                                                                                 −
                                                                                      
the i-th coordinate, at a “cost” E [|f − Ri f |] that is upper bounded by E |∂i f | . We show
that each application Ri can only decrease the “cost” associated with further applications
Rj , so that the total cost of obtaining f ∗ (i.e. the middle expression in (4.1)) may be upper
bounded, via the triangle inequality, by the sum of all directed partial derivatives, i.e. the
right-hand side of (4.1).
   A technically simpler version of this argument also yields a directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré
inequality for real-valued functions on the hypergrid. We also note that Theorems 4.1
and 4.2 are both tight up to constant factors.

Theorem 4.2. Let f : [n]d → R and let f ∗ be its monotone rearrangement. Then

                     distmono (f ) ≍ E [|f − f ∗ |] ≲ nE ∥∇− f ∥1 .
                                                                
                         1


    Table 3.1 in Chapter 3 shows these two results in the broader context of classical and
directed isoperimetric inequalities for continuous and discrete settings.


4.1.2     Testing monotonicity on the unit cube and hypergrid
Equipped with the results above, we give a monotonicity tester for Lipschitz functions
f : [0, 1]d → R, and the same technique yields a tester for functions on the hypergrid as
well. The testers are parameterized by an upper bound M on the Lipschitz constant of f
with respect to the ℓ1 geometry, in the terminology from Chapter 2.
   Both of our testers are partial derivative testers. These are algorithms which only have
access to a directional derivative oracle and, moreover, their queries are promised to be
axis-aligned vectors. In the discrete case, these are usually called edge testers [GGLRS00;
CS13].



                                               31
Theorem 4.3. There is a nonadaptive partial derivative L1 monotonicity tester for (ℓ1 , M )-
Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with query complexity O dM
                                                               
                                                             ε
                                                                 and one-sided error.
   Similarly, there is a nonadaptive partial derivative L1 monotonicity tester for (ℓ1 , M )-
Lipschitz functions f : [n]d with query complexity O dnMε
                                                             and one-sided error.

    The testers work by sampling points x and coordinates i ∈ [d] uniformly at random,
and using directional derivative queries to reject if ∂i− f (x) < 0. Their correctness is shown
using Theorems 4.1 and 4.2, which imply that, when f is ε-far from monotone in L1 -
distance, the total magnitude of its negative partial derivatives must be large—and since
each partial derivative is at most M by assumption, the values ∂i− f (x) must be strictly
negative in a set of large measure, which the tester stands good chance of hitting with the
given query complexity.


4.1.3     Testing monotonicity on the line
The results above, linking a directed Poincaré inequality with a monotonicity tester that
uses partial derivative queries and has linear dependence on d, paint a close parallel between
our analytic setting and the case of the edge tester on the Boolean cube [GGLRS00]. On the
other hand, we also show a strong separation between Hamming and L1 testing. Focusing
on the simpler problem of monotonicity testing on the line, we show that the tight query
complexity of L1 monotonicity testing Lipschitz functions grows with the square root of
the size of the (continuous or discrete) domain.

Theorem 4.4. There exist nonadaptive L1 monotonicitytesters for
                                                               M -Lipschitz functions
                                                       p
f : [0, n] → R and f : [n] → R with query complexity O
                                                     e  nM/ε . The testers use value
queries and have one-sided error.

   This result (along with the near-tight lower bounds in Section 4.1.4) stands in contrast
with the case of Hamming testing functions f : [n] → R, which has sample complexity
Θ(log n) [EKKRV98; Fis04; BRY14b; Bel18]. Intuitively, this difference arises because an
M -Lipschitz function may violate monotonicity with rate of change M , so the area under
the curve may grow quadratically in violating regions. The proof is in fact a reduction to
the Hamming case, using the Lipschitz assumption to establish a connection between the
L1 and Hamming distances to monotonicity.




                                              32
4.1.4       Lower bounds
We give two types of lower bounds: under no assumptions about the tester and for constant
d, we show that the dependence of Theorem 4.3 on M/ε is close to optimal1. We give
stronger bounds for the special case of partial derivative testers (such as the ones from
Theorem 4.3), essentially showing that our analysis of the partial derivative tester is tight.
      We first state our general lower bound for constant dimension d.

Theorem 4.5. Let d be a constant. Any L1 monotonicity tester (with two-sided error,
and adaptive value and directional
                                  derivative
                                             queries) for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f :
                                       d
[0, 1]d → R requires at least Ω (M/ε) d+1 queries.

    Similarly, any L1 monotonicity tester (with two-sided errornand adaptive queries)
                                                                                 o     for
                                                                         d
  1                                 d                                          d
(ℓ , M )-Lipschitz functions f : [n] → R requires at least Ω min (nM/ε) d+1 , n     queries.

   Note that the bounds above cannot be improved beyond logarithmic factors, because
they nearly attain the upper bounds for the line from Theorem 4.4. It also follows that
adaptivity (essentially) does not help with L1 monotonicity testing on the line, matching
the situation for Hamming testing [Fis04; CS14; Bel18].
    Theorem 4.5 is obtained via a “hole” construction, which hides a non-monotone region
of f inside an ℓ1 -ball B of radius r. We choose r such the violations of monotonicity inside
B are large enough to make f ε-far from monotone, but at the same time, the ball B is
hard to find using few queries. However, this construction has poor dependence on d.
    To lower bound the query complexity of partial derivative testers with better depen-
dence on d, we employ a simpler “step” construction, which essentially chooses a coordinate
i and hides a small negative-slope region on every line along coordinate i. These functions
are far from monotone, but a partial derivative tester must correctly guess both i and
the negative-slope region to detect them. We conclude that Theorem 4.3 is optimal for
partial derivative testers on the unit cube, and optimal for edge testers on the hypergrid
for constant ε and M .

Theorem 4.6. Any partial derivative L1 monotonicity tester for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz func-
tions f : [0, 1]d → R (with two-sided error and adaptive queries) requires at least Ω(dM/ε)
queries.
  1
    Note that one may always multiply the input values by 1/M to reduce the problem to the case with
Lipschitz constant 1 and proximity parameter ε/M , so this is the right ratio to look at.


                                                33
                   Hamming testing                      L1 -testing (prior works)        L1 -testing (this work)
 Domain
                      f :Ω→R                             f is (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz         f is (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz
                                                                
                                                         e d2 M (*) [BRY14a]                        dM
                                                                                                         
                                                         O     ε
                                                                                                O   p.d.t.
                                                                                                     ε

 Ω = [0, 1]d                Infeasible                                                         d
                                                                                                  
                                                                                          Ω Mε d+1 const. d
                                                                          —
                                                                                            Ω dM
                                                                                                  
                                                                                               ε
                                                                                                    p.d.t.
                                                             2       
                            d log n                          d nM                                   dnM
                                                                                                         
                       O       ε
                                          [CS13]        O
                                                        e
                                                               ε
                                                                          (*) [BRY14a]       O       p.d.t.
                                                                                                      ε

  Ω = [n]d                                                                                       d
                                                                                                   
                                                                                         Ω nM
                                                            M
                                                                                              d+1
                   
                       d log(n)−log(1/ε)
                                                       Ω
                                                        e
                                                            ε
                                                                    n.a. 1-s. [BRY14a]      ε
                                                                                                      const. d
               Ω               ε
                                               [CS14]
                                                        Ω(d log n) n.a. [BRY14b]                Ω(dn) p.d.t.

Table 4.1: Query complexity bounds for testing monotonicity on the unit cube and hyper-
grid. Upper bounds are for nonadaptive (n.a.) algorithms with one-sided error (1-s.), and
lower bounds are for adaptive algorithms with two-sided error, unless stated otherwise. For
L1 -testing, the upper bounds derived from prior works (*) are specialized to the Lipschitz
case by us; see the text for details. Our lower bounds hold either for constant (const.) d,
or for partial derivative testers (p.d.t.).

    For sufficiently small constant ε and constant M , any partial derivative L1 monotonicity
tester for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f : [m]n → R (with two-sided error and adaptive
queries) requires at least Ω(dn) queries.

   Table 4.1 summarizes our upper and lower bounds for testing monotonicity on the unit
cube and hypergrid, along with the analogous Hamming testing results for intuition and
bounds for L1 testing from prior works. See Section 4.6 for a comparison of our upper
bounds and those given in [BRY14a] for L1 testing of monotonicity, and an explanation of
how we derive the upper bounds shown in the table from their results (which are stated
under incomparable assumptions, namely bounded range instead of Lipschitz continuity).
We sketch in Appendix A how to obtain the Ω(d log n) nonadaptive lower bound shown in
the table via the construction of Blais, Raskhodnikova and Yaroslavtsev [BRY14b] for the
Hamming setting.


Organization. The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 4.2, we prove
our directed Poincaré inequalities on the unit cube (Theorem 4.1) and hypergrid (Theo-

                                                            34
rem 4.2), and in Section 4.3 we give our L1 monotonicity testers for these domains (Theo-
rem 4.3). Section 4.4 gives the upper bound for testing functions on the line (Theorem 4.4),
and in Section 4.5 we prove our lower bounds (Theorems 4.5 and 4.6). In Section 4.6, we
discuss the relation between our results and those from prior work on Lp testing [BRY14a]
and sketch the upper bounds shown in Table 4.1 derived from their results. Section 4.7
concludes this chapter with a brief discussion of the results and some open questions.


4.2      Directed Poincaré inequalities
In this section, we establish Theorems 4.1 and 4.2. We start with the one-dimensional case,
i.e. functions on the line, and then generalize to higher dimensions. In each subsection, we
focus our presentation on the setting where the domain is continuous (corresponding to our
results for the unit cube), and then show how the same proof strategy (more easily) yields
analogous results for discrete domains (corresponding to our results for the hypergrid).


4.2.1     One-dimensional case
Let n > 0, let I := (0, n), and let f : I → R be a measurable function. We wish to show
that ∥f − f ∗ ∥L1 (I) ≲ n ∥∂ − f ∥L1 (I) , where f ∗ is the monotone rearrangement of f . We first
introduce the monotone rearrangement, and then show this inequality using an elementary
calculus argument.


Monotone rearrangement

Here, we introduce the (non-symmetric, non-decreasing) monotone rearrangement of a one-
dimensional function. We follow the definition of [Kaw85], with the slight modification
that we are interested in the non-decreasing rearrangement, whereas most of the literature
usually favours the non-increasing rearrangement. The difference is purely syntactic, and
our choice more conveniently matches the convention in the monotonicity testing literature.
Up to this choice, our definition also agrees with that of [BS88, Chapter 2], and we refer
the reader to these two texts for a comprehensive treatment.
   We define the (lower) level sets of f : I → R as the sets
                                       
                                 I c := x ∈ I : f (x) ≤ c


                                               35
for all c ∈ R. For nonempty measurable S ⊂ R of finite measure, the rearrangement of S
is the set
                                   S ∗ := [0, L(S)]
(recall that L denotes the Lebesgue measure), and we define ∅∗ := ∅. For a level set I c , we
        ∗              ∗
write I c to mean I c .

Definition 4.7. The monotone rearrangement of f is the function f ∗ : I → R given by
                                      n              ∗
                                                       o
                           ∗
                          f (x) := inf c ∈ R : x ∈ I c .                          (4.2)

   Note that f ∗ is always a non-decreasing function.
    We note two well-known properties of the monotone rearrangement: equimeasurability
and order preservation. Two functions f, g are called equimeasurable if L{f ≥ c} = L{g ≥
c} for every c ∈ R. A mapping u 7→ u∗ is called order preserving if f (x) ≤ g(x) for all
x ∈ I implies f ∗ (x) ≤ g ∗ (x) for all x ∈ I. See [BS88, Chapter 2, Proposition 1.7] for a
proof of the following facts.

Fact 4.8. Let f : I → R be a measurable function. Then f and f ∗ are equimeasurable.

Fact 4.9. The mapping f 7→ f ∗ is order preserving.


Absolutely continuous functions and the one-dimensional Poincaré inequality

Let f : I → R be absolutely continuous. It follows that f has a derivative ∂f almost
everywhere (i.e. outside a set of measure zero), ∂f ∈ L1 (I) (i.e. its derivative is Lebesgue
integrable), and                               Z          x
                                   f (x) = f (0) +            ∂f (t) dt
                                                      0

for all x ∈ I. It also follows that ∂ − f ∈ L1 (I).
   We may now show our one-dimensional inequality.

Lemma 4.10. Let f : I → R be absolutely continuous. Then ∥f − f ∗ ∥L1 (I) ≤ 2n ∥∂ − f ∥L1 (I) .

Proof. Let S := x ∈ I : f ∗ (x) > f (x) , and note that S is a measurable set because
                  

f, f ∗ are measurable functions (the latter by Fact 4.8). Moreover, since f and f ∗ are


                                                36
equimeasurable (by the same result), we have f dx = f ∗ dx and therefore
                                              R         R

                  Z              Z                Z
        ∗                ∗            ∗
  ∥f − f ∥L1 (I) = |f − f | dx = (f − f ) dx +         (f − f ∗ ) dx
                   I              S                I\S
                  Z              Z                 Z                 Z
                      ∗
                 = (f − f ) dx +      (f − f ) dx − (f − f ) dx = 2 (f ∗ − f ) dx .
                                            ∗                 ∗
                     S                      I                  S                 S

Hence our goal is to show that
                             Z
                                      (f ∗ − f ) dx ≤ n ∂ − f L1 (I) .
                                  S

Let x ∈ I. We claim that there exists x′ ∈ [0, x] such that f (x′ ) ≥ f ∗ (x). Suppose this is
not the case. Then since f is continuous on [0, x], by the extreme value theorem it attains
its maximum and therefore    there exists c < f ∗ (x) such that f (y) ≤ c for all y ∈ [0, x]. Thus
                                             ∗
[0, x] ⊆ I c , so L I c ≥ x and hence x ∈ I c . Then, by Definition 4.7, f ∗ (x) ≤ c < f ∗ (x), a
                       

contradiction. Thus the claim is proved.
   Now, let x ∈ S and fix some x′ ∈ [0, x] such that f (x′ ) ≥ f ∗ (x). Since f is absolutely
continuous, we have
                                         Z x               Z n
       ∗                  ′
      f (x) − f (x) ≤ f (x ) − f (x) = −     ∂f (t) dt ≤ −     ∂ − f (t) dt = ∂ − f L1 (I) .
                                                x′                 0

The result follows by applying this estimate to all x:
          Z                Z
               ∗
             (f − f ) dx ≤     ∂ − f L1 (I) dx = L(S) ∂ − f L1 (I) ≤ n ∂ − f L1 (I) .
            S                 S



Discrete case

Let n ∈ N and let I := [n]. We may define the monotone rearrangement f ∗ : I → R of
f : I → R as in Definition 4.7 by identifying I with I and writing S ∗ := [|S|] for each
finite S ⊂ N. More directly, f ∗ is the function such that f ∗ (1) ≤ f ∗ (2) ≤ · · · ≤ f ∗ (n) is
the sorted sequence of the values f (1), f (2), . . . , f (n). It is easy to show that the directed
version of Lemma 4.10 holds, and in fact one may simply repeat the proof of that lemma.

Lemma 4.11. Let f : [n] → R. Then ∥f − f ∗ ∥L1 (I) ≤ 2n ∥∂ − f ∥L1 (I) .



                                                     37
4.2.2      Multidimensional case
In the continuous case, we ultimately only require an inequality on the unit cube [0, 1]n .
However, we will first work in slightly more generality and consider functions defined on a
box in Rd , defined below. This approach makes some of the steps more transparent, and
also gives intuition for the discrete case of the hypergrid.

Definition 4.12. Let a ∈ Rd>0 . The box of size a is the closure B ⊂ Rd of B = (0, a1 ) ×
· · · × (0, ad ).

For the rest of this section, B ⊂ Rd will always denote such a box.


Notation. For x ∈ Rd , y ∈ R and i ∈ [d], we will use the notation x−i to de-
note the vector in R[d]\{i} obtained by removing the i-th coordinate from x (note that
the indexing is not changed), and we will write (x−i , y) as a shorthand for the vector
(x1 , . . . , xi−1 , y, xi+1 , . . . , xd ) ∈ Rd . We will also write x−i directly to denote any vector in
R[d]\{i} . For function f : B → R and x−i ∈ R[d]\{i} , we will write fx−i for the function given
by fx−i (y) = f (x−i , y) for all (x−i , y) ∈ B. For any set D ∈ Rd , we will denote by D−i the
projection {x−i : x ∈ D}, and extend this notation in the natural way to more indices, e.g.
D−i−j .

Definition 4.13 (Rearrangement in direction i). Let f : B → R be a measurable function
and let i ∈ [d]. The rearrangement of f in direction i is the function Ri f : B → R given
by
                                  (Ri f )x−i := (fx−i )∗                            (4.3)
                  −i
for all x−i ∈ B . We call each Ri the rearrangement operator in direction i.
                 


    We may put (4.3) in words as follows: on each line in direction i determined by point
x−i , the restriction of Ri f to that line is the monotone rearrangement of the restriction of
f to that line.

Proposition 4.14. Let B be the box of size a ∈ Rd , and let f : B → R be Lipschitz. Then
for each i ∈ [d],
                         ∥f − Ri f ∥L1 (B) ≤ 2ai ∂i− f L1 (B) .

Proof. Since f is Lipschitz, each fx−i : [0, ai ] → R is Lipschitz and a fortiori absolutely
continuous. The result follows from Lemma 4.10, using Tonelli’s theorem to choose the

                                                   38
order of integration.

   A key ingredient in our multi-dimensional argument is that the rearrangement operator
preserves Lipschitz continuity.

Lemma 4.15 ([Kaw85, Lemma 2.12]). If f : B → R is Lipschitz (with Lipschitz constant
L), then Ri f is Lipschitz (with Lipschitz constant 2L).

   We are now ready to define the (multidimensional) monotone rearrangement f ∗ of f .

Definition 4.16. Let f : B → R be Lipschitz. The monotone rearrangement of f is the
function
                              f ∗ := Rd Rd−1 · · · R1 f .

   We first show that f ∗ is indeed a monotone function.

Proposition 4.17. Let f : B → R be Lipschitz. Then f ∗ is monotone.

Proof. Say that g : B → R is monotone in direction i if gx−i is non-decreasing for all
           −i
x−i ∈ B . Then g is monotone if and only if it is monotone in direction i for every
i ∈ [d]. Note that Ri f is monotone in direction i by definition of monotone rearrangement.
Therefore, it suffices to prove that if f is monotone in direction j, then Ri f is also monotone
in direction j.
   Suppose f is monotone in direction j, and suppose i < j without loss of generality. Let
                                       −j
a ∈ Rd be the size of B. Let x−j ∈ B       and 0 ≤ y1 < y2 ≤ aj , so that (x−j , y1 ), (x−j , y2 ) ∈
B. We need to show that (Ri f )(x−j , y1 ) ≤ (Ri f )(x−j , y2 ). Let I i := [0, ai ]. For each
k ∈ {1, 2}, let gk : I i → R be given by

                  gk (z) := f (x1 , . . . , xi−1 , z, xi+1 , . . . , xj−1 , yk , xj+1 , . . . , xn ) .

Note that
                gk∗ (z) = (Ri f )(x1 , . . . , xi−1 , z, xi+1 , . . . , xj−1 , yk , xj+1 , . . . , xn )
for every z ∈ I i , and therefore our goal is to show that g1∗ (xi ) ≤ g2∗ (xi ). But f being
monotone in direction j means that g1 (z) ≤ g2 (z) for all z ∈ I i , so by the order preserving
property (Fact 4.9) of the monotone rearrangement we get that g1∗ (xi ) ≤ g2∗ (xi ), which
concludes the proof.


                                                          39
    It is well-known that the monotone rearrangement is a nonexpansive operator. Actually
a stronger fact holds, as we note below.

Proposition 4.18 ([CT80]). Let n > 0 and let f, g ∈ L1 [0, n]. Then f ∗ , g ∗ satisfy
                      Z                     Z
                                  ∗ −
                              ∗
                            (f − g ) dx ≤         (f − g)− dx
                            [0,n]                         [0,n]

and                         Z                         Z
                                       ∗    ∗
                                      |f − g | dx ≤           |f − g| dx .
                              [0,n]                   [0,n]


   The result above is stated for functions on the interval. Taking the integral over the
box B and repeating for each operator Ri yields the nonexpansiveness of our monotone
rearrangement operator, as also noted by [Kaw85].

Corollary 4.19. Let f, g ∈ L1 (B). Then ∥f ∗ − g ∗ ∥L1 (B) ≤ ∥f − g∥L1 (B) .

   We show that the rearrangement operator can only make the norm of the directed
partial derivatives smaller, i.e. decrease the violations of monotonicity, which is the key
step in this proof. This result may be see as a directed version of nonexpansiveness.

Proposition 4.20. Let f : B → R be Lipschitz and let i, j ∈ [d]. Then ∂j− (Ri f ) L1 (B) ≤
 ∂j− f L1 (B) .

Proof. We may assume that i ̸= j, since otherwise the left-hand side is zero. We will use the
following convention for variables names: w ∈ Rd will denote points in B; z ∈ R[d]\{i,j} will
denote points in B −i−j ; x ∈ R will denote points in (0, ai ) (indexing the i-th dimension);
and y ∈ R will denote points in (0, aj ) (indexing the j-th dimension). Recall that, for each
i ∈ [d], ei denotes the i-th basis vector.
   Since f is Lipschitz, so is Ri f by Lemma 4.15. By Rademacher’s theorem, these
functions are differentiable almost everywhere. Therefore, let D ⊆ B be a measurable




                                                40
set such that f and Ri f are differentiable in D and L(D) = L(B). We have
                       Z
   −
 ∂j (Ri f ) L1 (B) =        ∂j− (Ri f ) dw
                         D
                       Z "                                               − #
                                     (Ri f )(w + hej ) − (Ri f )(w)
                   =         lim                                               dw
                         D h→0                         h
                                 Z                                        −
                   (BC1)               (Ri f )(w + hej ) − (Ri f )(w)
                     = lim                                                     dw
                           h→0 D                         h
                               Z                                         −
                   (D1)              (Ri f )(w + hej ) − (Ri f )(w)
                    = lim                                                     dw)
                         h→0 B                         h
                                                                                                  −
                                                           (Ri f )(z, y + h, x) − (Ri f )(z, y, x)
                              Z        Z       Z
                   (T 1)
                    = lim                                                                             dx dy dz
                         h→0 B −i−j (0,a ) (0,a )
                                            j       i
                                                                              h
                                                                                      −
                                                         f (z, y + h, x) − f (z, y, x)
                            Z        Z       Z
                   ≤ lim                                                                  dx dy dz
                       h→0 B −i−j (0,a ) (0,a )
                                          j       i
                                                                        h
                              Z                               −
                   (T 2)             f (w + hej ) − f (w)
                    = lim                                          dw
                         h→0 B                  h
                               Z                               −
                   (D2)              f (w + hej ) − f (w)
                    = lim                                           dw
                         h→0 D                   h
                           Z "                                    − #
                   (BC2)                f (w  +   he j ) −  f (w)
                     =            lim                                    dw
                             D    h→0               h
                       Z
                   =        ∂j− f dw
                        D
                    =   ∂j− f L1 (B) .

Equalities (BC1) and (BC2) hold by the bounded convergence theorem, which applies be-
cause the difference quotients are uniformly bounded by the Lipschitz constants of Ri f
and f (respectively), and because Ri f and f are differentiable in D (which gives pointwise
convergence of the limits). Equalities (D1) and (D2) hold again by the uniform bounded-
ness of the difference quotients, along with the fact that L(B \ D) = 0. Equalities (T1) and
(T2) hold by Tonelli’s theorem. Finally, the inequality holds by Proposition 4.18, since
(Ri f )(z, y + h, ·) is the monotone rearrangement of f (z, y + h, ·) and (Ri f )(z, y, ·) is the
monotone rearrangement of f (z, y, ·).

    We are now ready to prove our directed (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality.

                                                     41
Theorem 4.21. Let B be the box of size a ∈ Rd and let f : B → R be Lipschitz. Then
                                                     d
                                                     X
                                       ∗
                               ∥f − f ∥L1 (B) ≤ 2            ai ∂i− f L1 (B) .
                                                      i=1

Proof. We have
                   d
                   X
       ∗
∥f − f ∥L1 (B) ≤       ∥Ri−1 · · · R1 f − Ri · · · R1 f ∥L1 (B)                  (Triangle inequality)
                   i=1
                    X d
               ≤2         ai ∂i− (Ri−1 · · · R1 f ) L1 (B)         (Lemma 4.15 and Proposition 4.14)
                    i=1
                    d
                    X
               ≤2         ai ∂i− f L1 (B)                                         (Proposition 4.20) .
                    i=1




   Setting B = (0, 1)d yields the inequality portion of Theorem 4.1.

Corollary 4.22. Let B = (0, 1)d and let f : B → R be Lipschitz. Then
                                            Z
           E [|f − f |] = ∥f − f ∥L1 (B) ≤ 2 ∥∇− f ∥1 dx = 2E ∥∇− f ∥1 .
                    ∗           ∗
                                                                     
                                                         B

     To complete the proof of Theorem 4.1, we need to show that distmono
                                                                      1   (f ) ≍ E [|f − f ∗ |],
i.e. that the monotone rearrangement is “essentially optimal” as a target monotone function
for f . The inequality distmono
                            1   (f ) ≤ E [|f − f ∗ |] is immediate from the fact that f ∗ is
monotone. The inequality in the other direction follows from the nonexpansiveness of the
rearrangement operator, with essentially the same proof as that of [KMS18] for the Boolean
cube, as we now show.

Proposition 4.23. Let f : [0, 1]d → R be Lipschitz. Then E [|f − f ∗ |] ≤ 2distmono
                                                                               1    (f ).

Proof. Let B := (0, 1)d and let g ∈ L1 (B) be any monotone function. It follows that g ∗ = g
almost everywhere (that is, except perhaps at jump discontinuities of g). By Corollary 4.19,
we have that ∥f ∗ − g ∗ ∥L1 (B) ≤ ∥f − g∥L1 (B) . Using the triangle inequality, we obtain
             ∥f − f ∗ ∥L1 (B) ≤ ∥f − g∥L1 (B) + ∥g − f ∗ ∥L1 (B)
                               = ∥f − g∥L1 (B) + ∥f ∗ − g ∗ ∥L1 (B) ≤ 2 ∥f − g∥L1 (B) .
The claim follows by taking the infimum over the choice of g.

                                                    42
Tightness of the inequality. To check that Corollary 4.22 is tight up to constant
factors, it suffices to take the linear function f : [0, 1]d → R given by f (x) = 1 − x1 for all
x ∈ [0, 1]d . Then f ∗ is given by f ∗ (x) = x1 , so E [|f − f ∗ |] = 1/2 while E [∥∇− f ∥1 ] = 1, as
needed.

Discrete case

The proof above carries over to the case of the hypergrid almost unmodified, as we now
outline. We now consider functions f : [n]d → R, so the box B is replaced with [n]d
and its dimensions ai are all replaced with the length n of the hypergrid. We define
the rearrangement in direction i, Ri f , as in Definition 4.13 by sorting the restrictions of
f to each line along direction i. We also define f ∗ as in Definition 4.16 by subsequent
applications of each operator Ri . Then Proposition 4.14 carries over by applying the one-
dimensional Lemma 4.11, and the proof of Proposition 4.17 carries over unmodified.
   The nonexpansiveness properties Proposition 4.18 and Corollary 4.19 also carry over
unmodified, and the key Proposition 4.20 carries over with a more immediate proof: the
use of Proposition 4.18 remains the same, but rather than expanding the definition of
derivative and reasoning about the limit, the discrete argument boils down to showing the
inequality
           Z                                        Z
                                              −
               ((Ri f )(w + ej ) − (Ri f )(w)) dw ≤     (f (w + ej ) − f (w))− dw ,
            [n]d                                         [n]d

which follows immediately from the discrete version of Proposition 4.18 by summing over
all lines in direction i. Then, the hypergrid version of Theorem 4.21 follows by the same ap-
plication of the triangle inequality, and we conclude the inequality portion of Theorem 4.2.

Theorem 4.24. Let f : [n]d → R. Then E [|f − f ∗ |] ≤ 2nE [∥∇− f ∥1 ].

   The discrete version of Proposition 4.23 follows identically, and we state it here for
convenience.

Proposition 4.25. Let f : [n]d → R. Then E [|f − f ∗ |] ≤ 2distmono
                                                               1    (f ).

   Finally, the tightness of Theorem 4.24 is mostly easily verified via the following step
function: letting n be even for simplicity, define f : [n]d → R by
                                         (
                                            1 if x1 ≤ n/2 ,
                                 f (x) =
                                            0 if x1 > n/2 .

                                                 43
Then f ∗ is obtained by flipping this function along the first coordinate, or equivalently
swapping the values 1 and 0 in the definition above. Thus E [|f − f ∗ |] = 1. On the other
hand, ∥∇− f ∥1 takes value 1 on exactly one point in each line along the first coordinate,
and 0 elsewhere. Hence E [∥∇− f ∥1 ] = 1/n, as needed.


4.3     Monotonicity testers
In this section, we use the directed Poincaré inequalities on the unit cube and hypergrid
to show that the natural partial derivative tester (or edge tester) attains the upper bounds
from Theorem 4.3.
   Let Ω denote either [0, 1]d or [n]d , and let q(Ω, M, ε) denote the query complexity of
our testers for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions on these domains, as follows:
                                                                             
                   d                dM                      d               dnM
           q([0, 1] , M, ε) := Θ              and      q([n] , M, ε) := Θ         .
                                     ε                                        ε

   The tester is given in Algorithm 1. It is clear that this algorithm is a nonadaptive
partial derivative tester, and that it always accepts monotone functions. It suffices to show
that it rejects with good probability when distmono
                                                 1   (f ) > ε.

Algorithm 1 L1 monotonicity tester for Lipschitz functions using partial derivative queries
   Input: Partial derivative oracle access to Lipschitz function f : Ω → R.
   Output: Accept if f is monotone, reject if distmono
                                                   1   (f ) > ε.
   Requirement: f is (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz.
 procedure PartialDerivativeTester(f, Ω, M, ε)
    repeat q(Ω, M, ε) times
        Sample x ∈ Ω uniformly at random.
        Sample i ∈ [d] uniformly at random.
        Reject if ∂i f (x) < 0.
    end repeat
    Accept.

Lemma 4.26. Let Ω be one of [0, 1]d or [n]d , and let f : Ω → R be an (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz
function. Suppose distmono
                      1    (f ) > ε. Then Algorithm 1 rejects with probability at least 2/3.



                                             44
Proof. Write µ for the uniform measure over Ω, which is the Lebesgue measure if Ω = [0, 1]d
or the normalized counting measure if Ω = [n]d .
    Continuous case. Suppose Ω = [0, 1]d . Let D ⊆ [0, 1]d be a measurable set such that
f is differentiable on D and µ(D) = 1, which exists by Rademacher’s theorem. For each
i ∈ [d], let Si := {x ∈ D : ∂i f (x) < 0}. A standard argument gives that each Si ⊂ Rn is a
measurable set. We claim that
                                         d
                                        X             ε
                                            µ(Si ) >    .
                                        i=1
                                                     2M
Suppose this is not the case. By the Lipschitz continuity of f , we have that |∂i f (x)| ≤ M
for every x ∈ D and i ∈ [d], and therefore
                                   d
                                   X              d
                                                  X
                                     E ∂i− f ≤ 2M
                                           
                               2                    µ(Si ) ≤ ε .
                                   i=1                              i=1

On the other hand, the assumption that distmono
                                           1    (f ) > ε and Corollary 4.22 yield
                                                                             d
                                                                             X
                                         ∗                     −
                                                                                   E ∂i− f ,
                                                                                       
                       ε < E [|f − f |] ≤ 2E ∥∇ f ∥1 = 2
                                                                             i=1

a contradiction. Therefore the claim holds.
  Now, the probability that one iteration of the tester rejects is the probability that x ∈ Si
when x and i are sampled uniformly at random. This probability is
                                         d                                     d
                                         X                                     X 1                      ε
           P [Iteration rejects] =                P [i = j] P [x ∈ Sj ] =                · µ(Sj ) >       .
                                         j=1
                                                  i            x
                                                                               j=1
                                                                                     d                2dM

         dM
              
Thus Θ    ε
                  iterations suffice to reject with high constant probability.
    Discrete case. Suppose Ω = [n]d . The proof proceeds the same way, but we give it
explicitly for completeness. For each i ∈ [d], let Si := {x ∈ [n]d : ∂i f (x) < 0}. We then
claim that
                                     d
                                    X              ε
                                        µ(Si ) >       .
                                    i=1
                                                 2nM
Indeed, if this is not the case, then since |∂i f (x)| ≤ M for every i and x, we get that
                                   d                                d
                                   X                                X                ε
                                                 ∂i− f
                                                        
                               2         E                   ≤ 2M         µ(Si ) ≤     .
                                   i=1                              i=1
                                                                                     n

                                                              45
On the other hand, the assumption that distmono
                                           1    (f ) > ε and Theorem 4.24 yield
                                                              d
                   ε  1                  1                   X
                     < · E [|f − f ∗ |] ≤ · 2nE ∥∇− f ∥1 = 2     E ∂i− f ,
                                                                     
                   n  n                  n                   i=1

a contradiction. Thus the claim holds, and the probability that one iteration of the tester
rejects is
                                    d                                d
                                    X                                X 1                      ε
          P [Iteration rejects] =          P [i = j] P [x ∈ Sj ] =             · µ(Sj ) >        .
                                     j=1
                                           i        x
                                                                     j=1
                                                                           d                2dnM

         dnM
               
Thus Θ     ε
                   iterations suffice to reject with high constant probability.


4.4      L1-testing monotonicity on the line
In this section, we show the upper bounds for L1 monotonicity testing on the line from
Theorem 4.4. The main idea is to reduce from L1 testing to Hamming testing by using
the Lipschitz constant to show that, if the L1 distance to monotonicity is large, then the
Hamming distance to monotonicity must be somewhat large as well; combined with the
Hamming testers [EKKRV98; Bel18], this yields an L1 tester for the discrete line [n].
    To obtain a tester for the continuous line [0, n], we furthermore apply a discretization
strategy inspired by domain reduction and downsampling ideas from previous works on
property testing [BCS20; HY22]. The idea is that, given ε and M , we may impose a fine
enough grid on [0, n] such that the function defined on that grid preserves the L1 distance
to monotonicity compared to the continuous function; again, the Lipschitz assumption is
essential for this step.
    In this section, we will follow the convention of denoting functions on continuous do-
mains by f, g, and those on discrete domains by f , g. Depending on the context, it will
be clear whether f is an arbitrary function or one obtained by discretizing a particular
function f . We will also write “f is M -Lipschitz” without specifying the ℓq geometry, since
all choices are equivalent in one dimension.

Lemma 4.27 (Discretization preserves distance to monotonicity). Let n, M, ε > 0 and
let f : [0, n] → R be an M -Lipschitz function. Let the discretized function f : [n′ ] → R,
for suitable choice of n′ = Θ (nM/ε), be given by f (i) = f (δi) for each i ∈ [n′ ], where
δ := n/n′ . Then if distmono
                        1    (f ) > ε, we have distmono
                                                   1    (f ) > ε/4.

                                                    46
Proof. Let n′ ∈ [cnM/ε, 2cnM/ε] be an integer, where c is a sufficiently large univer-
sal constant.2 Let f : [n′ ] → R be the function given in the statement, and suppose
distmono
    1    (f ) > ε.
     Let g : [n′ ] → R be the monotone rearrangement of f . It is easy to check that g is
Lipschitz with at most the Lipschitz constant of f . Let g : [0, n] → R be the following
piecewise linear function whose discretization is g: for each i ∈ [n′ ] we set g(δi) = g(i),
and g is the linear spline induced by these points elsewhere (and constant in the segment
[0, δ]). Then clearly g is monotone, and thus E [|f − g|] > ε. Moreover, g is M -Lipschitz,
since its steepest slope is the same as that of g up to the coordinate change.3 Hence, we
have
                                                  n′ Z
                     1 n                       1 X iδ
                       Z
  ε < E [|f − g|] =        |f (x) − g(x)| dx =              |f (x) − g(x)| dx
                     n 0                       n i=1 (i−1)δ
          n′ Z
      1 X iδ
    =              |(f (iδ) ± M δ) − (g(iδ) ± M δ)| dx                     (Lipschitz property)
      n i=1 (i−1)δ
          n′ Z
      1 X iδ                              
    ≤                 f (i) − g(i) + 2M δ dx
      n i=1 (i−1)δ
                       n   ′                    n              ′
         1 ′    2
                      X                2nM   1 X                 2ε       
       =   2n M δ + δ     f (i) − g(i) =  ′
                                            + ′    f (i) − g(i) ≤    +E f −g ,
         n            i=1
                                         n   n i=1                 c

where we used the notation a ± b to denote any number in the interval [a − b, a + b].
                                                                    
   We may set c ≥ 4 so that 2ε/c ≤ ε/2. Therefore, we obtain E f − g > ε/2. Since g is
the monotone rearrangement of f , Proposition 4.25 implies that E f − g ≤ 2distmono
                                                                       
                                                                                 1    (f ).
                     mono
We conclude that dist1 (f ) > ε/4, as desired.

Observation 4.28. The function f defined in Lemma 4.27 is ε-Lipschitz. Indeed, since
n′ ≥ nM/ε, we have

                 f (i) − f (i + 1) = |f (δi) − f (δ(i + 1))| ≤ M δ = M n/n′ ≤ ε .
   2
     We may assume that nM/ε > 1, otherwise the problem is trivial: the maximum L1 distance from
monotonicity attainable by an M -Lipschitz function is n1 · n·nM
                                                               2  = nM/2. Thus the given interval indeed
contains an integer.
   3
     Formally, if f is M -Lipschitz, then f is M ′ -Lipschitz for M ′ = M n/n′ , hence so is its monotone
rearrangement g. Then since the steepest slope of g must come from two vertices of the spline, g is
Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant M ′ n′ /n = M .


                                                   47
   Write distH (f, g) := P [f ̸= g] for the relative Hamming distance between f and g, and
write distmono
          H     (f ) := inf monotone g distH (f, g) for the relative Hamming distance to mono-
tonicity of f .
                                                                         ′
Lemma 4.29 (Far in L1 distance imples far in
                                          q Hamming distance). Let f : [n ] → R be
                                                                   distmono (f )
an M ′ -Lipschitz function. Then distmono
                                     H    (f ) ≥                       1
                                                                      n′ M ′
                                                                                 .

Proof. Let S ⊆ [n′ ] be a set such that 1) |S| = distmono
                                                       H  (f ) · n′ ; and 2) it suffices to
change f on inputs in S to obtain a monotone function; note that S exists by definition of
Hamming distance. Write S as the union of maximal, pairwise disjoint contiguous intervals,
S = I1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ik .
    We define a monotone function g : [n′ ] → R as follows. For each i ∈ S, set i∗ ∈ [n′ ] \ S
as follows: if there exists j ∈ [n′ ] \ S such that j > i, pick the smallest such j; otherwise,
pick the largest j ∈ [n′ ] \ S. In other words, i∗ is obtained by picking a direction (right if
possible, otherwise left) and choosing the first point outside the interval Iℓ that contains
i. Now, define g by                         (
                                              f (i) if i ̸∈ S
                                     g(i) =
                                              f (i∗ ) if i ∈ S .

   We first claim that g is monotone. Indeed the sequence of values (f (i))i∈[n′ ]\S (taken in
order of increasing i) is monotone by the choice of S, and since g is obtained by extending
some of these values into flat regions, the resulting function is also monotone. Therefore
we can upper bound the L1 distance of f to monotonicity by
                                        n    ′              k
                                      1 X                 1 XX
 distmono                                                          f (i) − f (i∗ )
                               
     1    (f ) ≤ E       f −g       = ′    f (i) − g(i) = ′
                                     n i=1               n j=1 i∈I
                                                                                     j

                                          k X
                                        1 X
                                                          f (i∗ ) ± M ′ |i − i∗ | − f (i∗ )
                                                                                 
                                    =                                                              (Lipschitz property)
                                        n′ j=1 i∈I
                                                  j

                                            k X
                                          ′ X                                k                        k
                                     M                     M′ X X            M′ X 2
                                    ≤ ′         |i − i∗ | ≤ ′         |Ij | = ′     |Ij |
                                      n j=1 i∈I             n j=1 i∈I         n j=1
                                                      j                              j

                                      M′
                                    ≤ ′ · |S|2                                           (Since |I1 | + · · · + |Ik | = |S|)
                                      n
                                    = M ′ · distmono
                                                H    (f )2 · n′ .
The claim follows.

                                                             48
    Combining the two lemmas with the classical Hamming monotonicity tester of
[EKKRV98], the following theorem establishes Theorem 4.4 for the continuous domain
[0, n].

Theorem 4.30. There exists a nonadaptive one-sided L1qmonotonicitytester for M -
                                                           nM     nM
                                                                     
Lipschitz functions f : [0, n] → R with query complexity O  ε
                                                              log  ε
                                                                       .

Proof. The tester works as follows. It first fixes n′ = Θ (nM/ε) as given by Lemma 4.27.
Let f : [n′ ] → R be the discretization defined therein (f is not explicitly computed up-
front, but rather queried as needed). The algorithm then simulates the (nonadaptive,
one-sided)
         pmonotonicity    tester of [EKKRV98] on the function f with proximity parameter
 ′            ε
                  (the constant may easily be made explicit), producing f (δi) = f (in/n′ )
                
ε = Θ        nM
whenever the simulation queries f (i). The algorithm returns the result produced by the
simulated tester. The query complexity claim    follows from the fact that the tester of
[EKKRV98] has query complexity O ε1′ log n′ .
    We now show correctness. When f is monotone, so is f , so the algorithm accepts
since the tester of [EKKRV98] has one-sided error. Now, suppose distmono
                                                                     1   (f ) > ε. Then
    mono
dist1 (f ) > ε/4 by Lemma 4.27. Moreover, since f is ε-Lipschitz by Observation 4.28,
Lemma 4.29 implies that
                                 s                 r
                                   distmono
                                                            r    
                        mono           1    (f )      1         ε
                    distH (f ) ≥                 >       =Ω         .
                                       n′ ε          4n′       nM
Since this is the proximity parameter ε′ used to instantiate the tester of [EKKRV98], the
algorithm rejects with high constant probability, as needed.

   Lemma 4.29 itself also implies Theorem 4.4 for the discrete domain [n]. This time,
we use the Hamming tester of [Bel18] to obtain a slightly more precise query complexity
bound4 .
                                                           1
Theorem 4.31. There exists a nonadaptive one-sided      qL monotonicity
                                                                          tester for M -
                                                           nM
                                                              log nε
                                                                     
Lipschitz functions f : [n] → R with query complexity O     ε     M
                                                                        when ε/M ≥ 4/n,
and O(n) otherwise.

Proof. The tester sets ε′ := nM
                             p ε
                                   , and then runs the (nonadaptive, one-sided) Hamming
monotonicity tester of [Bel18] on the line [n] with proximity parameter ε′ . That tester has
  4
      One may check that this refinement would have no effect in Theorem 4.30


                                                   49
query complexity O ε1′ log(ε′ n) when ε′ ≥ 2/n and (trivially) O(n) otherwise, which gives
                                

the claimed upper bound. It remains to show correctness.
    When f is monotone, the algorithm accepts since the tester of [Bel18] has one-sided
error. Now, suppose distmono
                        1    (f ) > ε. Then Lemma 4.29 yields
                                               r
                                                  ε
                                      mono
                                  distH (f ) >      = ε′ ,
                                                 nM
so the tester rejects with high constant probability.


4.5      Lower bounds
In this section, we prove our lower bounds for testing monotonicity on the unit cube and
on the hypergrid. We first show our general lower bounds based on a “hole” construction,
which hides a monotonicity violating region inside a randomly placed ℓ1 -ball; these bounds
imply near tightness of our upper bounds for testing on the line from Section 4.4. Then
we give our lower bounds for partial derivative testers, which show that the analysis of our
tester in Section 4.3 is tight.

Definition 4.32 (ℓ1 -ball). Let Ω be one of Rd or Zd , let x ∈ Ω and let r > 0 be a real
number. The ℓ1 -ball of radius r centered at x is the set B1d (r, x) := {y ∈ Ω : ∥x − y∥1 ≤ r}.
We also write B1d (r) := B1d (r, 0).

    It will be clear from context whether the domain should be taken to be continuous or
discrete, i.e. whether B1d (r, c) should be understood under Ω = Rd or Ω = Zd . Let ν denote
the Lebesgue measure when Ω = Rd , and the counting measure over Zd when Ω = Zd .
   We give the following simple bounds on the volume of continuous and discrete ℓ1 -balls.
Since we do not require particularly tight bounds, we opt for a simple formulation and
elementary proof.

Proposition 4.33. There exist functions c1 , c2 : N → R>0 satisfying the following. Let
d ∈ N. Let Ω be one of Rd or Zd . Let r ∈ R satisfy r > 0 if Ω = Rd , and r ≥ 1 if Ω = Zd .
Then
                            c1 (d)rd ≤ ν B1d (r) ≤ c2 (d)rd .
                                                




                                              50
Proof. First suppose Ω = Rd . Then we have the following formula for the area of the
ℓ1 -ball of radius r (see e.g. [Wan05]):
                                                               (2r)d
                                                     ν B1d (r) =      .
                                                                  d!
The result follows as long as c1 (d) ≤ 2d /d! and c2 (d) ≥ 2d /d!.
    Now, suppose Ω = Zn , and suppose r is an integer without loss of generality (because
since r ≥ 1, there exist integers within a factor of 2 above and below r). We proceed by
an inductive argument. For d = 1, the volume is
                                                                   r
                                                                   X
                                               B11
                                                     
                                       ν                 =1+2             1 = 1 + 2r ,
                                                                    k=1

so the claim holds as long as c1 (1) ≤ 2 and c2 (1) ≥ 3. Assuming the claim for some d ∈ N,
we have
                                                                               r
                                                                               X
    B1d+1 (r)                                                                        |{x′ = (x′1 , . . . , x′d ) : ∥x′ ∥1 ≤ r − |y|}|
             
ν                = |{x = (x1 , . . . , xd , xd+1 ) : ∥x∥1 ≤ r}| =
                                                                              y=−r
                                       r
                                       X
                 = ν B1d (r) + 2               ν B1d (r − k) .
                                                           
                                       k=1
                                                 
Since the last expression is at most 3r·ν B1d (r) , using the inductive hypothesis we conclude
that
                  ν B1d+1 (r) ≤ 3r · c2 (d)rd = 3c2 (d)rd+1 ≤ c2 (d + 1)rd+1 ,
                              

the last inequality as long as c2 (n + 1) ≥ 3c2 (n).
   For the lower bound, we consider two cases. Note that r − k ≥ r/2 for at least ⌊r/2⌋
values of k. When r ≥ 2, we have ⌊r/2⌋ ≥ r/3, and then
                                             r
                                             X                               2r           r d
           B1d+1 (r)               d
                                                     c1 (d)(r − k)d >                           ≥ c1 (d + 1)rd+1 ,
                      
       ν                  ≥ c1 (d)r + 2                                         · c1 (d)
                                               k=1
                                                                             3             2

the last inequality as long as c1 (n + 1) ≤ 23 · 2−d · c1 (n). On the other hand, if r < 2, the
bound follows easily for small enough c1 (d + 1), since
                                                         r
                                                         X                        c1 (d)rd+1   c1 (d) d+1
                  B1d+1 (r)                d
                                                               c1 (d)(r − k)d >
                            
             ν                  ≥ c1 (d)r + 2                                                >       r    .
                                                         k=1
                                                                                       r          2

                                                                  51
Remark 4.34. The constants c1 (d) and c2 (d) in Proposition 4.33 have poor dependence
on d, and this is unavoidable at least in the continuous case. This fact is essentially the
reason why our general lower bound construction is only efficient for constant d.

    We now prove our tester-independent lower bounds. Note that there exists a tester
for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions with proximity parameter ε if and only if there exists a
tester for (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz functions with proximity parameter ε/M (by rescaling the input).
Therefore it suffices to prove the theorems for the case M = 1. The following two theorems
establish the continuous and discrete cases of Theorem 4.5.

Theorem 4.35 (Lower bound for constant d on the unit cube). Let d ∈ N be a con-
stant. Any L1 monotonicity tester (with two-sided error, and adaptive value and direc-
tional
   derivative
              queries) for (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R requires at least
         d
Ω (1/ε) d+1 queries.

Proof. We construct a family of functions that are ε-far from monotone in L1 distance such
that any deterministic algorithm cannot distinguish between a function chosen uniformly
at random from this family and the constant-0 function with fewer than the announced
number of queries; then, the claim will follow from Yao’s principle.
   Each such function f is constructed as follows. Let c ∈ [0, 1]d be a point such that
the ball B1d (r, c) is completely inside [0, 1]d , for radius r to be chosen below. Then f takes
value 0 everywhere outside B1d (r, c), and inside this ball, it takes value

                                       f (x) = −r + ∥x − c∥1

for each x ∈ B1d (r, c). Then f is (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz. We now lower bound distmono         1  (f ). Fix
       ′      d−1                                               ′
any x ∈ [0, 1]     and consider the line of points (y, x ) for y ∈ [0, 1], i.e. the line along the
first coordinate with remaining coordinates set to x′ . Suppose this line intersects B1d (r, c).
Then this intersection occurs on some interval          [a, b] of y-values, and on this interval, f first
decreases from f (a, x′ ) = 0 to f a+b       ′         b−a
                                               
                                        2
                                          , x    =   −  2
                                                            with rate 1, and then increases with rate
                 ′
1 back to f (b, x ) = 0. Any monotone function g is in particular monotone over this line,
and it is easy to see that this requires total change to f proportional to the area under
this curve:               Z 1                                 Z 1
                                      ′            ′
                              |f (y, x ) − g(y, x )| dy ≳         |f (y, x′ )| dy .
                            0                                0

Now, since this holds for each line intersecting B1d (r, c), and the collection of such lines
gives a partition of B1d (r, c), the total distance between f and any monotone function g is

                                                   52
lower bounded (up to a constant) by the L1 -norm of f :
                            Z                  Z
                                  |f − g| dx ≳      |f | dx ,
                                   [0,1]d                 [0,1]d

and since this holds for every choice of g, we conclude that
                                               Z
                                     mono
                                 dist1 (f ) ≳       |f | dx .
                                                       [0,1]d

We now note that this last expression is half the volume of an ℓ1 -ball in dimension d + 1:
for each point x ∈ B1d (r, c), the contribution to the integrand is |f (x)| = r − ∥x − c∥1 ,
corresponding to the measure of points (x, z ′ ) for all 0 ≤ z ′ ≤ z where z = r − ∥x − c∥1 , so
that the point (x, z) ∈ Rd+1 satisfies ∥(x, z)−(c, 0)∥1 = r. In other words, the points (x, z ′ )
are the points of B1d+1 (r, (c, 0)) with nonnegative last coordinate. Conversely, all such points
contribute to the integral above. Therefore, since d is a constant, using Proposition 4.33
and writing ν d+1 for the Lebesgue measure on Rd+1 , we have
                                       Z
                          mono
                                            |f | dx ≳ ν d+1 B1d+1 (r) ≳ rd+1 .
                                                                     
                     dist1 (f ) ≳
                                        [0,1]d

We wish this last quantity to be at least Ω(ε), so (recalling d is a constant) it suffices to
set                                            1
                                        r ≍ ε d+1 .
We have established that each function f , for this choice of r and any choice of c, is ε-far
from monotone as desired. Our family of functions from which f will be drawn will be
given by choices of c such that the balls B1d (r, c) are disjoint, so that each query may only
rule out one such choice (because queries outside B1d (r, c) take value 0). How many disjoint
balls B1d (r, c) can we fit inside [0, 1]d ? It suffices to divide [0, 1]d into a grid of d-dimensional
cells of side 2r, each of which can contain one ball. The number of such cells is at least
(up to a constant factor)
                                                             d
                                           (1/r)d ≳ (1/ε) d+1 .
Hence, to distinguish some f drawn uniformly at random from this family from the
constant-0 function with
                       constant
                                probability, any deterministic algorithm must have query
                             d
complexity at least Ω (1/ε) d+1 .

Theorem 4.36 (Lower bound for constant n on the hypergrid). Let d ∈ N be a constant.
Any L1 monotonicity tester (with two-sided error
                                                n and adaptive
                                                                               1
                                                              oqueries) for (ℓ , 1)-Lipschitz
                                                        d
functions f : [n]d → R requires at least Ω min (n/ε) d+1 , nd     queries.

                                                  53
Proof. We proceed similarly to Theorem 4.35, with small changes for the discrete setting.
We again construct functions f based on balls B1d (r, c) for suitable choices of r and c. For
fixed r and c, f takes value 0 outside the ball and, for each x ∈ B1d (r, c),
                                    f (x) = −r + ∥x − c∥1 ,
so that f is (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz. Again by a line restriction argument, for any monotone
function g we have               Z              Z
                                         |f − g| dx ≳              |f | dx ,
                                  [n]d                      [n]d

and thus                                                Z
                                                   1
                                 distmono
                                     1    (f ) ≳                   |f | dx .             (4.4)
                                                   nd   [n]d

   When ε ≤ 1/nd , this construction boils down to setting f (x) = −1 at a single point x,
which requires Ω(nd ) queries to identify. Now, assume ε > 1/nd .
   Again we may identify the integrand of (4.4) with points on half of B1d+1 (r, (c, 0)). As
long as r ≥ 1 and since d is a constant, Proposition 4.33 implies that

                                             mono    rd+1
                                         dist1 (f ) ≳ d .
                                                      n
Thus to have distmono
                 1    (f ) ≥ ε, it suffices (since d is a constant) to set
                                                   d    1
                                           r ≍ n d+1 ε d+1 ,
and indeed this gives r ≥ 1 since ε > 1/nd . Then, our functions f are given by choices of c
placed on the hypergrid [n]d inside disjoint cells of side 2r, of which there are at least (up
to a constant factor)
                                      n d  n  d+1d

                                            ≳           ,
                                       r        ε
                                                          d
                                                             
and thus any deterministic algorithm requires Ω (n/ε) d+1 queries to distinguish between
f drawn uniformly at random from this distribution and the constant-0 function.

    The construction for the partial derivative tester lower bounds is simpler: we start with
a one-dimensional “step” construction which is flat everywhere except for a small region
of negative slope, and then copy this function onto every line along a randomly chosen
coordinate i. Then a partial derivative tester must correctly guess both i and the negative-
slope region to detect such functions. The following two theorems establish the continuous
and discrete cases of Theorem 4.6.

                                                  54
Theorem 4.37 (Lower bound for partial derivative testers on the unit cube). Any partial
derivative L1 monotonicity tester for (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R (with two-
sided error and adaptive queries) requires at least Ω(d/ε) queries.

Proof. Let ε ≤ 1/6. For any z ∈ 31 , 23 − ε , let gz : [0, 1] → R be the function given by
                                           
                                 
                                 ε
                                                  if x < z ,
                        gz (x) = ε − (x − z) if z ≤ x ≤ z + ε ,
                                 
                                   0               if x > z + ε .
                                 

Note that gz is 1-Lipschitz. Moreover, we claim that distmono    1     (gz ) ≳ ε. Indeed, for any
x ∈ [0, 1/3], we have that gz (x) = ε and gz (2/3 + x) = 0. On the other hand, for any
monotone function h : [0, 1] → R we must have h(x) ≤ h(2/3 + x). Thus, for any such h we
have |gz (x) − h(x)| + |gz (2/3 + x) − h(2/3 + x)| ≥ ε. Since this holds for all x ∈ [0, 1/3],
we conclude that for any such h we must have E [|gz − h|] ≥ ε/3, proving the claim.
    Now, for any i ∈ [d] and z ∈ 31 , 23 − ε , let fi,z : [0, 1]d → R be given by copying gz
                                               

onto f along every line in direction i, i.e. setting fi,z (x) = gz (xi ) for every x ∈ [0, 1]d . Note
that f is (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz (since its partial derivatives are 0 along non-i coordinates), and
distmono
    1    (f ) ≳ ε (since the lines in direction i partition the domain).
   We construct a set of Ω(d/ε) functions fi,z as follows. First, i can be any of the
                                                               1
coordinates in [d]. Then
                      1 2let z1, . . . , zk be given by zj = 3 + kε for k = Ω(1/ε), such that for
each j we have zj ∈ 3 , 3 − ε and, moreover, for distinct j, ℓ ∈ [k], the regions where fi,zj
and fi,zℓ take non-zero slope are disjoint. It follows that each partial derivative query may
only rule out one such fi,z , so any partial derivative tester that distinguishes an fi,z chosen
uniformly at random from the constant-0 function must make at least Ω(d/ε) queries.

    The argument for the hypergrid is similar, except that the construction cannot be made
to occupy an arbitrarily small region of the domain when the domain is discrete. We opt
to keep the argument simple and give a proof for constant parameter ε.

Theorem 4.38 (Lower bound for edge testers on the hypergrid). For sufficiently small
constant ε, any partial derivative L1 monotonicity tester for (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz functions
f : [n]d → R (with two-sided error and adaptive queries) requires at least Ω(dn) queries.

Proof. Let n be a multiple of 3 for simplicity. For each z ∈ n3 + 1, . . . , 2n
                                                               
                                                                              3
                                                                                , define gz :
[n] → R by                                 (
                                            1 if x < z ,
                                  gz (x) =
                                            0 if z ≥ z .

                                                 55
Then, n as before gz is 1-Lipschitz and distmono
                                               1    (gz ) = Ω(1). Then for each i ∈ [d] and
              2n
                 
z ∈ 3 + 1, 3 , we let fi,z : [n] → R be given by fi,z (x) = gz (xi ) for each x ∈ [n]d ; it
                                   d

follows that f is (ℓ1 , 1)-Lipschitz and distmono
                                             1    (f ) = Ω(1). Note that there are Ω(dn) such
functions. Moreover, each partial derivative query may only rule out one such fi,z , and
therefore any edge tester that distinguishes an fi,z chosen uniformly at random from the
constant-0 function must make at least Ω(dn) queries.


4.6       Comparison with prior work on Lp testing for
          bounded-range functions
[BRY14a] initiated the systematic study of Lp -testing and, most relevant to our results,
established the first (and, to our knowledge, only previous) results on Lp testing of mono-
tonicity on the hypergrid and on the discrete line. While our models are broadly compat-
ible, a subtle but crucial distinction must be explained.
    In [BRY14a], the authors focused their exposition on the case of functions f : Ω → [0, 1],
and in this regime, L1 testing is only be easier than Hamming testing—which they show
via a reduction based on Boolean threshold functions. On the other hand, for functions
with other ranges, say f : Ω → [a, b], their definition normalizes the notion of distance
                 1
by a factor of b−a  . In our terminology, letting r := b − a and g := f /r, it follows that
dist1 (g) = distmono
    mono
                   1    (f )/r, so testing f with proximity parameter ε reduces to testing
g with proximity parameter ε/r. For Hamming testers with query complexity that scale
linearly with 1/ε, this amounts to paying a factor of r in the reduction to the Boolean case5 .
This loss is indeed necessary, because by the same reasoning, testing g with proximity
parameter ε reduces to testing f with proximity parameter rε. Therefore the problems of
testing f with proximity parameter ε and testing f /r with proximity parameter ε/r have
the same query complexity.
   In this thesis, we do not normalize the distance metric by r; we would like to handle
functions f that may take large values as the dimension d grows, as long as f satisfies
a Lipschitz assumption, and our goal is to beat the query complexity afforded by the
reduction to the Boolean case. We derive such a benchmark in Section 4.6.1 by assuming
that the input f is Lipschitz, and inferring an upper bound for r based on the Lipschitz
constant and the size of the domain. Combining the hypergrid tester of [BRY14a] and
   5
    This factor can also be tracked explicitly in the characterization of the L1 distance to monotonicity of
[BRY14a]: it arises in Lemmas 2.1 and 2.2, where an integral from 0 to 1 must be changed to an integral
from a to b, so the best threshold function is only guaranteed to be ε/r-far from monotone.


                                                    56
a discretization argument for the unit cube inspired by [BCS20; HY22], we obtain upper
bounds for our setting.
    With the discussion above in mind, it is instructive to return to Table 4.1. We note that
our upper bounds have polynomially smaller dependence on d than the benchmarks, sug-
gesting that our use of the Lipschitz assumption—via our directed Poincaré inequalities—
exploits useful structure underlying the monotonicity testing problem (whereas the bench-
mark testers must work for every function with bounded range, not only the Lipschitz
ones). Our lower bounds feature an almost-linear dependence on the hypergrid length n;
intuitively, this dependence is not implied by previous works such as [BRY14a; BRY14b] be-
cause those works construct the violations of monotonicity via Boolean functions, whereas
our constructions exploit the fact that a Lipschitz function can vastly exceed the [0, 1]
range along a given direction, which exacerbates the L1 distance to monotonicity in the
region where that happens.


4.6.1     Upper bounds derived from [BRY14a]
We now show how the L1 monotonicity
                         2        testing upper bounds from[BRY14a] imply testers
                      e d M on the unit cube and O
with query complexity O                               e d2 nM on the hypergrid for
                           ε                                ε
(ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f . We start with the case of the hypergrid, and first state the
upper bound of [BRY14a] for functions with arbitrary range of size r, which without loss
of generality (by translation invariance) we denote [0, r]:

Theorem 4.39 ([BRY14a]). There          exists an L1 monotonicity tester for functions f :
[n]d → [0, r] that uses O rd log rd
                                    
                           ε      ε
                                      value queries. The tester is nonadaptive and has one-
sided error.

   We thus obtain the following L1 monotonicity tester for Lipschitz functions on the
hypergrid:
                               1
Corollary 4.40. There
                     2is an L monotonicity
                                             tester for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f :
[n]d → R that uses O d nM  log dnM
                                   
                        ε        ε
                                      value queries. The tester is nonadaptive and has
one-sided error.

Proof. The algorithm simulates the tester from Theorem 4.39 with parameters r = M nd
and ε, which gives the announced query complexity. As for correctness, note that since
f is (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz, for any x, y ∈ [n]d we have |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ M ∥x − y∥1 ≤ M nd.

                                             57
Thus f has range of size at most M nd, so the reduction to the tester from Theorem 4.39
is correct.

    We outline how this result implies a tester for Lipschitz functions on the unit cube as
well, via the domain reduction or downsampling principle of [BCS20; HY22], and similarly
to our work on the one-dimensional case in Section 4.4. Even though the tester above has
query complexity that depends on the hypergrid length n, the main observation is that,
given an (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz function f on [0, 1]d , we may discretize it into an (ℓ1 , M/n)-
Lipschitz function f ′ on an arbitrarily fine hypergrid [n]d by choosing n large enough.
Then the term n(M/n) = M remains fixed for any choice of n, so the complexity of the
tester above applied to f ′ does not depend on n. Then, by setting n large enough, we may
upper bound the error introduced by the discretization.

Corollary 4.41. Thereis an L1 monotonicity
                                               tester for (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f :
                         2
[0, 1]d → R that uses O d εM log dM
                                    
                                  ε
                                        value queries. The tester is nonadaptive and has
one-sided error.

Proof. For sufficiently large m to be chosen below, the algorithm imposes a hypergrid [n]d
uniformly on [0, 1]d . More precisely, we define a function f ′ : [n]d → R via f ′ (x) = f (x/n)
for all x ∈ [n]d . Note that f ′ is (ℓ1 , M/n)-Lipschitz. Then, the algorithm simulates the
tester from Corollary 4.40 on f ′ with proximity parameter Θ(ε), and returns its result.
Note that the query complexity is as desired, so it remains to show correctness. If f is
monotone so is f ′ , in which case the algorithm accepts. Now assume that distmono  1   (f ) > ε,
and we need to show that distmono
                                1   (f ′
                                         ) ≳ ε.
     Let g ′ : [n]d → R be any monotone function. We obtain a monotone function g :
[0, 1]d → R as follows: for each x ∈ [0, 1]d , let x be obtained by rounding up each coordinate
xi to a positive integer multiple of 1/n. Then x′ := nx ∈ [n]d , and we set g(x) := g ′ (x′ ). It
follows that g is monotone, and by the triangle inequality,
                                                                                       Md
           E [|f − g|] ≤ E [|f ′ − g ′ |] + max |f (x) − f (x)| ≤ E [|f ′ − g ′ |] +      .
                                          x∈[0,1]d                                     n

In the first inequality, we separately accounted for the cost of turning each value of f into
the value at its corresponding “rounded up” point (accounted for by the second summand),
and then the cost of turning each equal-sized, constant-valued cell into the value of g on
that cell, and these values agree with f ′ and g ′ (accounted for by the first summand). In
the second inequality, we used the fact that any point x satisfies ∥x − x∥1 ≤ n1 · d, along
with the Lipschitz assumption on f .

                                                     58
    Therefore, by setting n > 10Mε
                                   d
                                     , we obtain Mnd < 10
                                                        ε
                                                          , and since the inequality above holds
for every monotone function g , we conclude that dist1 (f ′ ) ≥ distmono
                               ′                         mono
                                                                        1    (f ) − ε/10 > 9ε/10,
as desired.

Remark 4.42. One may wonder whether the reductions above could yield more efficient
testers if combined with Hamming testers for Boolean functions on the hypergrid with
better dependence on d (via the reduction from L1 testing to Hamming testing of [BRY14a],
which is behind Theorem 4.39), since e.g. the tester of [BCS23a] has query complexity
 e 1/2+o(1) /ε2 ). However, it seems like this cannot be the case, i.e. Corollary 4.40 has the
O(d
best query complexity of any reduction that upper bounds the size of the range of f by
M nd. The reason is as follows: [KMS18] showed that any nonadaptive, one-sided pair tester
for the Boolean cube with query complexity O(dα /εβ ) must satisfy α + β2 ≥ 32 , so hypergrid
testers must also satisfy this as well as β ≥ 1, assuming query complexity independent of
n. Then, given a hypergrid tester for Boolean functions with query complexity O(d    e α /εβ ),
                                                              1
our reduction via the inferred range size r = M nd gives an L tester with asymptotic query
                       dα      dα+β/2 dβ/2 (nM )β    2
complexity at least (ε/r) β =          εβ
                                                  ≥ d nM
                                                       ε
                                                         .


4.7      Discussion and open questions
In this chapter, we started the systematic study of directed Poincaré inequalities over con-
tinuous and discrete domains, and showed that the connection between directed isoperime-
try and monotonicity testing extends to the analytic setting by giving an L1 monotonicity
tester for Lipschitz functions over [0, 1]d via the corresponding directed Poincaré inequality.
We also showed that the one-dimensional case of the (discrete or continuous) line enjoys
a reduction to the Hamming setting; at the same time, the case of the discrete line [n]
shows a strong separation between Hamming testing (which has query complexity p       Θ(log n))
       1
and L testing of M -Lipschitz functions (which has query complexity Θ( nM/ε)). The
                                                                            e
one-dimensional
              setting also establishes
                                            (perhaps surprisingly) that our lower bounds of
            d                     d
Ω (M/ε) d+1 and Ω (nM/ε) d+1 for the unit cube and hypergrid, respectively, cannot
be improved for general constant dimension d.
    Comparing our tester for the solid cube [0, 1]d , which makes O(dM/ε)
                                                                       √ queries,   with
                                                                                 1/2+o(1)
the situation for monotonicity testing of Boolean functions, where O( d) and d
                                                                     e
query complexity bounds are achievable for the Boolean cube and hypergrid, respectively
[KMS18; BCS23a], the most immediate question is: is there an L1 tester for monotonicity
of Lipschitz functions with o(d) query complexity? We will begin to tackle this question
in the next chapter.

                                               59
A conjectured (L1 , ℓ2 )-inequality. Classical Poincaré inequalities are usually of the ℓ2
form, which seems natural e.g. due to basis independence. On the other hand, in the
directed setting, the weaker ℓ1 inequalities (as in [GGLRS00] and this chapter) have more
straightforward proofs than ℓ2 counterparts such as the inequality of [KMS18]. A perhaps
related observation is that monotonicity is not a basis-independent concept, since it is
defined in terms of the standard basis. In light of the parallels between the continuous and
discrete settings, we conjecture that the solid unit cube enjoys a directed (L1 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
inequality, mirroring the situation for the Boolean cube [KMS18; PRW22; CCRSW25].

Conjecture 4.43. For every Lipschitz function f : [0, 1]d → R, it holds that
                                               −
                            distmono
                                                        
                                1    (f ) ≲ E  ∥∇ f ∥ 2   .

    While we originally made this conjecture in [Fer23] in hopes of establishing an o(d)
tester for the analytic√setting, in the rest of this thesis we will actually obtain such a
tester—indeed, an O(e d) tester—from an (L2 , ℓ2 )-inequality instead. Such an inequality
enjoys the more standard ℓ2 geometry as described above, and appears to be easier to
obtain compared to Conjecture 4.43 because L2 spaces enjoy more useful structure (for
example, they are Hilbert spaces) than L1 spaces. Nevertheless, we believe that a proof or
disproof of Conjecture 4.43 will further illuminate the nature of directed isoperimetry in
the analytic setting, and its connection to monotonicity.




                                              60
Chapter 5
                √
Testing with O(
              e d) queries,
conditional on (L2, ℓ2)-Poincaré

In this chapter, we show that if we can prove a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for Lip-
                                                                                             √
schitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R, then we can obtain a monotonicity tester using only O(  e d)
queries, improving upon the O(d)-query tester from the previous chapter. Specifically, we
assume for now the following result, which will be proved in Chapter 7.

Theorem 5.1 (Directed Poincaré inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such that, for all Lipschitz f : [0, 1]d → R,

                                distmono (f )2 ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥22 .
                                                             
                                     2


   Conditional on this theorem, we show

Theorem 5.2. There exists a nonadaptive, directional derivative√L2 monotonicity tester
                                                                 e dM 2 /ε2 ) and one-sided
for M -Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with query complexity O(
error.

   We make two remarks about this result.
    First, as observed in [BRY14a], for 1 ≤ p ≤ q and any (say) Lipschitz f and g,
Jensen’s inequality gives ∥f − g∥Lp ([0,1]d ) ≤ ∥f − g∥Lq ([0,1]d ) . Thus any Lq monotonicity
                                              √
tester is also an Lp tester, so that the O(
                                          e dM 2 /ε2 ) upper bound from Theorem 5.2 also
holds for Lp testing with p ∈ [1, 2]. At the same time, as remarked in Chapter 2, if

                                               61
f is M -Lipschitz (with respect to the standard ℓ2 geometry, which is the assumption in
Theorem 5.2), then f is also (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz. Thus the testers from both Theorem 4.3
from the previous chapter and Theorem 5.2 above are L1 monotonicity testers for M -
Lipschitz functions; and in this setting, ignoring logarithmic factors, Theorem 5.2 is better
than Theorem 4.3 when Mε > √1d and vice-versa. Curiously, something analogous is true
                                                                                      √
of the testers of [KMS18] and [GGLRS00] for the Boolean setting, which make O(      e d/ε2 )
and O(d/ε) queries respectively.
                  √
    Second, the d dependence in the query complexity is optimal for derivative-pair
testers, which are randomized nonadaptive testers that, at each step, either sample points
x ⪯ y and use value queries to reject if f (x) > f (y), or sample point x and direction v ⪰ 0
and use a directional derivative query to reject if v · ∇f (x) < 0. The proof is not difficult,
and is given in Section 5.2.


Idea of the algorithm. Our tester may be seen as the natural continuous analogue of
the path tester of [KMS18] for the Boolean cube, which samples points x ⪯ y ∈ {0, 1}d
connected by a path of length 2k , for k sampled uniformly from [log d], and rejects if
f (x) > f (y). In our case, a path is replaced by a direction v ∈ {0, 1}d , and the condition
f (x) > f (y) is replaced by the condition v · ∇f (x) < 0, for a uniformly random point
x ∈ [0, 1]d , via a directional derivative query. Such a tester accepts any monotone function,
so the challenge is to ensure that it detects the case when distmono
                                                                   2   (f ) ≥ ε.
   In this case, hiding constant factors, Theorem 5.1 gives that E [∥∇− f ∥22 ] ≳ ε2 . We
                                                                                  ∥∇− f (x)∥2
would like the distribution of v to be such that, for any x, P [v · ∇f (x) < 0] ≳ √d∥∇f (x)∥22 .
                                                                 v                               2
Note that ∥∇f (x)∥22 ≤ M 2 because f is M -Lipschitz, hso if we had  i such2 a distribution for
                                                        ∥∇− f (x)∥22      ε
v, the tester would reject with probability at least E √dM 2          ≳ √dM   2 , implying that
   √                                                 x
O( dM 2 /ε2 ) queries suffice.
    A natural choice would be to sample v ∈ {0, 1}d so that vi = 1 corresponds to taking
edge i in the path tester. We make this concrete as follows: sample p uniformly from
  1, 12 , . . . , 2⌈log12 (4d)⌉ , and sample v ∈ {0, 1}d by letting each vi be 1 independently with


probability p. At a high level, Lemma 5.4 below shows that this distribution satisfies
the condition above (up to a logarithmic factor) by considering, for each threshold τ ,
the smallest value of p such that, informally, after issuing all its queries the algorithm
should expect to sample at least one vector v whose support intersects with at least one
entry i from ∇f (x) satisfying (∇f (x))i < −τ (this idea allows us to “forget” about all
the other negative entries of ∇f (x), and focus on a simpler “good event”). By ranging
over all possible τ , we show that there exists τ and corresponding p such that, with good

                                                62
Algorithm 2 L2 monotonicity tester for Lipschitz functions using directional derivative
queries
    Input: Directional derivative oracle access to M -Lipschitz function f : [0, 1]d → R.
    Output: Accept if f is monotone, reject if distmono
                                                   2    (f ) ≥ ε.
  procedure DirectionalDerivativeTester(f,
               √ 2                                 d, M, ε)
                  dM
      repeat Θ    ε2
                     log d times
         Sample x ∈ [0, 1]d uniformly at random.
         Sample v ∈ {0, 1}d from distribution D given by Definition 5.3.
         Reject if ∇f (x) · v < 0.
      end repeat
      Accept.


probability, the contribution of the positive entries of ∇f (x) to v · ∇f (x) is smaller than
τ , so that v · ∇f (x) < 0.


5.1       Algorithm and upper bound
We first define the distribution D from which the tester, which is given in Algorithm 2,
samples each direction v for its directional derivative queries.

Definition 5.3 (Distribution of direction vector). For each p ∈ [0, 1], we define distribution
Dp over {0, 1}d as follows. To sample v ∼ Dp ,

   1. Sample xi ∼ Ber(p) independently for each i ∈ [d], where Ber(p) is the Bernoulli
      distribution;

   2. Produce v = di=1 xi ei , where ei denotes the i-th standard basis vector.
                    P


Then, we define the distribution D over {0, 1}d as follows. Let P := 1, 21 , 41 , . . . , 2⌈log12 (4d)⌉ .
                                                                    

To sample v ∼ D, we first sample p uniformly at random from P , and then sample v from
Dp .

    Our proof of Theorem 5.2 relies on the following lemma, which quantifies the ability
of the tester to detect negative entries in the gradient ∇f (x) via directional derivative
queries v · ∇f (x). This setup may be seen, informally, as a signed version of the classic

                                                   63
group testing problem [Dor43]. We first state the lemma and defer its proof until after the
proof of the main theorem.

Lemma 5.4 (Detecting negative entries with subset sums). There exist universal constants
c, δ > 0 such that the distribution D from Definition 5.3 has the following property: for
any nonzero u ∈ Rd , we have
                                                         ∥u− ∥22
                                          
                                     δ −
                       P u · v < − ∥u ∥2 ≥ c ·     √                  .
                      v∼D            d               d log(d) · ∥u∥22
Theorem 5.5 (Refinement of Theorem 5.2). Algorithm 2 is a nonadaptive, directional
derivative L2 monotonicity  tester for M -Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R with query
               √    2
                           
complexity O dM  ε2
                      log d and one-sided error.

Proof. First note that, since f is Lipschitz and hence differentiable almost everywhere in
(0, 1)d by Rademacher’s theorem, with probability 1 the algorithm only samples points x
at which f is differentiable. Moreover, we have ∥∇f ∥2 ≤ M almost everywhere since f is
M -Lipschitz.
   The algorithm clearly accepts any monotone function; indeed if f is monotone, then
∇f ⪰ 0 and, since D is supported on {0, 1}d , we have ∇f · v ≥ 0 with probability 1.
Now, suppose distmono
                  2   (f ) ≥ ε. Combining Lemma 5.4 and Theorem 5.1, we obtain that
the probability that any single iteration of the tester rejects is
P [Iteration rejects] =      P       [∇f (x) · v < 0]
                          x∈[0,1]d
                           v∼D
                                                              
                                                   δ −
                     ≥ P           ∇f (x) · v < − ∥∇ f (x)∥2
                       x∈[0,1]d                    d
                         v∼D
                       Z                                        
                                                       δ −
                     =            P ∇f (x) · v < − ∥∇ f (x)∥2 dx
                         [0,1]d v∼D                    d
                                         −      2
                                     ∥∇ f (x)∥2
                       Z
                     ≥          c· √              dx               (Lemma 5.4, ∥∇f ∥2 ≤ M )
                         [0,1]d       d log(d)M 2
                                        Z
                                c
                     =       √                 ∥∇− f (x)∥22 dx
                           2
                       M d log d [0,1]d
                                c          1
                     ≥       √           · distmono
                                                2   (f )2                    (Theorem 5.1)
                       M d log d C
                           2

                        c           ε2
                     ≥ ·           √         ,
                       C M 2 d log d

                                                    64
where δ,c√are the constants
                             from Lemma 5.4 and C is the constant from Theorem 5.1.
           dM 2
Thus Θ     ε2
                log d iterations suffice to reject with probability at least 2/3.

Remark 5.6. A slight modification of the proof of Theorem 5.5 also shows that, if we
replace the condition ∇f (x) · v < 0 in Algorithm 2 with the more demanding condition
∇f (x) · v < − Kε
                d
                   for some universal constant K > 0, then we still obtain a tester with
the same guarantees; in particular,  Algorithm 2 does not rely on arbitrary precision. In-
deed, Theorem 5.1 gives that ∥∇− f (x)∥22 dx ≥ C1 ε2 when f is ε-far from monotone, but
                              R
                                       ε2                                ε2
the points x for which ∥∇− f (x)∥22 ≤ 2C  can only contribute at most 2C    to the integral.
                                   −      2   ε2                            ε2
Therefore the points satisfying ∥∇ f (x)∥2 > 2C must contribute at least 2C    and, at each
such point, Lemma 5.4 below guarantees that ∇− f (x) · v < − dδ ∥∇− f (x)∥2 < − dδ · √ε2C
with at least the probability given in the lemma. Therefore a similar calculation to that
of Theorem 5.5 shows that this modified tester also rejects with sufficient probability.

   We now prove Lemma 5.4, restated below for convenience.

Lemma 5.4 (Detecting negative entries with subset sums). There exist universal constants
c, δ > 0 such that the distribution D from Definition 5.3 has the following property: for
any nonzero u ∈ Rd , we have
                                                        ∥u− ∥22
                                          
                                     δ −
                       P u · v < − ∥u ∥2 ≥ c · √                     .
                      v∼D            d              d log(d) · ∥u∥22

Proof. We may assume that u contains at least one strictly negative entry, since otherwise
∥u− ∥22 = 0 and the claim is trivial. Let δ := 1/100, and define δd := δ/d for convenience.
    Recall the distributions D and Dp , as well as the set P , from Definition 5.3. Let
     C∥u− ∥2
t := √d·∥u∥22 , where we let C := 1/40. Note that 0 < t < 1. Letting c1 := 1/10, we will be
            2
done if we can show that there exists p ∈ P such that
                                                            ?
                                         u · v < −δd ∥u− ∥2 ≥ c1 t ,
                                     
                                P
                              v∼Dp

Suppose for a contradiction that this is not the case, i.e. that for every p ∈ P ,

                              P u · v < −δd ∥u− ∥2 < c1 t .
                                                     
                              v∼Dp


For convenience of notation, let a := u− and b := u+ . Then for every p ∈ P , letting
z, w ∼ Dp independently, we conclude that u · v is distributed identically to b · w − a · z,

                                                  65
and hence
                                           P      [a · z > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 ] < c1 t .
                                      z,w∼Dp

Fix any τ ∈ (2δd ∥a∥2 , ∥a∥∞ ), where the interval is nonempty since ∥a∥2 ≤ ∥a∥1 ≤ d∥a∥∞ ,
so that 2δd ∥a∥2 = 2∥a∥
                    100d
                         2
                           < ∥a∥∞ . Define aτ ∈ Rd as the vector obtained from a by only
preserving entries that are strictly larger than τ , and zeroing out entries that are at most
τ . Since the dot product a · z only gets smaller if we omit some of its summands, we
conclude that for every p ∈ P ,
                                          P       [aτ · z > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 ] < c1 t .
                                      z,w∼Dp

Let E denote the event that supp(z) ∩ supp(aτ ) ̸= ∅, so that aτ · z > τ when E occurs and
aτ · z = 0 otherwise. Fix the smallest p = p(τ ) ∈ P satisfying p ≥ ∥aτt ∥0 , which must exist
because ∥aτ ∥0 ≥ 1 by the choice of range for τ and t ≤ 1 as observed above, and therefore
  t
∥aτ ∥0
       ≤ 1 ∈ P . Then
                                                                                                       t
                   P       [E] = 1 − (1 − p(τ ))∥aτ ∥0 ≥ 1 − e−p(τ )∥aτ ∥0 ≥ 1 − e−t ≥                   ,
                z∼Dp(τ )                                                                               2
the last inequality since e−x ≤ 1 − x/2 for (say) 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. Therefore
                 c1 t >        P          [aτ · z > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 ]
                           z,w∼Dp(τ )

                       =      P       [E]         P      [aτ · z > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 | E]
                           z∼Dp(τ )         z,w∼Dp(τ )

                             +        P        [¬E]       P        [aτ · z > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 | ¬E]
                                  z∼Dp(τ )            z,w∼Dp(τ )
                           t
                       ≥       P [τ > b · w + δd ∥a∥2 ] .
                           2 w∼Dp(τ )
We conclude that
                                              P       [b · w < τ − δd ∥a∥2 ] < 2c1 .
                                          w∼Dp(τ )

We now claim that p(τ ) ≤ ∥a2tτ ∥0 . Indeed if this were not the case, then the choice of p(τ )
would imply that pmin := min P satisfies pmin > ∥a2tτ ∥0 with p(τ ) = pmin ≤ 4d 1
                                                                                   and hence,
since τ > 2δd ∥a∥2 ,
        P       [b · w < τ − δd ∥a∥2 ] ≥                 P       [b · w = 0] ≥      P       [w = 0] = (1 − pmin )d
     w∼Dp(τ )                                         w∼Dp(τ )                   w∼Dp(τ )

                                                                        3
                                                  ≥ 1 − d · pmin ≥        ,
                                                                        4

                                                                  66
a contradiction. Thus p(τ ) ≤ ∥a2tτ ∥0 . Now, the definition of Dp(τ ) , linearity of expectation
and the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality yield
                                          d
                                          X                                         √
                  E         [b · w] =           P [wi = 1] bi = p(τ ) · ∥b∥1 ≤ p(τ ) d∥b∥2 ,
               w∼Dp(τ )
                                          i=1

so by Markov’s inequality,
                                            h            √     i  1
                                    P     b · w ≥ 10p(τ ) d∥b∥2 ≤    .
                                 w∼Dp(τ )                         10
Now, the union bound implies that
                     h                              √        i               1
               P       τ − δd ∥a∥2 ≤ b · w < 10p(τ ) d∥b∥2 ≥ 1 − 2c1 −          > 0,
            w∼Dp(τ )                                                         10
                                                               √
so there exists w satisfying τ − δd ∥a∥2 ≤ b · w < 10p(τ ) d∥b∥2 , and hence τ − δd ∥a∥2 <
       √                                                                        C∥u− ∥2
10p(τ ) d∥b∥2 . Now, using the fact that p(τ ) ≤ ∥a2tτ ∥0 , recalling that t = √d·∥u∥22 , observing
                                                                                                            2
that ∥u∥22 = ∥u− ∥22 + ∥u+ ∥22 while b = u+ by definition, and using the inequality 2xy ≤
x2 + y 2 , we obtain
                               √              √
                             20 d∥b∥2 t   20C d∥u+ ∥2 ∥u− ∥22   10C · ∥u− ∥2
               τ − δd ∥a∥2 <            =          √          ≤              .
                               ∥aτ ∥0      ∥aτ ∥0 · d · ∥u∥22      ∥aτ ∥0
In summary, recalling that a = u− by definition, for all τ ∈ (2δd ∥a∥2 , ∥a∥∞ ) we have
                        τ
                          ∥aτ ∥0 ≤ (τ − δd ∥a∥2 )∥aτ ∥0 < 10C∥a∥2 ,
                        2
so τ ∥aτ ∥0 < 20C∥a∥2 for all τ ∈ (2δd ∥a∥2 , ∥a∥∞ ). On the other hand, if τ ∈ (0, 2δd ∥a∥2 ]
then
                                                  1           1
               τ ∥aτ ∥0 ≤ 2δd ∥a∥2 · d = 2δ∥a∥2 = ∥a∥2 < ∥a∥2 = 20C∥a∥2 ,
                                                 50           2
so in fact τ ∥aτ ∥0 < 20C∥a∥2 for all τ ∈ (0, ∥a∥∞ ). Integrating over τ and using Tonelli’s
theorem, we conclude that
                     Z                       Z                     Z     Xd
∥a∥∞ · 20C∥a∥2 =              20C∥a∥2 dτ >           τ ∥aτ ∥0 dτ =           (τ · 1 [ai > τ ]) dτ
                       (0,∥a∥∞ )                         (0,∥a∥∞ )                      (0,∥a∥∞ ) i=1
                     d Z                                             d Z                      d
                     X                                               X                        X a2  i       ∥a∥22
                 =                        (τ · 1 [ai > τ ]) dτ =                     τ dτ =             =         .
                      i=1     (0,∥a∥∞ )                              i=1   (0,ai )            i=1
                                                                                                    2        2

Hence we obtain that ∥a∥2 < 40C · ∥a∥∞ = ∥a∥∞ , a contradiction as desired.

                                                          67
On simulating directional derivative queries using value queries. We remark
that the directional derivative queries, while convenient for the analysis and in our opinion
conceptually clean, can be replaced with value queries under reasonable smoothness as-
sumptions. First, in Remark 5.6 we observed that the rejection condition v·∇f (x) < 0 may
in fact be replaced with the more robust condition v · ∇f (x) < −Θ(ε/d). Now, suppose the
input function f is promised to be twice-differentiable with second derivatives bounded by
any constant β. We may then replace any directional derivative query v · ∇f (x) with the
value queries f (x) and f (y), where y = x + αv for sufficiently small α > 0 as a function of
β, ε and d, and reject if f (y) < f (x). This is possible because, if v · ∇f (x) < −Θ(ε/d) and
for such small α, the directional derivative v · ∇f (z) remains negative on all points z in
the line segment between x and y, and hence f (y) < f (x). Conceptually, we view this as
confirmation that directional derivative queries are not unreasonably powerful, but rather
a useful abstraction for the analytic setting.


5.2      Lower bound
Definition 5.7. A derivative-pair tester for monotonicity of Lipschitz functions f :
[0, 1]d → R is described by a distribution D over pair tests and directional derivative
tests, where

  1. a pair test is an operation that performs a pair of value queries f (x), f (y) for x ⪯ y,
     and rejects if and only if f (x) > f (y); and
  2. a directional derivative test is an operation that performs a directional derivative
     query at point x and direction v ⪰ 0, and rejects if and only if ∇f · v < 0.

The tester independently samples m tests from D, rejects if any of these tests rejects,
and accepts otherwise. By definition, every derivative-pair tester is nonadaptive and has
one-sided error.

Theorem 5.8. Every L1 derivative-pair tester √for monotonicity
                                                               of M -Lipschitz functions
          d                                     dM
f : [0, 1] → R must have query complexity Ω     ε
                                                     .

Proof. It suffices to give a distribution over O(M )-Lipschitz functions f that are Ω(ε)-far
from monotone in L1 distance
                                 and such that any fixed pair test or directional derivative
                         ε
test has only an O √dM probability of rejecting a random f . Moreover, to obtain the
asymptotic lower bound we may as well assume that (say) ε ≤ 1 ≤ M .

                                             68
    For each i ∈ [d], define the function fi : [0, 1]d → R by
                                                          X        M
                                    fi (x) := −εxi +               √ xj .
                                                         j∈[d]\{i}
                                                                    d

Then, define f := fi where i is sampled uniformly at random from [d]. Note that each fi
is linear and hence Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant
                              s                    2
                                                       √
                                             
                                               M
                   |∇fi (x)| = ε + (d − 1) √
                                  2                   ≤ 2M = O(M ) .
                                                 d

We claim that distmono 1     (fi ) = Ω(ε) for each i ∈ [d]; by symmetry it suffices to consider the
case i = d. Any restriction fd (x−d , ·) of fd to an axis-aligned line in direction d (where
x−d := (x1 , . . . , xd−1 )) is a linear function with slope −ε, so it is Ω(ε)-far from monotone
in L1 distance (in fact, ε/4-far, and the constant average-valued function achieves this).
But by Tonelli’s theorem, the distance from fd to any monotone function g is the average
of the distance over each such axis-aligned line:
Z                      Z               Z                                       Z
      |fd −g| dx =                dx−d     |fd (x−d , xd )−g(x−d , xd )| dxd ≥     Ω(ε) dx−d = Ω(ε) .
 [0,1]d              [0,1]d−1         [0,1]                                     [0,1]d−1

We now show thatany pair  test or directional derivative test rejects a random f only
                       ε
with probability O √dM . Note that, since each fi is a linear function, any pair test on
points x ⪯ y may be simulated by a directional derivative test on point x and direction
v = y − x ⪰ 0. Therefore it suffices to consider directional derivative tests. Moreover, since
the gradient of each fi is constant over the points x, only the direction v is relevant. For
simplicity, we will say that direction v rejects function fi if a directional derivative test
with direction v rejects fi .
    Fix any direction v ⪰ 0. Suppose there exists j ∈ [d] such that
                                                M X
                                          εvj ≤ √             vk .
                                                  d k∈[d]\{j}

We then claim that the vector v ′ given by vj′ := 0 and vk′ := vk for k ∈ [d] \ {j} rejects
every fi that v rejects. Indeed, suppose v rejects fi . There are two cases. If i = j, then
                                                               X       M
                                0 > ∇fi (x) · v = −εvj +               √ vk ,
                                                             k∈[d]\{j}
                                                                        d

                                                    69
a contradiction, so this case cannot happen. On the other hand, if i ̸= j, then
                                  X        M                X M
        ∇f (x) · v ′ = −εvi′ +             √ vk′ ≤ −εvi +           √ vk = ∇f (x) · v < 0 ,
                                 k∈[d]\{i}
                                            d             k∈[d]\{i}
                                                                     d

the inequality since vi′ = vi and v ′ ⪯ v. Hence v ′ also rejects fi , as claimed. Thus v ′ rejects
a random f with no less probability than v. Therefore we may assume without loss of
generality that, for every j ∈ [d], either vj = 0 or

                                             M X
                                       εvj > √             vk .
                                               d k∈[d]\{j}

Let j ∗ ∈ [d] be such that vj ∗ is a minimum nonzero entry of v, and let n := ∥v∥0 be the
number of nonzero entries of v. Applying the inequality above to j = j ∗ yields
                      M X                   M X                                M
              εvj ∗ > √                vk ≥ √                1 [vk > 0] vj ∗ = √ · nvj ∗ ,
                        d k∈[d]\{j ∗ }        d k∈[d]\{j ∗ }                    d
                 √
and hence n < Mdε . Finally, note that v does not reject fi if vi = 0, so we conclude that
                                                                        √
                                                              n             dε/M    ε
           P [v rejects f ] = P [v rejects fi ] ≤ P [vi > 0] = ≤                 =√    ,
           f                  i                   i           d              d      dM
as desired. This concludes the proof.

Remark 5.9. Since every Lp tester with p ≥ 1 is also an L1 tester (see the remark after
Theorem 5.2), the lower bound above holds for Lp testers for all p ≥ 1.




                                                  70
Interlude




    71
Chapter 6

Directed isoperimetry on graphs via
the directed heat flow

In this chapter, we start working towards a proof of a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality
for the solid cube [0, 1]d (Theorem 5.1) by first showing such an inequality in the discrete
setting of functions f : {0, 1}d → R over the Boolean cube. By taking this intermediate
step, we untangle two aspects of our eventual proof of Theorem 5.1:

  1. A dynamical argument: instead of reasoning about distmono2   (f ) as a “static” com-
     parison between the object f and some monotone function f ∗ , we instead inspect a
     time-continuous process which smoothly takes initial state f to equilibrium state f ∗ .
     This idea can already be implemented in the case of functions f : {0, 1}d → R.
  2. The challenges of continuous space: when we implement this idea in the analytic
     setting of functions f : [0, 1]d → R, we will need to handle many complications of
     real- and functional-analytic flavour, such as ensuring regularity and integrability of
     solutions to partial differential equations. In contrast, the discrete study relies on
     the more well-behaved theory of finite-dimensional vector spaces, and thus makes for
     a more appropriate starting point.

    It turns out that the most natural way to show an (L2 , ℓ2 ) inequality for the Boolean
cube is to study the more general setting of directed graphs instead. In that setting, classical
Poincaré inequalities are intimately connected to the field of spectral graph theory, and our
argument will proceed by revisiting and extending a spectral theory for directed graphs
initiated by [Yos16] in the context of network analysis, via a dynamical system framework
introduced by work on the Paulsen problem from operator theory [KLLR18].

                                              72
   First, let us briefly recall some elements of spectral graph theory and their connection
to Poincaré inequalities. While our proof is mostly self-contained, we refer the reader to
[Han14; LP17; Lau25] for a thorough introduction to these ideas.
    Let G = (V, E) be an unweighted, undirected graph, with V = [n]. One of the central
objects in spectral graph theory is the Laplacian operator of G, which is the n × n matrix
L given as follows. Let A be the adjacency matrix of G, and let D be the diagonal matrix
such that Di is the degree of vertex i for each 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Then the Laplacian operator
is L := D − A. This matrix is symmetric and real-valued, and therefore enjoys a spectral
decomposition; we write λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ · · · ≤ λn for its eigenvalues.
    Spectral graph theory shows that the spectrum of L is remarkably effective in capturing
the connectivity properties of G, roughly speaking. For example, the smallest eigenvalue
λ1 is always equal to zero, and the second eigenvalue λ2 is nonzero if and only if G is
connected. Graph partitioning algorithms work by putting the vertices of G into clusters
according to an ordering defined by the eigenvector corresponding to the second eigenvalue
λ2 . This eigenvalue is also related to properties of G such as vertex and edge expansion,
which are combinatorial measures of connectivity of G, via so-called Cheeger inequalities.
Graphs with large λ2 are expander graphs, which are graphs that behave in many ways like
random graphs and have far-reaching connections in theoretical computer science, spanning
areas such as error-correcting codes, pseudorandomness, probabilistically checkable proofs,
and Markov chain theory. Moreover, the action Lf of the Laplacian operator also induces
a dynamical process called the heat flow, which will be a crucial element of our proof.
   The relevance of the Laplacian operator to our goals is revealed by the quadratic form
on L: for each f ∈ Rn , we have
                                       X
                              f ⊤ Lf =    (f (x) − f (y))2 .                         (6.1)
                                          xy∈E

Note that the right-hand side above, which sums up the variation of f along each edge of G,
is an unnormalized version of the right-hand side E [∥∇f ∥22 ] of a classical (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré
inequality when G is the graph of the hypercube, with an edge between x, y ∈ {0, 1}d if
and only if ∥x − y∥1 = 1. Indeed, the Laplacian operator is intimately connected to the
Poincaré inequality on G, and this connection provides the starting point for our proof in
the next section.
    The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 6.1, we study a spectral
theory for directed graphs and prove a general directed Poincaré inequality for any weighted
directed graph G, mediated by a quantity called the dynamical spectral gap of G. In
Section 6.2, we compute the dynamical spectral gap of the hypercube graph Hn , which we

                                                 73
use to derive a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for functions f : {0, 1}d → R. Finally,
in Section 6.3 we show a family of reverse Poincaré inequalities, showing in particular that
the directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality is tight up to a factor of d, and thus elucidating
the quality of the local-to-global relationship embodied by the directed Poincaré inequality.


6.1      Spectral theory and heat flow for directed graphs
We start by summarizing existing work on spectral theory for directed graphs, and pre-
viewing how we will employ and extend this theory to give a dynamical proof of a directed
Poincaré inequality for any weighted directed graph G.


Prior work on spectral theory for directed graphs. There has been extensive prior
work developing spectral graph theory beyond the classical setting of undirected graphs,
toward capturing directed graphs and hypergraphs. Early work of [Fil91; Chu05] associated
a certain Hermitian matrix with each directed graph, and showed a Cheeger-type inequality
based on the eigenvalues of that matrix, and many subsequent works have built upon that
foundation; we refer to the recent thesis [Tun25] for a thorough review, and here we mention
two recent lines of work that are closest to our setting. One line of works [LTW23; LTW24;
Tun25] has developed a theory of reweighted eigenvalues capturing expansion properties
of directed graphs and hypergraphs, proved Cheeger inequalities for these settings, and
devised efficient algorithms for graph partitioning. Another line of works [Yos16; Yos19;
FSY21; IMTY22] has pursued similar goals by analyzing a nonlinear Laplacian operator
and the heat equation associated with it.
    While our interest in a spectral theory for directed graphs is related to these previous
works (and indeed we will build upon the approach of [Yos16]), our focus is slightly different.
In a nutshell, while prior works have focused on spectral characterizations of good expansion
of a directed graph G as captured by directed versions of Cheeger inequalities (for edge
conductance or vertex expansion) and mixing time of random walks, our focus will be on
the quality of G as the “substrate” for a dynamical process; we will consider G a good
directed spectral expander if it affords fast convergence for that process. In particular, our
perspective allows for directed acyclic graphs to be considered good expanders, which is a
stark departure from prior perspectives – as we briefly explain next.
   Indeed, a central focus of prior works has been to establish Cheeger inequalities of the
type                                             q
                                    ⃗λ2 ≲ ϕ(G)
                                          ⃗    ≲ ⃗λ2 ,                                (6.2)

                                              74
where ⃗λ2 denotes a relevant second eigenvalue related to the directed weighted graph G,
                           ⃗
and the edge conductance ϕ(G)   of G is
                                                  +           +
                        ⃗             min {w(δ (S)), w(δ (V \ S))}
                        ϕ(G) := min                                 ,
                               ∅̸=S⊊V  min {volw (S), volw (V \ S)}

where δ + (S) denotes the outgoing edge boundary of S and volw (S) denotes the total
weighted degree of all vertices in S. Now, if G is not strongly connected, then in general
there exists a set S with positive volume but no outgoing edges, which makes ϕ(G)    ⃗     and
     ⃗
thus λ2 zero. In particular, this is the case for the directed hypercube graph which we are
interested in, so if we hope to show a non-trivial directed Poincaré inequality via a spectral
argument, such a quantity ⃗λ2 will not do.


Our approach. The type of spectral theory for directed graphs we study in this section
was first developed by [Yos16] in the context of network analysis. In that work, [Yos16]
defined a nonlinear Laplacian operator acting on real-valued functions defined on the ver-
tices of a directed graph, showed that this operator induces a dynamical process that is a
directed analogue of the classical heat flow on graphs, proved that this operator has non-
trivial eigenvalues, and established a Cheeger inequality like (6.2) for this setting. While
[Yos16] focused on the implications of directed spectral theory for graph partitioning and
related problems in network analysis, we focus on the dynamical properties of the heat
flow on directed graphs – namely its convergence to a monotone limit, and its connection
to the directed Poincaré inequality.
    Let us briefly motivate the main ideas in our argument by elaborating on the relevance
of spectral graph theory to Poincaré inequalities, as previewed in the introduction to this
chapter. Given a graph G = (V, E), the following four concepts play a central role:

   1. The Laplacian operator1 L , which acts on function f by outputting another function
      L f.

   2. The Dirichlet energy functional E, which associates with each f an energy E(f ) ≥ 0
      measuring the “local variance” of f along edges of G. (This is essentially the quadratic
      form shown in (6.1), appropriately normalized by 1/|V | and possibly the edge weights
      of G.)
  1
     We now write L as opposed to L because, going forward, we will see L as an operator acting on a
normalized inner product space, as opposed to a matrix acting on unnormalized Euclidean space. This
will be made formal in Section 6.1.1.


                                                75
  3. The heat flow semigroup Pet , which captures a dynamical process which starts at some
                                                                           d e
     initial state f and has its rate of change governed by the Laplacian: dt Pt f = L Pet f .
     The heat flow informally “sends mass” along each edge of G from the vertex with
     higher f -value to the vertex with lower f -value, causing the system to converge to
     an equilibrium state.

  4. The Poincaré inequality, which states that Var [f ] ≤ λ1 E(f ). The best constant λ is
     called the spectral gap of G.

    The appearance of the Poincaré inequality above hints at the relevance of this theory
to our goal of proving a directed Poincaré inequality, and we mentioned above that our
strategy toward this goal will be to define a directed version of the spectral gap. As a
motivation for this strategy, we observe that the spectral gap ties together essentially all
of the elements of the list above; indeed, as summarized in [Han14, Theorem 2.18], the
following are equivalent given a constant c ≥ 0:

  1. Poincaré inequality: Var [f ] ≤ cE(f ) for all f .
                           h    i
  2. Variance decay: Var Pt f ≤ e−2t/c Var [f ] for all f, t.
                             e

  3. Energy decay: E(Pet f ) ≤ e−2t/c E(f ) for all f, t.

    To prove a directed Poincaré inequality, we replace the Laplacian operator L with
an operator L − which, intuitively, only “sends mass” from vertex u to vertex v if (u, v)
is a directed edge and f (u) > f (v), i.e. f violates monotonicity along edge (u, v); the
dynamical system induced by L − is the directed heat flow on G, which was studied by
[Yos16]. The directed heat flow is precisely the gradient system for the directed energy
functional E − (f ), which is the directed version of E(f ) that only counts those edges along
which f violates monotonicity. Thus, this system intuitively “corrects” the local violations
of monotonicity as quickly as possible, and indeed it converges to a monotone function as
t → ∞.
    This directed theory cannot fully analogize the classical situation above; for example,
variance decay fails to hold, because non-constant monotone functions are (non-unique!)
stationary solutions. Instead, we will define the dynamical spectral gap of G as the best
constant characterizing the (directed) energy decay, as in Item 3 above, and then show
that (the directed version of) Item 3 implies (the directed version of) Item 1.



                                               76
Organization. The rest of this section is organized as follows. Sections 6.1.1 to 6.1.3
present the directed versions of the Laplacian operator, the Dirichlet energy functional,
and the heat flow, respectively. These subsections are largely an alternative exposition of
the ideas covered in [Yos16], but with a different emphasis tailored to our goals2. Then,
in Section 6.1.4 we define the dynamical spectral gap of a directed weighted graph, and
show via an energy decay argument that every directed weighted graph admits a directed
Poincaré inequality mediated by the dynamical spectral gap.


Notation. Given a discrete set V , we denote by L2 (V ) the Hilbert space obtained by
endowing the set of V → R functions with the inner product ⟨f, g⟩ := E [f (x)g(x)],
                                                                                        x∈V
where the expectation is taken with
                                 p respect to
                                            pthe uniform distribution over V . This inner
product induces the norm ∥f ∥ = ⟨f, f ⟩ = E [f 2 ].
    For each u ∈ V , we write eu ∈ L2 (V ) for the standard basis vector given by eu (v) :=
1 [u = v].


6.1.1      The directed Laplacian
Let G = (V, w) be a directed weighted graph, where w : V × V → [0, +∞) is function
specifying the weights of edges in G. By convention, we say that (u, v) ∈ V × V is an edge
in G when w(u, v) > 0. We say G is undirected if w is a symmetric function.

Definition 6.1 (Directed Laplacian [Yos16]). The directed Laplacian operator of G is the
operator L − = LG− : L2 (V ) → L2 (V ) given by
                                   1 X
                        L − f :=           w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ (ev − eu )                     (6.3)
                                   2 u,v∈V

for each f ∈ L2 (V ).

    Given f ∈ L2 (V ), we say an edge (u, v) is f -monotone if f (u) ≤ f (v), and we say
it is f -antimonotone if f (u) > f (v). We say f is monotone if every edge (u, v) of G is
f -monotone. If we think of f as the distribution of “mass” over the vertices V and of L − f
as the rate of change of f = f (t) over time t, then Definition 6.1 posits that mass flows
along the f -antimonotone edges, from the heavier vertex to the lighter one. When G is
   2
    In particular, [Yos16] defined both normalized and unnormalized versions of their Laplacian operator,
and focused on the normalized one. We study a single definition for weighted graphs.


                                                   77
undirected, this process is the standard heat flow on G, and indeed Definition 6.1 recovers
the standard graph Laplacian in this case:

Observation 6.2. If G is undirected, then LG− is (half of ) the standard (unnormalized)
Laplacian operator LG of G. Indeed, we can see the action of LG− on f ∈ L2 (V ) as
follows: 1) remove the f -monotone edges (u, v) from G; 2) view the resulting graph G′ as
undirected; and 3) apply the standard Laplacian operator LG′ to f .

Remark 6.3. In spectral graph theory one typically defines the Laplacian operator of
an undirected graph as −LG in our notation, i.e. by replacing ev − eu with eu − ev in
Definition 6.1 (which yields the matrix L from the introduction to this chapter). Our
notation follows instead the tradition from probability theory (see e.g. [BGL14; Han14]),
which has the advantages 1) that L − itself, rather than −L − , will be the generator of
the heat semigroup – our main object of interest; and 2) of consistency with the analytic
setting, where we have the Laplacian operator ∆ for smooth functions in Euclidean space.

   We note that unlike the standard Laplacian operator, the operator L − is nonlinear and
not self-adjoint in general. Instead, one may think of L − as a “piecewise linear” operator
on L2 (V ), which is in particular Lipschitz continuous.

Lemma 6.4. The operator L − : L2 (V ) → L2 (V ) is Lipschitz continuous.

Proof. Since all norms are equivalent in a finite-dimensional space, it suffices to let
f, g ∈ L2 (V ) differ on a single point z ∈ V and show that, for all u ∈ V ,
|(L − f )(u) − (L − g)(u)| ≤ M |f (z) − g(z)| for some constant M > 0, which may depend
on the graph G but not on f or g.
   By Definition 6.1, we have
                          1 X
          (L − f )(u) =         −w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ + w(v, u) (f (v) − f (u))+
                                                                                     
                          2 v∈V

and
                          1 X
         (L − g)(u) =           −w(u, v) (g(u) − g(v))+ + w(v, u) (g(v) − g(u))+ .
                                                                                
                          2 v∈V




                                               78
By the triangle inequality and the assumption that f and g differ only on coordinate z,
                                1          X                                          +                        +
   (L − f )(u) − (L − g)(u) ≤                              w(v, v ′ ) (f (v) − f (v ′ )) − (g(v) − g(v ′ ))
                                2
                                    v,v ′ ∈V :z∈{v,v ′ }
                                1          X
                            ≤                              w(v, v ′ )|(f (v) − f (v ′ )) − (g(v) − g(v ′ ))|
                                2
                                    v,v ′ ∈V :z∈{v,v ′ }
                             1                X
                            ≤ |f (z) − g(z)|          w(v, v ′ ) .
                             2               v,v ′ ∈V



6.1.2    The energy functional
As in the case of the standard Laplacian operator, the directed Laplacian naturally in-
duces an energy functional (or Dirichlet form). The following definition corresponds to the
Rayleigh quotient defined in [Yos16].

Definition 6.5 (Energy functional). The directed Dirichlet energy functional E − :
L2 (V ) → R is given by
                             E − (f ) := − f, L − f .

   The directed Dirichlet energy measures the local violations of monotonicity along edges
of G, and it is indeed always non-negative, as shown in the following proposition (which is
similar to Lemma 4.3 of [Yos16] for the normalized nonlinear Laplacian).

Proposition 6.6 (Energy functional measures local violations). For each f ∈ L2 (V ), it
holds that                        "                                 #
                            1       X                             2
                  E − (f ) = E          w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+
                                                                 
                                                                      .
                            2 u∈V
                                    v∈V




                                                      79
Proof. We have
                                *                                                      +
                                     1   X                                 +
  E − (f ) = − f, L − f = − f,                 w(u′ , v) (f (u′ ) − f (v)) (ev − eu′ )
                                     2 u′ ,v∈V
                      "                                                                            !#
               1              X                                 +
                                                                     X                           +
           = − E f (u)              w(u′ , u) (f (u′ ) − f (u)) −         w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))
               2 u∈V          u′ ∈V                                  v∈V
                      "                                                                       #
               1           X                                                               
           = − E f (u)             w(v, u) (f (v) − f (u))+ − w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+
               2 u∈V       v∈V
               1 X                                              1 X
           =             w(u, v)f (u) (f (u) − f (v))+ −                  w(v, u)f (u) (f (v) − f (u))+
             2|V | u,v∈V                                      2|V | u,v∈V
                   "                                      #
             1       X                                  2
                         w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+
                                                       
           = E                                              .
             2 u∈V v∈V

   Observe that since L − is “piecewise linear”, the energy functional E − is a “piecewise
quadratic” functional on L2 (V ). Furthermore, at each point f ∈ L2 (V ) the Laplacian L − f
points at the direction opposite to the gradient of E − . To formalize this viewpoint, we first
need to introduce some standard definitions to clarify what we mean by the gradient of a
functional on L2 (V ), such as E − . We recall the following standard definition.

Definition 6.7 (Fréchet derivative and gradient). We say that F : L2 (V ) → R is Fréchet
differentiable at f ∈ L2 (V ) if there exists a bounded linear operator A : L2 (V ) → R such
that
                                     |F (f + h) − F (f ) − Ah|
                               lim                             = 0.
                             ∥h∥2 →0           ∥h∥2
In this case, we call DF (f ) := A the Fréchet derivative of F at f . Moreover, by the Riesz
representation theorem there exists a unique vector v ∈ L2 (V ) satisfying

                                             Ah = ⟨h, v⟩                                           (6.4)

for all h ∈ L2 (V ). We call ∇F (f ) := v the gradient of F at f . Finally, we say that F is
(Fréchet) C 1 if it is Fréchet differentiable at every f ∈ L2 (V ) and the map f 7→ DF (f )
(from L2 (V ) to the space of bounded linear operators L2 (V ) → R) is continuous.

   The following proposition follows from standard real analysis.


                                                   80
Proposition 6.8. Suppose F : L2 (V ) → R has continuous partial derivatives with respect
to the standard basis {eu }u∈V , that is, for each u ∈ V the L2 (V ) → R function
                                                     F (f + teu ) − F (f )
                                   ∂u F (f ) = lim
                                              t→0             t
is continuous. Then F is (Fréchet) C 1 and its gradient ∇F : L2 (V ) → L2 (V ) is given by

                                      (∇F (f ))(u) = |V | · ∂u F (f )

for each f ∈ L2 (V ) and u ∈ V .

   We highlight that since the inner product on L2 (V ) used in (6.4) differs from the
standard inner product on the finite dimensional Euclidean space RV by a factor of |V |,
the gradient of F also differs from the partial derivatives of F by a factor of |V |.
  We are now equipped to show that E − is a convex C 1 functional, and that the Laplacian
L is (half of) the negative gradient of E − .
  −


Lemma 6.9. The functional E − : L2 (V ) → [0, +∞) is C 1 and convex.

Proof. We define a function g : R2 → R by
                                                     1         2
                                       g(x, y) :=      (x − y)+ .                              (6.5)
                                                     2

    Class C 1 . By Proposition 6.6, it suffices to show that for each u, v ∈ V , the L2 (V ) → R
                                2
function f 7→ (f (u) − f (v))+ is C 1 . By Proposition 6.8, it suffices to show that this
function has continuous partial derivatives, which is equivalent to showing that g has
continuous partial derivatives. This is indeed the case, with ∂1 g(x, y) = (x − y)+ and
∂2 g(x, y) = −(x − y)+ .
    Convexity. By Proposition 6.6 and recalling that the weights w(u, v) are non-negative,
it again suffices to show that the function g is convex. Indeed, let (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ) ∈ R2
and λ ∈ [0, 1]. Then, using the convexity of the functions z 7→ z + and z 7→ z 2 along with
the fact that the latter function is increasing for z ≥ 0, we have
                                          1                                              2
      g (λ(x1 , y1 ) + (1 − λ)(x2 , y2 )) =    [(λx1 + (1 − λ)x2 ) − (λy1 + (1 − λ)y2 )]+
                                          2
           1                                       2 1                                     2
         =    [λ(x1 − y1 ) + (1 − λ)(x2 − y2 )]+ ≤          λ(x1 − y1 )+ + (1 − λ)(x2 − y2 )+
           2                                              2
         ≤ λg(x1 , y1 ) + (1 − λ)g(x2 , y2 ) .

                                                      81
Lemma 6.10. For any f ∈ L2 (V ), we have L − f = − 12 ∇E − (f ).

Proof. Recall that the function g in (6.5) has partial derivatives ∂1 g(x, y) = (x − y)+ and
∂2 g(x, y) = −(x − y)+ . Now, by Proposition 6.6, for each u ∈ V , the partial derivative
∂u E − (f ) (in the notation of Proposition 6.8) is
                       1 X
          ∂u E − (f ) =        [w(u, v)∂1 g(f (u), f (v)) + w(v, u)∂2 g(f (v), f (u))]
                      |V | v∈V
                       1 X
                                w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ − w(v, u) (f (v) − f (u))+ .
                                                                                       
                    =
                      |V | v∈V

Thus, by Proposition 6.8, the gradient ∇E − (f ) (which exists by Lemma 6.9) is given by
                                        X
  (∇E − (f ))(u) = |V | · ∂u E − (f ) =    w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ − w(v, u) (f (v) − f (u))+
                                                                                               
                                        v∈V

for each u ∈ V . On the other hand, by Definition 6.1,
                           1 X
          (L − f )(u) =          −w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ + w(v, u) (f (v) − f (u))+
                                                                                      
                           2 v∈V

for each u ∈ V , so (L − f )(u) = − 21 (∇E − (f ))(u) as desired.


6.1.3     Directed heat flow
As previewed in the Section 6.1.1, the directed Laplacian operator can be thought of as
the rate of mass transfer along f -antimonotone edges of G in a dynamical process. Let us
make this notion precise.
   Given any f ∈ L2 (V ), we define the directed heat flow on G with initial state f as the
dynamical system given by the initial value problem (IVP)

                          f ′ (t) = L − f (t) for all t ≥ 0 ,   f (0) = f .                 (6.6)
Since the operator L − is Lipschitz by Lemma 6.4, a standard existence and uniqueness
theorem for ordinary differential equations (ODEs) implies that this IVP has a unique
solution f : [0, +∞) → L2 (V ); see e.g. [Tes12, Corollary 2.6]. This can also be shown
using the theory of maximal monotone operators, as done by [IMTY22] for the heat flow

                                                  82
on hypergraphs, and by [Yos19] in a study that generalizes both the directed graph setting
of [Yos16] and the hypergraph setting of [IMTY22].
   Moreover, the directed heat flow enjoys the following semigroup structure. Define the
operator family (Pt )t≥0 , with Pt : L2 (V ) → L2 (V ) for each t ≥ 0, as follows: for each
f ∈ L2 (V ), let f : [0, +∞) → L2 (V ) be the solution to the IVP (6.6), and let

                                         Pt f := f (t) .

Then it immediately follows that Pt satisfies the properties of a semigroup, namely

  1. P0 is the identity operator.

  2. Ps Pt = Ps+t for all s, t ≥ 0.

  3. limt→0 Pt f = f for all f ∈ L2 (V ) (this follows from the differentiability of the solution
     f (t)).

We call Pt the directed heat semigroup operator. Note that Pt is a nonlinear operator.

Observation 6.11 (Monotone functions are stationary solutions). If f ∈ L2 (V ) is mono-
tone, then L − f = 0 and hence Pt f = f for all t ≥ 0.

     Since monotone functions are stationary solutions to the directed heat flow (Observa-
tion 6.11), while any non-monotone f has non-zero Laplacian L − f (see Proposition 6.6),
it is natural to expect that Pt f always converges to a monotone function as t → ∞. This is
indeed the case, because the directed heat flow is a gradient system for the convex energy
functional E − .

Proposition 6.12 (Directed heat flow is gradient system). For all f ∈ L2 (V ) and t ≥ 0,
we have
                              d           1
                                 Pt f = − ∇E − (Pt f ) .
                              dt          2
                                       d
Proof. By the definition of Pt we have dt Pt f = L − Pt f . The claim then follows from
Lemma 6.10.

Corollary 6.13 (Convergence to monotone equilibrium). For every f ∈ L2 (V ), there
exists a (unique) monotone f ∗ ∈ L2 (V ) such that Pt f → f ∗ as t → ∞.


                                               83
Proof. It is a standard fact that since E − is a convex differentiable function which attains
its minimum, its gradient system (which is given by Pt ) converges to a minimizer f ∗ ; see
e.g. [AC84, Chapter 3, Theorem 2]. By Proposition 6.6, such a minimizer is monotone.

   In light of Corollary 6.13, we may define the following limit operator.

Definition 6.14 (Monotone equilibrium). We define the operator P∞ : L2 (V ) → L2 (V )
by P∞ f := limt→∞ Pt f for each f ∈ L2 (V ), and call P∞ f the monotone equilibrium of f .

Remark 6.15. Since P∞ f is monotone, it is constant in each strongly connected compo-
nent of G.


6.1.4    Dynamical spectral gap
In this subsection, we associate with the directed Laplacian operator L − = LG− a quantity
λ− = λ− (G), the dynamical spectral gap of G, as a natural directed generalization of the
classical (undirected) case. In particular, λ− (G) characterizes the rate of energy decay in
the directed heat flow as Pt f converges to its monotone equilibrium, and this also implies a
directed Poincaré inequality linking the distance between the initial and equilibrium states
to the energy of the initial state (i.e. its violations of monotonicity).
   In the classical theory, the spectral gap λ(G) associated with the classical Laplacian
operator LG is
                                                      − ⟨f, LG f ⟩
                              λ(G) =        inf                    ,                (6.7)
                                      f ̸=⃗0: E[f ]=0    ∥f ∥22
which is the best constant for which the Poincaré inequality
                                                   1
                                    Var [f ] ≤        E(f )
                                                 λ(G)

holds, where the classical Dirichlet energy is E(f ) = − ⟨f, LG f ⟩. As mentioned at the
beginning of this section, the spectral gap also characterizes the rate of exponential decay
of the variance toward its minimum value under the heat flow. That is, λ(G) is the best
constant for which
                              d     h    i               h    i
                                 Var Pt f ≤ −2λ(G)Var Pt f
                                      e                    e                            (6.8)
                              dt
holds for all f ∈ L2 (V ) and t ≥ 0, where Pet is the undirected heat flow. It also similarly
characterizes the exponential decay of the Dirichlet energy, i.e. λ(G) is the best constant

                                             84
for which
                                d e
                                   E(Pt f ) ≤ −2λ(G)E(Pet f )                     (6.9)
                                dt
holds for all f ∈ L2 (V ) and t ≥ 0. We refer the reader to [Han14] for a comprehensive
reference.
    We wish to define a natural notion of spectral gap for the directed Laplacian L − ,
towards the goal of obtaining a directed Poincaré inequality. One attempt is to take the
directed analogue of the ratio in (6.7), namely
                                       E − (f )   − ⟨f, L − f ⟩
                                                =               .                                (6.10)
                                        ∥f ∥22       ∥f ∥22
(This would essentially be the unnormalized version of the spectral gap defined by [Yos16]
for the normalized nonlinear Laplacian.) However, this quantity faces the issue that any
monotone function f has E − (f ) = 0, which makes the ratio zero3. Even if we restricted
our attention to non-monotone f , in general ∥f ∥22 could still be made arbitrarily large
while keeping E − (f ) > 0 bounded, by putting large values of f (u) that do not introduce
violations of monotonicity. Therefore (6.10) does not seem like an informative quantity for
our purposes.
    Another way to see the conceptual issue is that, unlike in the classical case, in the
directed setting we cannot hope to have variance decay as in (6.8), since the monotone
equilibrium P∞ f may have strictly positive variance. However, as our next attempt will
reveal, we can establish the decay of Dirichlet energy as in (6.9), which will suffice to give
a directed Poincaré inequality for G.
       We start by observing that, in the classical case, the ratio
                                                     ∥L f ∥22
                                               inf                                               (6.11)
                                           f :E(f )>0 E(f )

equals the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of the classical Laplacian −LG , so for a connected
graph it also equals the spectral gap λ(G). Now, its directed analogue
                                                      ∥L − f ∥22
                                              inf                                                (6.12)
                                         f :E − (f )>0 E − (f )

seems like a reasonable candidate – intuitively, note that not only does the constraint
E − (f ) > 0 rule out monotone functions f , but also, f -monotone edges (u, v) with large
   3
    While for strongly connected directed graphs only constant functions are monotone, which renders the
objection void, this is not the case for general directed graphs.


                                                   85
f (v) − f (u) contribute nothing to the denominator, suggesting that (6.12) does not have
the same shortcoming as (6.10)4. Another way to see the intuition behind (6.12) is that,
while its classical counterpart (6.11) only differs from (6.7) by ignoring the zero eigenvalues
coming from the single pathological case of disconnected graphs, the directed (6.12) ignores
many more uninformative situations and captures the connectivity of G in the appropriate,
directed sense.
       Therefore, we define

Definition 6.16. The dynamical spectral gap of G is the quantity λ− (G) ∈ [0, +∞] given
by
                                ∥L − f ∥22
                                                                 
                  −                              2       −
                 λ (G) := inf              f ∈ L (V ) , E (f ) > 0 .
                                 E − (f )

       The next proposition shows that every graph has a non-zero dynamical spectral gap.

Proposition 6.17. The dynamical spectral gap λ− (G) is strictly positive, and it is a real
number unless G consists of isolated vertices only.

Proof. If G contains at least one edge e = (u, v), then any function f ∈ L2 (V ) with
f (u) = 1 and f (v) = 0 has E − (f ) > 0, so λ− (G) < +∞.
   We now show that λ− (G) > 0. The idea is that, for each function f ∈ L2 (V ), the action
of L − on f is the same as the action of the standard Laplacian on a subgraph of G (made
undirected) that preserves only the f -antimonotone edges (as noted in Observation 6.2).
The number of such subgraphs is at most |V |!, i.e. the number of permutations induced
by f , so λ− (G) is lower bounded by the minimum non-zero eigenvalue out of finitely many
graphs.
   Formally, let n := |V |, fix any f ∈ L2 (V ) satisfying E − (f ) > 0, and let π : V → [n] be
a bijection such that fπ−1 (1) ≤ fπ−1 (2) ≤ · · · ≤ fπ−1 (n) . Let Gπ = (V, wπ ) be the undirected,
weighted graph defined as follows: for each u, v ∈ V ,
                                          (
                                            1
                                              w(u, v) if π(u) > π(v)
                            wπ (u, v) := 21
                                            2
                                              w(v, u) otherwise.
   4
    For example, let G consist of two disjoint edges (u, v) and (u′ , v ′ ), and consider the sequence (fi )i∈N
with fi (u) = 0, fi (v) = i, f (u′ ) = 1, and f (v ′ ) = 0. Then E − (fi )/∥fi ∥22 → 0 as i → ∞, while
∥L − fi ∥22 /E − (fi ) remains constant.




                                                      86
Let Lπ := LGπ denote the standard Laplacian operator for Gπ . We claim that L − f =
Lπ f . First, by definition of the standard Laplacian, for any z ∈ V we have
                                        X
                           (Lπ f )(z) =    wπ (z, v) (f (v) − f (z)) .
                                             v∈V

On the other hand, Definition 6.1 and the definition of wπ yield
                  1 X
     (L − f )(z) =        w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+ (ev (z) − eu (z))
                  2 u,v∈V
                  1 X                                     1 X
                =               w(u, z) (f (u) − f (z)) −               w(z, v) (f (z) − f (v))
                  2                                       2
                    u:π(u)>π(z)                             v:π(z)>π(v)
                     X                                     X
                =           wπ (v, z) (f (v) − f (z)) +            wπ (v, z) (f (v) − f (z))
                     v:π(v)>π(z)                             v:π(z)>π(v)
                     X
                =          wπ (v, z) (f (v) − f (z)) = (Lπ f )(z) ,
                     v∈V

so indeed L − f = Lπ f . Let λπ denote the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of −Lπ , which
exists because Gπ contains at least one edge since f is not monotone. Then

                            ∥L − f ∥22    ∥Lπ f ∥22       ∥Lπ f ∥22
                                       =               =             ≥ λπ .
                             E − (f )    − ⟨f, L − f ⟩   ⟨f, −Lπ f ⟩

Let λ∗ := minπ λπ , where π ranges over all bijections from V to [n] for which −Lπ has a
non-zero eigenvalue. Then λ∗ is strictly positive, and for each g ∈ L2 (V ) with E − (g) > 0,
we have
                                      ∥L − g∥22
                                                ≥ λ∗ .
                                       E − (g)
Thus λ− (G) > 0 as claimed.

    Next, we observe that λ− (G) characterizes the rate of exponential decay of E − (Pt f ).
The key fact is that, in a gradient system, the rate of energy decay is governed by the rate
of change of the state.

Proposition 6.18. Let f ∈ L2 (V ). Then the function t 7→ E − (Pt f ) is differentiable and,
for all t ≥ 0,
                                                      2
                             d −               d
                               E (Pt f ) = −2     Pt f .
                            dt                 dt     2


                                                    87
Proof. By the chain rule (for the Fréchet derivative) and Proposition 6.12,
                                                                   2
        d −                 −        d         d     d          d
           E (Pt f ) =    ∇E (Pt f ), Pt f = −2 Pt f, Pt f = −2    Pt f .
        dt                           dt        dt    dt         dt     2

Corollary 6.19. Let f ∈ L2 (V ). Then the function t 7→ E − (Pt f ) satisfies, for all t ≥ 0,

                               d −
                                  E (Pt f ) ≤ −2λ− (G) · E − (Pt f ) .                     (6.13)
                               dt
Furthermore, λ− (G) is the largest constant for which (6.13) holds for all f, t.

Proof. By Proposition 6.18,
                                                      2
                          d −               d
                             E (Pt f ) = −2    Pt f = −2∥L − Pt f ∥22 .
                          dt                dt     2

By Definition 6.16, λ− (G) ≤ ∥L − Pt f ∥22 /E − (Pt f ), whence (6.13) follows. Conversely, for
every ε > 0, by definition of infimum we can find g ∈ L2 (V ) such that ∥L − g∥22 /E − (g) <
λ− (G) + ε, in which case we have (recalling that P0 g = g)

                  d −                       2
                     E (P0 g) = −2 L − P0 g 2 > −2 λ− (G) + ε E − (P0 g) ,
                                                             
                  dt
so the constant λ− (G) is indeed tight.

    We can now show that the dynamical spectral gap mediates an upper bound on the
distance from the initial state f to its monotone equilibrium P∞ f in terms of the directed
Dirichlet energy of f , i.e. a directed Poincaré inequality.

Theorem 6.20 (Directed Poincaré inequality). For all f ∈ L2 (V ), it holds that
                                                      1
                                 ∥f − P∞ f ∥22 ≤            E − (f ) .
                                                   λ− (G)

Proof. Since Pt f → P∞ t, it suffices to show that ∥f − Pt f ∥2L2 (V ) satisfies the claimed upper
bound for all t ≥ 0. By the triangle inequality and Proposition 6.18,
                      Z t                 Z t                 Z tr
                           d                   d                         1 d
       ∥f − Pt f ∥2 =        Pt f dt ≤            Pt f dt =            − · E − (Pt f ) dt .
                       0 dt           2    0   dt      2        0        2 dt

                                                 88
We now appeal to the exponential rate of decay of E − (Pt f ) (Corollary 6.19) via a straight-
forward calculus lemma stated below (Lemma 6.21) to conclude that
                            r
                              1      2     p                    1    p
             ∥f − Pt f ∥2 ≤     ·p           E − (P0 f ) = p            E − (f ) .
                              2      −
                                   2λ (G)                       −
                                                               λ (G)
   We used the following calculus lemma, which appears implicitly in [KLR21,
Lemma 4.17].

Lemma 6.21. Let t > 0 and suppose that F : [0, t] → [0, +∞) is differentiable and satisfies
F ′ (s) ≤ −KF (s) for all s ∈ [0, t], for some K > 0. Then it holds that
                               Z tp
                                                      2 p
                                       −F ′ (s) ds ≤ √   F (0) .
                                0                      K
Proof. We first observe that we may assume that F (s) > 0 for all s ∈ (0, t). Indeed, if this
is not the case, then let s∗ := inf{s ∈ (0, t) : F (s) = 0}. By continuity of F , we obtain
that F (s∗ ) = 0; then, since F ≥ 0 and F ′ ≤ 0, we conclude that F (s) = F ′ (s) = 0 for all
s ∈ [s∗ , t]. Thus it suffices to prove the claim for the interval [0, s∗ ], and indeed F (s) > 0
for all s ∈ (0, s∗ ). Thus assume without loss of generality that F (s) > 0 for all s ∈ (0, t).
                                                                                       F ′ (s)
                                          p                                  p
    By the chain rule, the function s 7→ F (s) is differentiable with ds   d
                                                                               F (s) = √       ≤0
                                                                                      2   F (s)
for all s ∈ (0, t), and thus
                                  p                         p
                                               ′
                                                                                 
                 p               2  F (s)    F   (s)      2  F (s)      d  p
                    −F ′ (s) = − p           p         =p             −      F (s)
                                   −F ′ (s) 2 F (s)         −F ′ (s)    ds
                                p                        
                               2 F (s)        dp                   2 dp
                             ≤p             −        F (s) = − √          F (s) .
                                 KF (s)       ds                   K ds
Therefore
 Z tp                  Z t p     
          ′
                     2     d             2 p       p        2 p
      −F (s) ds ≤ − √        F (s) ds = √    F (0) − F (t) ≤ √   F (0) .
  0                  K 0 ds               K                   K



6.2      The dynamical spectral gap of the directed hy-
         percube
                                                                                             
Let Hd denote the unweighted directed hypercube in dimension d, i.e. Hd = {0, 1}d , w
where the weight function w is as follows: for each x, y ∈ {0, 1}d , w(x, y) = 1 if ∥x−y∥1 = 1

                                                89
with x ⪯ y, and w(x, y) = 0 otherwise. For simplicity of notation, in this section we also
let V := {0, 1}d .
   This section studies the spectral gap of Hd endowed with directed Laplacian operator
L = LH−d and associated directed Dirichlet energy functional E − . Note that the directed
  −

Dirichlet energy specialized to Hd satisfies, by Proposition 6.6,
                            "                                 #
                       1      X                             2    1 
             E − (f ) = E        w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))+       = E ∥∇− f ∥22 ,
                                                                            
                                                                                   (6.14)
                       2 u∈V v∈V                                 2

so a directed Poincaré inequality as given by Theorem 6.20 for Hd is indeed a directed
(L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality in the notation of Chapter 2.
   We show the following.

Theorem 6.22 (Dynamical spectral gap of the directed hypercube). Hd satisfies λ− (Hd ) =
1.

   Before proving the theorem, we first observe that L − and E − enjoy a useful coordinate-
wise decomposition: we write
                                            Xd
                                     L− =       L (i) ,
                                                    i=1

where each L   (i)     2          2
                     : L (V ) → L (V ) is given by
                                        1
                     (L (i) f )(x) :=     f (x⊕i ) − f (x) 1 f (xi→0 ) > f (xi→1 )
                                                                                
                                        2
for each f ∈ L2 (V ) and x ∈ {0, 1}d , where x⊕i denotes the vertex obtained by flipping the
i-th bit of x, and xi→b denotes the vertex obtained by setting the i-th bit of x to b. It
is straightforward to check that this decomposition agrees with Definition 6.1. Similarly,
from Proposition 6.6 we also obtain the decomposition
                                                    d
                                                    X
                                               −
                                              E =         E (i) ,
                                                    i=1


where each E (i) : L2 (V ) → R is given by

                            (i)     1          h
                                                      i→1
                                                                    i
                                                               i→0 − 2
                           E (f ) := · E         (f (x ) − f (x ))
                                    4 x∈{0,1}d

                                                    90
for each f ∈ L2 (V ). (The extra factor of 1/2 compared to Proposition 6.6 appears because
the summation above counts each edge of Hd twice.)
    We now prove Theorem 6.22. The upper bound is easy and attained by anti-dictator
functions, so the main point is to show the lower bound λ− (Hd ) ≥ 1. To this end, we fix any
function f , consider the fraction in Definition 6.16, and expand the operators L − and E −
according to the coordinate-wise decompositions above. The main conceptual ingredient
is the positive correlation L (i) f, L (j) f ≥ 0, which is established by an argument rem-
iniscent of the analysis of the edge tester for monotonicity of functions on the hypercube
[GGLRS00]5.

Proof of Theorem 6.22. Upper bound. Note that for the anti-dictator function g(x) =
−x1 , the coordinate-wise decompositions give that (L − g)(x) = ± 21 for every x ∈ {0, 1}d ,
while the g-antimonotone edges (which contribute to E − ) are precisely those along the first
coordinate. Hence
                              ∥L − g∥22   E [(±1/2)2 ]
                                        =  1            = 1,
                               E − (g)     4
                                             E [(−1)2 ]
so λ− (Hd ) ≤ 1.
       Lower bound. Let f ∈ L2 (V ). It suffices to show that ∥L − f ∥22 ≥ E − (f ). Note that
                     * d           d
                                             +     d
                 2
                      X            X              X          2     X
            L −f 2 =      L (i) f,    L (i) f =        L (i) 2 + 2      L (i) , L (j) ,
                           i=1             i=1           i=1                i<j

                             Pd
and recall that E − (f ) =       i=1 E
                                         (i)
                                        (f ). For each i ∈ [d], we have
                                                       "                                              2 #
         2
                      h                 2
                                          i               1
 L (i) f 2 = E           (L (i) f )(x)                       f (x⊕i ) − f (x) 1 f (xi→0 ) > f (xi→1 )
                                                                                                  
                                            = E
             x∈{0,1}d                         x∈{0,1}d    2
             1          h                            2 i
           =      E       (f (xi→1 ) − f (xi→0 )− )       = E (i) (f ) .
             4 x∈{0,1}d
Therefore, we will be done if we can show that, for each i ̸= j, it holds that
 L (i) f, L (j) f ≥ 0:
   5
    [GGLRS00] define a switch operator Si which fixes all violations of monotonicity of a Boolean function
f along direction i, by switching the values of f along violating edges. A key lemma in that paper
shows that the application of Si can only make the number of violations of monotonicity along a different
direction j smaller – informally, the work along direction i “helps” toward the work along direction j. In
our L2 setting, this is captured by the positive correlation L (i) f, L (j) f ≥ 0 between the contributions
of directions i and j to the action of L .


                                                    91
Claim 6.23. For every i, j ∈ [d] with i ̸= j, we have

                                                  L (i) f, L (j) f ≥ 0 .

   We prove the claim below, but first we use it to conclude the proof of the theorem.
Putting the above together, we obtain
                             d                                                        d
                       2
                             X                2       X                               X
            L f−
                       2
                         =         L   (i)
                                             f 2+2          L    (i)
                                                                       ,L   (j)
                                                                                  ≥         E (i) (f ) = E − (f ) .
                             i=1                      i<j                             i=1


Since f was arbitrary, we conclude that λ− (Hd ) ≥ 1.

Proof of Claim 6.23. Suppose without loss of generality that i = 1 and j = 2. We first
observe that it suffices to consider each “square” obtained by fixing all but the first two
coordinates, since the inner product decomposes along these squares. Concretely, for each
y ∈ {0, 1}d−2 , let gy : {0, 1}2 → R be given by gy (x) := f (x, y) for each x ∈ {0, 1}2 , where
we write f (x, y) for the value of f at the input obtained by concatenating x and y. Then
                     1 X
 L (1) f, L (2) f =                (1)               (2)
                                                              
                                (L     f )(z)    (L      f )(z)
                    2d
                       z∈{0,1}d
                                          "
                     1 X         X          1
                                                f (x⊕1 , y) − f (x, y) 1 f (x1→0 , y) > f (x1→1 , y)
                                                                                                  
                   = d
                    2         2      d−2
                                            2
                            x∈{0,1} y∈{0,1}
                                                                                                                                  #
                                                       1
                                                         f (x⊕2 , y) − f (x, y) 1 f (x2→0 , y) > f (x2→1 , y)
                                                                                                            
                                                     ·
                                                       2
                       1       X             X
                   =                               L (1) gy (x) · L (2) gy (x) .
                       2d
                            y∈{0,1}d−2 x∈{0,1}2


We will show that for any g : {0, 1}2 → R, the sum                                     x∈{0,1}2 L          g(x) · L (2) g(x) is
                                                                                                     (1)
                                                                                   P
nonnegative, which will complete the proof. Define

                             c := g(0, 1) ,                                       d := g(1, 1) ,
                             a := g(0, 0) ,                                       b := g(1, 0) .




                                                            92
Then we have
     X
         L (1) g(x) · L (2) g(x)
      x∈{0,1}2
        X
                  g(x⊕1 ) − g(x) 1 g(x1→0 ) > g(x1→1 ) g(x⊕2 ) − g(x) 1 g(x2→0 ) > g(x2→1 )
                                                                                       
  =
      x∈{0,1}2

  = (b − a)1 [a > b] (c − a)1 [a > c] + (a − b)1 [a > b] (d − b)1 [b > d]
           + (d − c)1 [c > d] (a − c)1 [a > c] + (c − d)1 [c > d] (b − d)1 [b > d]
  = (a − b)+ (a − c)+ − (a − b)+ (b − d)+ − (c − d)+ (a − c)+ + (c − d)+ (b − d)+
  = (a − b)+ − (c − d)+ (a − c)+ − (b − d)+ ≥ 0 ,
                                             


where the last inequality is proved in Lemma 6.24 below.

Lemma 6.24. For any a, b, c, d ∈ R, we have

                  (a − b)+ − (c − d)+ (a − c)+ − (b − d)+ ≥ 0 .
                                                      


Proof. Let X := (a − b)+ − (c − d)+ and Y := (a − c)+ − (b − d)+ , so that our goal is to
show that XY ≥ 0, or equivalently that X > 0 =⇒ Y ≥ 0 and Y > 0 =⇒ X ≥ 0. By
switching the roles of b and c, it suffices to prove the first implication, i.e. that X > 0 =⇒
Y ≥ 0.
   Suppose X > 0. Then a − b > 0, since otherwise we would have (a − b)+ = 0 and hence
X ≤ 0. Therefore a − b = (a − b)+ > (c − d)+ ≥ c − d. Moreover, if (b − d)+ = 0 then
Y ≥ 0 and we are done, so we may assume that b − d = (b − d)+ > 0. We conclude that

                 Y = (a − c)+ − (b − d)+ ≥ (a − c) − (b − d) = (a − b) − (c − d) ≥ 0 ,

where the first inequality holds since (a − c)+ ≥ a − c while (b − d)+ = b − d, and the
second inequality holds since a − b ≥ c − d.

   Combining Theorems 6.20 and 6.22 along with (6.14), we obtain the desired directed
(L , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for the hypercube.
  2


Theorem 6.25 (Directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for the hypercube). For all f :
{0, 1}d → R, it holds that
                                                  1       −          −        1  − 2
            distmono
                2    (f )2 ≤ ∥f − P∞ f ∥22 ≤            E   (f ) = E   (f ) =   E ∥∇ f ∥2 .
                                               λ− (Hd )                       2

                                                   93
6.3      Reverse directed Poincaré inequalities
We give a reverse directed Poincaré inequality which establishes the tightness of Theo-
rem 6.25 up to a factor of d. In fact, for a general directed graph G, the reverse directed
Poincaré inequality we show is mediated by the maximum total weighted degree of G.
   Let dw (G) denote the maximum total weighted degree of any vertex in G:
                                     (                     )
                                      X
                       dw (G) := max    (w(u, v) + w(v, u)) .
                                     u∈V
                                           v∈V


     It will also be natural to generalize the reverse inequality to all (Lp , ℓp ) types for p ∈
[1, 2]. To that end, define
                                       "                                  #
                                 1       X                          +   p
                      Ep− (f ) := · E
                                                                      
                                             w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))        ,              (6.15)
                                 p u∈V v∈V

so that E2− (f ) = E − (f ) by Proposition 6.6, and moreover when G = Hd we have
                                               1
                                  Ep− (f ) =     · E ∥∇− f ∥pp .
                                                             
                                               p

   We then show the following.

Theorem 6.26 (Reverse directed Poincaré inequality). For all f : V → R, all monotone
g : V → R, and all p ∈ [1, 2], we have
                                                       1
                                ∥f − g∥pLp (V ) ≥         E − (f ) .
                                                    dw (G) p

Proof. Let ∆ ∈ L2 (V ) be given by ∆(u) := |f (u) − g(u)| for each u ∈ V , so that ∥f −
g∥pLp (V ) = ∥∆∥pLp (V ) . For each f -antimonotone edge (u, v) of G, we have f (u) > f (v) while
g(u) ≤ g(v), which implies via the triangle inequality that

                                 ∆(u) + ∆(v) ≥ f (u) − f (v) .                            (6.16)




                                                 94
Using (6.15) and summing (6.16) up over all f -antimonotone edges, we conclude that
                                  "                                      #
                   −        1       X                               + p
                  Ep (f ) = E            w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))
                            p u∈V v∈V
                                                                             
                            1            X
                          = E                       w(u, v) (f (u) − f (v))p 
                            p u∈V
                                    v∈V :f (u)>f (v)
                                                                              
                            1            X
                          ≤ E                       w(u, v) (∆(u) + ∆(v))p 
                            p u∈V
                                    v∈V :f (u)>f (v)
                                                                             
                                      X
                          ≤ E                    w(u, v) (∆(u)p + ∆(v)p )
                           u∈V
                                     v∈V :f (u)>f (v)
                                 "                                  !#
                                                X
                        ≤ E          ∆(u)p       (w(u, v) + w(v, u))
                           u∈V
                                                v∈V
                        ≤ dw (G) · ∥∆∥pLp (V ) ,

where the second inequality used the fact that (x + y)p ≤ p(xp + y p ) for x, y ≥ 0 and
p ∈ [1, 2].

   The directed unweighted hypercube Hd has dw (Hd ) = d. Hence the theorem above
implies

Corollary 6.27. Fix graph Hd , the directed unweighted hypercube on vertex set {0, 1}d .
Then for each f : {0, 1}d → R and p ∈ [1, 2], we have
                                           1 −          1
                      distmono (f )p ≥                     E ∥∇− f ∥pp .
                                                                     
                          p                  Ep (f ) =
                                           d           p·d




                                                   95
Part II: Continuous setting via PDEs
        and optimal transport




                 96
Chapter 7

An L2 directed Poincaré inequality
via the directed heat equation

The main result of this chapter is a directed (L2 , ℓ2 )-Poincaré inequality for sufficiently reg-
ular functions f : [0, 1]d → R (in particular, Lipschitz continuity suffices; see Section 7.2.1).

Theorem 7.1 (Directed Poincaré inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such that, for all f ∈ H 1 ((0, 1)d ),
                                 distmono (f )2 ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥22 .
                                                              
                                       2                                        (7.1)

    As in the previous chapter, we will prove Theorem 7.1 via a dynamical argument. The
two areas of mathematics underpinning our proof are partial differential equations [Eva10;
Bre11] and the theory of optimal transport [Vil09; San15]. Our guiding vision is to identify
a robust approach to the classical Poincaré inequality such that, by “toggling” a single
aspect of the approach, we can transform a proof of the classical statement into a proof
of its directed counterpart. It turns out that the heat equation is the crucial ingredient to
implement this vision, as we now outline.


7.1      Proof ideas
7.1.1     Starting point: the heat equation.
The first step is to identify the right classical starting point. For example, the Poincaré
inequality can be proved using Fourier analysis, but since the directed problem is highly

                                                97
nonlinear (due to the ∇− operator), this approach does not seem suitable. Instead, we
take a physically-motivated approach. Let u = u(t, x) where we think of the first variable
as time, with each f = u(t) = u(t, ·) a function over space. A remarkable property (see
e.g. [BGL14, Chapter 4]) of the Poincaré inequality

                                 Var [f ] ≤ C E ∥∇f ∥22
                                                       

(where we have written Var [f ] in the place of distconst
                                                    2     (f )2 , which is the same thing) is that
it is equivalent to exponential decay of variance in the heat equation

                                           ∂t u = ∆u ,                                      (7.2)

where ∆ denotes the Laplacian operator, given appropriate “no-flux” boundary conditions
which we do not expand Ron at the moment.
                                       R       To see this equivalence, assume for simplicity
the mean zero condition u(0) dx = u(0, x) dx = 0 (which is then preserved over time),
compute ∂t Var [u(t)], differentiate under the integral, apply (7.2) and integrate by parts to
obtain
                  Z               Z                   Z                      Z
                        2
∂t Var [u(t)] = ∂t u(t) dx = 2 u(t)∂t u(t) dx = 2 u(t)∆u(t) dx = −2 ∇u(t)·∇u(t) dx .

This means that ∂t Var [u(t)] ≤ −C Var [u(t)] if and only if Var [u(t)] ≤ C2 ∥∇u(t)∥22 dx,
                                                                              R

i.e. exponential decay of the variance is equivalent to the Poincaré inequality.
    We observe that solutions to the heat equation converge to a constant equilibrium
(taking the average value of u), and the associated Poincaré inequality is a bound on the
distance to a constant function. Accordingly, it seems intuitive that if we replace (7.2)
with a PDE that converges to a monotone function, we might learn something about the
distance to a monotone function instead.


7.1.2     The directed heat equation
The preceding observations suggest that we should study directed analogues of (7.2). How-
ever, in the multidimensional setting, the nonlinearities that seem inherent to any such
directed analogue prove challenging to analyze. Hence, let us focus on the one-dimensional
case for now. In one dimension, the heat equation is

                                         ∂t u = ∂x ∂x u .

The surface reading of this PDE is that, if we focus on the value of u at a single point x,
the PDE tells us how this value changes over time. Another useful perspective is to think

                                               98
of u(t, x) as the density of “particles” at each point, and ask about how these particles are
“moving” over time; this idea can be made formal via the so-called continuity equation.
Under this view, it turns out that the inner expression ∂x u represents (up to a sign change)
the flux (or momentum) field, i.e. the total rate of particle movement at each point, and
by taking the derivative of this field, i.e. ∂x ∂x u, we determine whether, on the balance,
there are more “incoming” or “outgoing” particles—quantitatively, the rate of change ∂t u.
    With this perspective, a natural candidate PDE—which we call the directed heat equa-
tion—is
                                       ∂t u = ∂x ∂x− u ,                            (7.3)
where ∂x− u := min{0, ∂x u}. The idea is that the new flux ∂x− u is always nonpositive,
which, up to a required sign change, means that particles are only allowed to “move to the
right”. Observe also that the RHS of (7.3) is zero for any monotone function, so monotone
functions are stationary solutions, while for decreasing functions, this PDE behaves exactly
as the heat equation. Thus, intuitively, this PDE seems to take a function u(0) and move
it toward a monotone limit over time.
    We explained above that the Poincaré inequality is intimately connected to convergence
of the heat equation, and we would like to show a similar property in the directed case.
One option would be to study the rate of decay of the distance to monotonicity, distmono   2 .
Although this is possible, it does not seem to lead to a proof strategy; also note that, while
in the case of the variance we also have tools such as Fourier analysis to reason about
the rate of decay directly, here we only have the PDE to work with. Fortunately, there is
another relevant quantity which decays exponentially under the heat equation, namely the
Dirichlet energy                              Z
                                            1
                                    E(f ) =     (∂x f )2 dx .
                                            2
Indeed, another formal computation shows that by differentiating under the integral,
switching the partial derivatives, applying (7.2) and integrating by parts, we get
                     Z                 Z                          Z
                 1              2
    ∂t E(u(t)) = ∂t (∂x u(t)) dx = (∂x u(t))(∂t ∂x u(t)) dx = (∂x u(t))(∂x ∂t u(t)) dx
                 2
                 Z                               Z                        Z
                                                              2         1
               = (∂x u(t))(∂x ∂x ∂x u(t)) dx = − (∂x ∂x u(t)) dx ≤ −         (∂x u(t))2 dx
                                                                       C
                   2
               = − E(u(t)) ,
                   C
where the inequality is an application of a version of the Poincaré inequality for functions
that are zero on the boundary, which will be the case for ∂x u(t) by the no-flux boundary
conditions.

                                             99
   Now, it seems reasonable to propose the following directed analogue of the Dirichlet
energy:                                   Z
                                −       1
                               E (f ) =     (∂x− f )2 dx .
                                        2
If E measures the “locally non-constant” activity of a function, E − measures the “locally
non-monotone” activity. Using E − to recast the directed heat equation in the language of
gradient flows and maximal monotone operators [Bre73], we can show that

   1. this PDE has a solution (Proposition 7.20 and Corollary 7.23);

   2. the directed Dirichlet energy decays exponentially in time (Proposition 7.25);

   3. the solution converges to a monotone equilibrium as t → ∞ (Proposition 7.68); and

   4. the solution, including up to the limit above, satisfies several other essential ana-
      lytic properties, such as nonexpansiveness (Proposition 7.72) and order preservation
      (Corollary 7.71).


7.1.3      Transport-energy inequality in one dimension
It is tempting, now, to use these results to conclude the one-dimensional directed Poincaré
inequality. The problem is that this seems to lead to a dead end, because we do not know
how to tensorize the one-dimensional inequality into a multidimensional one1.
     Instead, we keep leaning on what the PDEs naturally tell us. It turns out that there
is a different notion of distance, the Wasserstein distance, which is much more closely
connected to the theory of evolution equations and better suited to the dynamical approach
we are undertaking. Informally, the squared Wasserstein distance W22 (ϱ0 , ϱ1 ) between
probability measures ϱ0 and ϱ1 is the minimum total cost of a “transport plan” (coupling)
moving particles from ϱ0 to ϱ1 , where the cost of moving a particle from point x to point y
is |x − y|2 . The connection to PDEs is via the Benamou-Brenier formula, which informally
says that
                    Z 1                                                                           
   2                          2
W2 (ϱ0 , ϱ1 ) = min      ∥vt ∥L2 (ϱt ) dt : vt is a velocity field taking ϱ0 to ϱ1 from time 0 to 1 .
                         0
   1
     In the classical case, the law of total variance does allow such tensorization [BGL14, Chapter 4.3], but
this aspect of the problem does not seem to be robust to passing to the directed setting. Also note that, if
we only desired a one-dimensional directed Poincaré inequality, then we may obtain a much shorter proof
by following the argument from Chapter 4.


                                                    100
Without going into details, it follows that if we can upper bound the directed Dirichlet
energy E − (u(t)), then we can upper bound the total (weighted) magnitude of the velocity
field, i.e. ∥vt ∥2L2 (ϱt ) (recall that the momentum of particles in the directed heat equation
is essentially ∂x− u, so this connection is not arbitrary), and therefore upper bound the
Wasserstein distance between the initial state ϱ0 —which informally corresponds to the
function f = u(0)—and the final state ϱ1 —which informally corresponds to the monotone
equilibrium f ∗ = limt→∞ u(t).
    This strategy yields, at least for bounded functions, the following result. Let U be a
class of “reasonable” initial states which we do not define for now, and let the operator P∞
map each initial state to its monotone equilibrium according to the directed heat equation.
Then

Theorem 7.2 (Transport-energy inequality in one dimension). There exists a constant
C > 0 such
       R      that the following holds. Let u ∈ U be positive, bounded away from zero, and
satisfy (0,1) u dx = 1. Define the measures dµ := u dx and dµ∞ := (P∞ u) dx. Then
                                                    C −
                                 W22 (µ, µ∞ ) ≤         E (u) .
                                                  inf u

7.1.4     Tensorizing the transport-energy inequality
The advantage of making this detour through the Wasserstein distance is that, modulo
the required technical work, tensorization becomes relatively straightforward. Indeed, it
is well-known in the theory of optimal transport (c.f. [Vil09, Remark 6.6]) that the W2
distance scales well with the dimension and reflects useful geometric content. Here the
main idea is that, since the cost function for the W2 distance is the squared Euclidean
distance |x − y|2 between points x, y ∈ [0, 1]d , one way to extend the one-dimensional
result above to, say, the unit square [0, 1]2 is to

  1. apply the one-dimensional result to each row, making the row restrictions monotone
     while paying cost W22 (ϱ0 , ϱ1 ) = a2 ; and then
  2. apply the one-dimensional result to each column, making the column restrictions
     monotone while paying cost W22 (ϱ1 , ϱ2 ) = b2 .

Then, by combining the transport of particles along rows and columns into a single trans-
port plan, we obtain via the Pythagorean theorem a plan with cost a2 + b2 , so this quantity
upper bounds the overall squared distance W22 (ϱ0 , ϱ2 ). The same idea extends to higher
dimensions, and we prove:

                                             101
Lemma 7.3 (Pythagorean composition of transport plans). Let I, J ⊆ [d] be nonempty
disjoint sets. Let µ, ϱ, ν ∈ P (Rd ) be supported in bounded sets, and let γ + ∈ ΠI (µ → ϱ)
and γ − ∈ ΠJ (ϱ → ν). Then there exists γ ∈ ΠI∪J (µ → ν) satisfying C2 (γ)2 = C2 (γ + )2 +
C2 (γ − )2 .

    In this statement, C2 (γ)2 is the cost of transport plan γ, and ΠI (µ → ν) denotes the set
of transport plans between probability measures µ to ν, under two additional restrictions:
1) particles can only move along “I-aligned” lines, e.g. along rows in the example; and
2) particles can only move “up” in the partial order on Rd , i.e. a particle can move from
x to y only if x ⪯ y—we call such a transport plan directed. The second restriction is
important because, when we finally recover a Poincaré inequality from a transport-energy
inequality, the information that particles only moved up in the partial order will be reflected
in the appearance of the directed gradient ∇− .
   Now, informally, Theorem 7.2 tells us that each step of the above strategy (e.g. moving
particles
R − 2 along rows) incurs cost bounded by the directed Dirichlet energy, i.e. the integral
 (∂i f ) dx of the partial derivatives along the (say) rows. Repeating for every i ∈ [d] via
Lemma 7.3, we obtain the directed, multidimensional transport-energy inequality:

Theorem 7.4 (Transport-energy inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such     that the following holds. Let a ∈ (0, 1), and let f ∈ Lip satisfy 1 − a ≤ f ≤ 1 + a and
         f dx = 1. Define the probability measures dµ := f dx and dµ∗ := f ∗ dx on [0, 1]d .
R
  [0,1]d
Then
                                            C(1 + a)2
                                                        Z
                                       ∗                            2
                              2
                            W2 (µ → µ ) ≤            3
                                                                ∇− f dx .
                                             (1 − a)     [0,1]d


    Moreover, by the order preservation property of our solution to our PDE, each operation
along direction i preserves the monotonicity along the directions j < i, so the final function
f ∗ in the statement above, which is the result after all d steps, is indeed monotone. The
notation W22 (µ → µ∗ ) indicates that this bound holds even for directed transport plans, as
explained above.


7.1.5     Recovering a Poincaré inequality via optimal transport du-
          ality
The final step is to recover, from the multidimensional transport-energy inequality, our
desired directed Poincaré inequality. Fortunately, there is an intimate connection between


                                              102
transport and Poincaré inequalities (as well as Sobolev, logarithmic Sobolev, and other
isoperimetric and concentration inequalities), and this theory is well established in the
classical case (c.f. [Vil09, Chapters 21 and 22]). Closest to the present approach, [Liu20]
proved, in the classical setting, the equivalence between transport-energy, Poincaré, and
other related inequalities. Our task, therefore, is to obtain at least an implication in the
directed setting.
    The main ingredient toward this goal is the notion of Kantorovich duality for the
Wasserstein distance. In the classical setting, the weak Kantorovich duality says that,
given two probability measures µ and ν, if we can find “certificate functions” ϕ and ψ
satisfying
                    ϕ(y) − ψ(x) ≤ |x − y|2     for all points x and y,            (7.4)
then                                   Z                      Z
                        W22 (µ, ν) ≥           ϕ(y) dν(y) −           ψ(x) dµ(x) .      (7.5)

Villani recounts the following analogy by Caffarelli: suppose you operate a consortium of
bakeries and cafes in a city, and that µ(dx) is the supply of bread by a bakery at point
x while ν(dy) is the demand by a cafe at point y. Then if transporting a unit of bread
from x to y costs |x − y|2 , the minimum cost for transporting all the bread is by definition
W22 (µ, ν). Suppose a transportation company offers to take over the transportation job by
buying bread from the bakeries at price ψ(x) and selling it to cafes at price ϕ(y). If (7.4)
holds then, for each x and y, hiring the transportation company is no more expensive than
handling the transportation yourself. Therefore the cost W22 (µ, ν) is at least as large as
how much the bakery-cafe consortium pays the company to fulfill the supply and demand,
which is the RHS of (7.5).
    In the directed setting, where we can only transport mass from x to y if x ⪯ y, we
expect the transport to be in general more expensive, so “more” certificates should be
valid. Indeed, it is not difficult to obtain the following natural directed version of weak
duality (Lemma 7.126): if

                      ϕ(y) − ψ(x) ≤ |x − y|2             for all points x ⪯ y,

then                                       Z                      Z
                       W22 (µ → ν) ≥            ϕ(y) dν(y) −           ψ(x) dµ(x) .

   The final main ingredient is an operator which, given a candidate function ϕ, produces
the best possible ψ for duality. This is accomplished by a directed analogue of the so-called


                                                   103
Hamilton-Jacobi operator, defined as follows: for each function h on the unit cube,
                              (
                  ⃗ t h)(x) := h(x) 
                 (H
                                                              if t = 0
                                supy⪰x h(y) − 2t1 |x − y|2    otherwise.

Then, for each h and setting t = 1, this operator yields the following (Proposition 7.129):
                                          Z         Z
                          1  2
                            W2 (µ → ν) ≥ h dν − (H      ⃗ 1 h) dµ .                    (7.6)
                          2


                        ⃗ t h)(x) intuitively seeks the direction y − x ⪰ 0 of steepest ascent
Note that, as t → 0+ , (H
of h. This suggests a connection to the directed gradient, and indeed in Proposition 7.131
we show that
                                     ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)
                                     H                 |∇+ h(x)|2
                             lim sup                 ≤             ,                     (7.7)
                               t→0+          t              2
where ∇+ h := max{0, ∇h}.
    At this point, instead of trying to reproduce the calculations from Section 7.4.2, let us
give some intuition for how the pieces above recover a Poincaré inequality. By homogeneity,
it suffices to consider mean-zero functions h. The key idea is to fix a small t > 0 and let h
play two roles at the same time: 1) as the building block for measures dµ(x) = (1 + th) dx
and dµ∗ (x) = (1 + th∗ ) dx, where h∗ is the monotone function obtained via the coordinate-
wise application of the directed heat equation as in the previous section; and 2) in the test
function −th for duality via (7.6). That is, after building measures µ and µ∗ from h and
h∗ (as perturbations of the uniform measure, scaled by the parameter t), we also employ
h to build certificate functions ϕ = −th and ψ = H     ⃗ 1 (−th). This yields, via (7.6), a bound
on the Wasserstein distance to monotonicity of (the measure µ produced by) h which is
itself written in terms of h.
    From the fact that h plays both of these roles, and h (respectively, H          ⃗ 1 h) appears
integrated against R ν 2(respectively, µ) in (7.6), that inequality ends up producing      the “in-
teraction term” (h − hh ) dx, which canR be appropriately bounded by (h − h∗ )2 dx;
                              ∗
                                                                                   R

and since h∗ is monotone, the inequality (h − h∗ ) dx ≥ distmono      2    (h)2 explains why we
should expect the distance to monotonicity to appear. Moreover, after the appropriate
calculations, the term involving H  ⃗ 1 in (7.6) gives rise to the expression in (7.7), so letting
       +
t → 0 makes the directed gradient of h appear.           Thus W22 (µ, µ∗ ) can be lower bounded
                                  mono
by an expression involving dist2 (h)2 and |∇− h|2 dx. On the other
                                                 R
                                                                              hand, Theorem 7.4
gives that W22 (µ, µ∗ ) is upper bounded by an expression involving |∇− h|2 dx. Therefore,
                                                                         R

chaining the inequalities, we have precisely the terms required to put (7.1) together.

                                               104
Organization. The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. In Section 7.2, we study
the directed heat equation, showing that this PDE is well-posed and satisfies the properties
listed in Section 7.1.2. In Section 7.3, we introduce optimal transport and establish the
transport-energy inequality (Theorem 7.4). Finally, in Section 7.4 we recover the directed
Poincaré inequality (Theorem 7.1) from the transport-energy inequality.


7.2      Directed heat semigroup
In this section, we make concrete the ideas presented in Section 7.1.2 of the proof overview.
Recall that we wish to analyze the directed heat equation, which we informally specified in
(7.3) as
                                       ∂t u = ∂x ∂x− u .                                (7.8)
We require a more rigorous definition before we can study this PDE, since e.g. the quantity
∂x− u = min{0, ∂x u} is not in general differentiable even if u is smooth. Indeed, while the
classical heat equation has a smoothing effect, we expect any solution to (7.8) (in the
appropriate sense) to have non-differentiable points, so a more technical treatment of this
nonlinear PDE is unavoidable.
    The first step is to replace the operator ∂ − u with something more amenable to anal-
ysis. In Definition 7.11 we define a canonical representation u = u↑ + u↓ such that u↓
is nonincreasing and differentiable (more precisely, it is in the Sobolev space H 1 ), while
u↑ is nondecreasing and need not be differentiable (it only needs to be in the space L2 of
square-integrable functions). While a priori such a representation need not be unique, we
show in Proposition 7.10 that thereR is a unique   representation (after fixing the shift by a
                                           2
constant) minimizing the energy (∂x u↓) dx; intuitively, this means that we pack all the
“decreasing behaviour” of u into u↓, and all the “increasing behaviour” of u into u↑. Note
that u↑ may even contain jump discontinuities, which our theory must withstand, so this
decomposition captures extremely relevant properties of our problem.
   Then, we are able to restate our PDE more rigorously in Definitions 7.14 and 7.18.
Essentially, the “Neumann problem”
                               (
                                 z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in (0, 1)
                                 ∂x u↓ = 0    on {0, 1}

given in (7.9) (where z will take the role of ∂t u in Definition 7.18) replaces ∂x− u with ∂x u↓ in
(7.8), and then places a “Neumann boundary condition” ∂x u↓ = 0 which, as is standard in

                                               105
PDEs, means that there will be no mass flux at the boundaries of the domain. For technical
reasons that are common to most study of PDEs, we need to give in (7.10) a notion of
“weak solution”, which is essentially a solution which may not be regular enough to satisfy
the specification of the PDE (i.e. it may not be twice-differentiable), but which behaves
(via integration by parts) just like a “strong solution” for many analytical purposes, and
can sometimes be “promoted”: a weak solution that is regular enough is usually also a
strong solution (in fact, our problem automatically enjoys such a promotion thanks to
“elliptic regularity”, see Lemma 7.24).
    To study our PDE, we bring in the theory of gradient flows and maximal monotone
operators [Bre73] by recasting the PDE as the problem of finding the direction of steepest
descent2 (in the space of L2 functions) of the directed Dirichlet energy E − (u), which our
formalism allows us to define in terms of u↓ in Definition 7.12. The main results in
Section 7.2.2 are Proposition 7.20 on the existence of a unique solution to the gradient flow
problem – which allows us to define a semigroup operator Pt , the directed heat semigroup,
describing the evolution of this solution – and Corollary 7.23, which shows that this solution
is also a solution to the Neumann problem (i.e. our PDE of interest).
    To conclude the basic study of our PDE, Section 7.2.3 shows, via the theory of gradient
flows, that the directed Dirichlet energy E − (Pt u) decays exponentially in time (Propo-
sition 7.25), which allows us to conclude that Pt u converges to some limit as t → ∞
(Proposition 7.27).
    Sections 7.2.4 to 7.2.6 are concerned with showing that regular initial states u yield
solutions Pt u that are also regular for all times t > 0, where “regular” can mean Lipschitz
or Sobolev class H 1 . The main result in Section 7.2.4 is Lemma 7.28, a technical lemma
which says that for solutions to our PDE, if ∂x u↓ < 0 in an interval (a, b) (which we wish
to call “u is decreasing”), it must be the case that u↑ is constant in (a, b) (legitimizing
that wish). This result is far from being vacuous or tautological – it implies that in regions
where our PDE is “active” (because ∂x u↓ is nonzero), the other component u↑ of u is
“inactive” (constant), which means that solutions to our PDE avoid a host of pathological
scenarios and allows crucial technical arguments to go through. Then, using technical
arguments and tools from the theory of maximal monotone operators, Section 7.2.5 builds
toward Corollary 7.41 – H 1 regularity is preserved over time – and Section 7.2.6 builds
toward Corollary 7.48 – Lipschitz regularity is preserved over time.
   In Section 7.2.7, we turn our attention to nonexpansiveness and order preservation
properties. The main result, Proposition 7.57, is a quantitative order preservation result
which implies that if initial states u, v satisfy u ≤ v, then Pt u ≤ Pt v for all times t > 0
  2
      This is analogous to our analysis of the heat flow on directed graphs as a gradient system in Chapter 6.


                                                     106
(Corollary 7.59). We conclude Section 7.2.7 with some useful basic observations about the
semigroup Pt ; in particular, Proposition 7.66 shows that Pt behaves nicely under certain
affine transformations, namely Pt (αu + β) = αPt u + β when α > 0 and β ∈ R.
    Finally, Section 7.2.8 studies the convergence of solutions Pt u as t → ∞. The main
result is Proposition 7.68, which shows that Pt u converges to a monotone function, which
we define as P∞ u in Definition 7.69. The remainder of Section 7.2.8 shows that the main
properties of Pt shown in the previous subsections – preservation of regularity, nonexpan-
siveness, behaviour under affine transformations – are also satisfied by P∞ .


7.2.1     Preliminaries for PDE
We briefly outline some of the main concepts required to study our PDE, and refer the
reader to e.g. [Eva10; Bre11] for detailed expositions.
    Let J = (a, b) be an open interval. The absolutely continuous (AC) functions f : J → R
                                                                1
                 R for which there exists a function g ∈ L (J) such that, for all x ∈ J,
are precisely those
f (x) = f (a) + (a,x) g dx. We call g a weak derivative of f , and write ∂x f for any weak
derivative of f . The weak derivative is almost everywhere (a.e.) uniquely determined,
and moreover, f is classically differentiable a.e. and its classical derivative agrees with ∂x f
almost everywhere.
    Let Ω := J d . Let k ∈ Z≥0 and p ∈ [1, +∞]. The Sobolev space W k,p (Ω) is the space of
functions f : Ω → R which have weak derivatives up to order k in Lp (Ω). The definition of
weak derivative in the multidimensional case is more involved than in the one-dimensional
case, but the details are not relevant here. In one dimension, we may recursively define
W 0,p (J) := Lp (J) and, for k ≥ 1, W k,p (J) as the set of functions f ∈ W k−1,p (J) such that
∂x f ∈ W k−1,p (J).
    We identify a.e. equal functions into equivalence classes in W k,p (Ω), and we write “f = g
a.e.” and “f = g in W k,p (Ω)” interchangeably. Often, we are interested in a continuous
representative of f , which is unique when it exists, and by abuse of notation write f for
its continuous representative as well. With this interpretation, a standard fact is that
W 1,∞ (Ω) is precisely the class of Lipschitz functions on Ω. If 1 ≤ p ≤ q ≤ +∞, then
W k,q (Ω) ⊂ W k,p (Ω).
   The case p = 2 is special because then H k (Ω) := W k,2 (Ω) is a Hilbert space. In one
dimension, the inner product in H k (J) is
                                                k
                                                X
                             ⟨f, g⟩H k (J) :=         Di f, Di g L2 (J) ,
                                                i=0


                                                 107
where Di above denotes the i-th weak derivative. When the space of integration is clear,
we drop the subscript from the inner product notation. The inner product above also
induces the norm                          v
                                          u k
                                          uX
                            ∥f ∥H k (J) = t   ∥Di f ∥2L2 (J) .
                                                 i=0


   For a sequence (fn )n∈N ⊂ H k (Ω) and f ∈ H k (Ω), the notation “fn → f in H k (Ω)”
means convergence in norm, i.e. ∥fn − f ∥H k (Ω) → 0 as n → ∞. We write “fn ⇀ f weakly
in H k (Ω)” to denote weak convergence in this space, which means that φ(fn ) → φ(f ) as
n → ∞ for every φ in the dual space of H k (Ω). The dual space of L2 (Ω) is L2 (Ω) itself
with the L2 (Ω) inner product action φ(f ) = ⟨φ, f ⟩. The dual space of H 1 (Ω) is larger, but
contains L2 (Ω) with the same action.
    It is often useful to approximate a function by a sequence of smooth functions, and
for that we will use mollification. The following comes from [Eva10, Appendix C]. The
standard mollifier η ∈ C ∞ (Rd ) is given by
                                     (              
                                       C exp |x|21−1   if |x| < 1
                            η(x) :=
                                       0               if |x| ≥ 1 ,
                                    R
for constant C > 0 chosen so that    Rd
                                          η dx = 1. Then for each ε > 0, we let

                                                 1
                                     ηε (x) :=      η(x/ε) ,
                                                 εd
which is a C ∞ (Rd ) function satisfying Rd ηε dx = 1 and η(x) = 0 for x ̸∈ B(0, ε), where
                                        R

B(0, ε) is the open ball of radius ε centered at 0. We abuse language and also call ηε a
standard mollifier.
   Let U ⊂ Rd be an open set and let Uε := {x ∈ U : dist(x, ∂U ) > ε}, where ∂U is the
boundary of U . For locally integrable f : U → R (meaning that f is integrable on every
compact K ⊂ U ), we define the mollification f ε : Uε → R of f by
                                 Z                       Z
           ε
         f (x) := (ηε ∗ f )(x) =    ηε (x − y)f (y) dy =      η(y)f (x − y) dy .
                                    U                          B(0,ε)

We then have the following properties (see Theorem 7 of [Eva10, Appendix C]):

  1. f ε ∈ C ∞ (Uε ).

                                              108
  2. f ε → f a.e. as ε → 0.

  3. If f ∈ C(U ), then f ε → f uniformly on compact subsets of U .

  4. If 1 ≤ p < ∞ and f ∈ Lploc (U ), then f ε → f in Lploc (U ),

where Lploc (U ) is the space of measurable functions whose every restriction to compact
K ⊂ U is in Lp (K), and convergence in Lploc (U ) means convergence in Lp (K) for every
compact K ⊂ U .
    We also use the following abstract spaces. Let X be a real Banach space (for us,
typically L2 (J)), let 1 ≤ p ≤ +∞ and let T ∈ (0, +∞]. Then the Bochner space Lp (0, T ; X)
is the space of Bochner measurable functions (whose precise definition is not important
here) u : [0, T ] → X whose norm ∥u∥Lp (0,T ;X) is finite, where
                                                         1/p
                                       R              p
                                                 ∥u(t)∥X dt     1 ≤ p < +∞
                    ∥u∥Lp (0,T ;X) :=     (0,T )
                                      ess sup
                                            t∈(0,T )  ∥u(t)∥
                                                          X     p = +∞ .

As usual, C([0, T ]; X) denotes the set of continuous functions u : [0, T ] → X. When
X possesses the so-called Radon-Nikodym property, which in particular is the case for
X = L2 (J), and for T < +∞, the characterization of absolutely continuous functions
as those possessing an integrable weak derivative introduced earlier extends to functions
u : [0, T ] → X (see [DU77, pp. 217–219]).
    Above and hereafter, we use boldface symbols, e.g. u, to denote Banach-valued func-
tions whose domain we think of as the time in an evolution equation.
   Hereafter, we write I for the unit interval (0, 1) unless otherwise specified, which will
always be clearly indicated.


7.2.2    Neumann and gradient flow problems
The next definition captures the “natural” class of functions we need to handle in our PDE
study; very informally, those whose “decreasing regions are differentiable”.

Definition 7.5 (Down-H 1 functions). We define the set U of down-H 1 functions as

                              U := {u ∈ L2 (I) : R(u) ̸= ∅} ,


                                             109
where R(u) is the set of admissible representations for u as follows:
                        n
               R(u) := (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ L2 (I) × H 1 (I) :
                               u(1) is nondecreasing, u(2) is nonincreasing,
                               Z                                        o
                                    (2)                   (1)    (2)
                                  u dx = 0, and u = u + u a.e. .
                                 I

Remark 7.6. The properties “nondecreasing” and “nonincreasing” in the definition above
technically do not apply directly to members of L2 (I) and H 1 (I), which are equivalence
classes of a.e. equal functions. Rather, we mean that u(1) is a member of L2 (I) which has a
representative function I → R that is nondecreasing, and likewise for u(2) . More generally,
when f is an object of any space that identifies a.e. equal functions, we abuse language
and write “f is nonincreasing” (resp. nondecreasing) to mean that f has a nonincreasing
(resp. nondecreasing) representative.

Remark 7.7. It is easy to check that H 1 (I) ⊂ U, since for any u ∈ H 1 (I) we may separate
the positive and negative parts of ∂x u into u(1) and u(2) , respectively, and shift u(1) and
u(2) by appropriate constants so that they satisfy the conditions of Definition 7.5. Then,
since H 1 (I) is dense in L2 (I), so is U.

Definition 7.8 (Directed Dirichlet energy). For each u ∈ U and (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u), define
                                              Z
                            − (1)    (2)    1           2
                          D (u , u ) :=          ∂x u(2) dx .
                                            2 I

Definition 7.9 (Optimal representations). For each u ∈ U, define R∗ (u) ⊆ R(u) as the
set of representations minimizing D− , i.e.
                                                                   
                  ∗          (1)  (2)          − (1)  (2)         −
                R (u) := (u , u ) ∈ R(u) : D (u , u ) = inf D         .
                                                                  R(u)



Proposition 7.10 (Existence and uniqueness of optimal representation). For all u ∈ U,
R∗ (u) contains exactly one element.

Proof. See Appendix B.

   Owing to Proposition 7.10, we may define for each u ∈ U a canonical representation
and directed Dirichlet energy (by a slight abuse of notation):

                                            110
Definition 7.11 (Canonical representation). For each u ∈ U, the canonical representation
of u is the unique element of R∗ (u), denoted (u↑, u↓). We define the directed Dirichlet
energy of u by D− (u) := D− (u↑, u↓).

    The following definition, which extends the directed Dirichlet energy functional to all of
L2 (I) by assigning +∞ to functions outside of U, will enable us to find and study a solution
to our PDE using tools from the theory of maximal monotone operators and gradient flows.
Our main reference for this theory is [Bre73].

Definition 7.12 (Energy functional). Define the functional E − : L2 (I) → [0, +∞] by
                                      (
                                       D− (u) if u ∈ U
                           E − (u) :=
                                       +∞       otherwise.


Proposition 7.13. The functional E − : L2 (I) → [0, +∞] is convex, proper and lower
semicontinuous.

Proof. See Appendix B.

Definition 7.14 (Static Neumann problem). Let u ∈ U and z ∈ L2 (I). We say that u, z
form a weak solution to the static Neumann problem
                                 (
                                   z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in I
                                                                               (7.9)
                                   ∂x u↓ = 0    on {0, 1}

if for all ϕ ∈ H 1 (I) we have
                                 Z               Z
                                     zϕ dx = −       (∂x u↓)(∂x ϕ) dx .                 (7.10)
                                 I               I

Remark 7.15. The equation z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in (7.9) is also called the Poisson equation, while
∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} is called the (homogeneous) Neumann boundary condition.

Definition 7.16 (Nice evolution function). Let u ∈ C([0, +∞); L2 (I)) and u′ : (0, +∞) →
L2 (I). We
        R say′ that u is a nice evolution    function (with weak derivative u′ ) if 1) u(t) =
u(0) + (0,t) u (s) ds for all t > 0; 2) u(δ,+∞) ∈ L∞ (δ, +∞; L2 (I)) for all δ > 0, where u′J
                                         ′

denotes the restriction of u′ to domain J ⊆ (0, +∞); and 3) u′(0,δ) ∈ L2 (0, δ; L2 (I)) for all
δ > 0.

                                                 111
Remark 7.17. Definition 7.16 captures functions that are Lipschitz away from zero, and
absolutely continuous with square-integrable weak derivative near zero.

Definition 7.18 (Neumann evolution problem). Let u0 ∈ U and let u ∈ C([0, +∞); L2 (I))
be a nice evolution function. We say u is a weak solution to the Neumann evolution
problem with initial state (or initial data) u0 if 1) u(0) = u0 ; 2) u(t) ∈ U for all t > 0; and
3) u(t), u′ (t) form a weak solution to the static Neumann problem for a.e. t > 0.

    Before introducing the gradient flow problem, we need some notation. Let φ : L2 (I) →
[0, +∞] be a convex, proper, lower semicontinuous function. We write D(φ) := {u ∈
L2 (I) : φ(u) < +∞} for the domain of φ. For any u ∈ L2 (I), we define the subdifferential
of φ at u as
               ∂φ(u) := {z ∈ L2 (I) : ∀v ∈ L2 (I) . φ(v) ≥ φ(u) + ⟨z, v − u⟩} ,
and we write D(∂φ) := {u ∈ L2 (I) : ∂φ(u) ̸= ∅} for the domain of ∂φ. Using the fact that
φ is proper, it is easy to check that D(∂φ) ⊆ D(φ). It is standard that ∂φ is a maximal
monotone operator ; we will not use (the definition of) this property explicitly, but rather
rely on the theory of such operators as presented in [Bre73].
   We can now define the gradient flow problem:

Definition 7.19 (Gradient flow problem). Let u0 ∈ U and let u be a nice evolution
function. We say u is a solution to the gradient flow problem with initial state (or initial
data) u0 if 1) u(0) = u0 ; 2) u(t) ∈ D(∂E − ) for all t > 0; and 3) u′ (t) ∈ −∂E − (u(t)) for
a.e. t > 0.

   Note that in both Definitions 7.18 and 7.19, the pointwise condition at t = 0 makes
sense by the requirement that u be continuous.
   The theory of maximal monotone operators and gradient flows immediately yields that
the gradient flow problem has a unique solution, as follows:

Proposition 7.20. Let u0 ∈ U. Then there exists a unique solution u ∈ C([0, +∞); L2 (I))
to the gradient flow problem. Moreover, for all t > 0 we have
                                             Z
                          −        −
                        E (u0 ) − E (u(t)) =       ∥u′ (s)∥2L2 (I) ds .
                                                    (0,t)

For u0 , v0 ∈ U, the corresponding solutions u, v have ∥u(t) − v(t)∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥u0 − v0 ∥L2 (I)
for all t > 0.

                                              112
Proof. This is a direct application of [Bre73, Theorems 3.1 and 3.2 and Proposition 3.1].

Directed heat semigroup. As described in [Bre73], the nonexpansive property of so-
lutions u allows us to define an operator Pt : L2 (I) → L2 (I) such that Pt u = u(t) for
each initial state u ∈ U with corresponding solution u, and with Pt u defined by continuous
extension when u ∈ L2 (I) \ U (recall that U is dense in L2 (I)). Then for every u ∈ L2 (I)
and t > 0 it holds that Pt u ∈ D(∂E − ), and (Pt )t≥0 forms a nonexpansive semigroup in
L2 (I), i.e.

  1. Pt+s = Pt Ps for all t, s ∈ R≥0 , with P0 the identity;
  2. Pt u → u in L2 (I) as t ↓ 0, for all u ∈ L2 (I); and
  3. ∥Pt u − Pt v∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥u − v∥L2 (I) for all u, v ∈ L2 (I) and t ∈ R≥0 .

The last property also implies that, for each t ≥ 0, Pt : L2 (I) → L2 (I) is continuous. We
say that Pt is the semigroup generated by −∂E − .
   It turns out that the solution to the gradient flow problem is also a weak solution to
the Neumann evolution problem, as the following results show.

Proposition 7.21. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ) and z ∈ −∂E − (u). Then u, z form a weak solution
to the static Neumann problem.

Proof. Note that we have u ∈ D(∂E − ) ⊆ D(E − ) = U. Let ϕ ∈ H 1 (I); we will prove that
(7.10) holds. Let α ̸= 0, let ψα := αϕ and let vα := u + ψα . Since −z ∈ ∂E − (u), we have
                   E − (vα ) ≥ E − (u) + ⟨−z, vα − u⟩ = E − (u) + ⟨−z, ψα ⟩ .          (7.11)
Now, the fact that u ∈ U implies that E − (u) = D− (u). We now claim that vα ∈ U as well,
which will imply that E − (vα ) = D− (vα ). In fact, we establish the following:
Claim 7.22. We have vα ∈ U. Moreover, D− (vα ) ≤ 12 I (∂x u↓ + ∂x ψα )2 dx.
                                                           R


Proof. We define a nondecreasing function v (1) ∈ L2 (I) and a nonincreasing function v (2) ∈
H 1 (I) as follows: for each x ∈ I,
                                         Z
               (1)
                                                                       +
             v (x)   := u↑(x) + ψα (0) +         ∂x ψα (y) − |∂x u↓(y)| dy  and
                                           (0,x)
                                Z
               (2)
                                                              
             v (x) := u↓(x) +          ∂x ψα (y) ∧ |∂x u↓(y)| dy .
                                 (0,x)


                                              113
It is clear that v (1) , v (2) ∈ L2 (I) with v (1) nondecreasing. Since u↓ ∈ H 1 (I) by definition of
R(u), while ψα ∈ H 1 (I) because ϕ ∈ H 1 (I), we also obtain that v (2) ∈ H 1 (I). To see that
v (2) is nonincreasing, note that for a.e. x ∈ I we have
                          ∂x v (2) (x) = ∂x u↓(x) + ∂x ψα (x) ∧ |∂x u↓(x)| ≤ 0 .
                                                                          

Observe also that v (1) + v (2) = u + ψα = vRα . Finally, by translating v (1) and v (2) by a
constant if necessary, we can ensure that I v (2) dx = 0 without invalidating the other
properties. Thus vα ∈ U.
   To show the second part of the claim, we note that for a.e. x ∈ I,
         ∂x v (2) (x) = ∂x u↓(x) + ∂x ψα (x) ∧ |∂x u↓(x)| ≤ ∂x u↓(x) + ∂x ψα (x) ,
                                                         
         | {z }         | {z } |             {z          }
              ≤0             ≤0               ≤|∂x u↓(x)|

where the inequality follows from inspecting the cases ∂x ψα (x) ≤ |∂x u↓(x)| and ∂x ψα (x) >
|∂x u↓(x)|. We conclude that
                                     Z                 Z
           −        − (1) (2)      1        (2) 2    1
        D (vα ) ≤ D (v , v ) =         (∂x v ) dx ≤       (∂x u↓(x) + ∂x ψα (x))2 dx .
                                   2 I               2 I
Now, putting together (7.11) and the claim, we get
              Z               Z                      Z
            1          2                    −      1
                (∂x u↓) dx − zψα dx ≤ D (vα ) ≤         (∂x u↓ + ∂x ψα )2 dx .
            2 I                I                   2  I
Simplifying and substituting ψα = αϕ, we obtain
                   Z                Z               Z
                                1 2          2
                  α zϕ dx ≥ − α        (∂x ϕ) dx − α (∂x u↓)(∂x ϕ) dx .
                    I           2    I               I

Taking the limits α → 0+ and α → 0− , we conclude that
                           Z            Z
                              zϕ dx = − (∂x u↓)(∂x ϕ) dx ,
                                  I              I

which is (7.10) as needed.

Corollary 7.23. Let u0 ∈ U and suppose u is a solution to the gradient flow problem.
Then u is also a weak solution to the Neumann evolution problem.

Proof. The condition u(0) = u0 holds by definition of solution to the gradient flow problem,
and for all t > 0 we have u(t) ∈ D(∂E − ) ⊆ D(E − ) = U. Finally, for a.e. t > 0 we have
u′ (t) ∈ −∂E − (u(t)), which by Proposition 7.21 implies that u(t), u′ (t) form a solution
to the static Neumann problem. Hence u is a weak solution to the Neumann evolution
problem.

                                                114
7.2.3     Exponential decay of directed Dirichlet energy
The following elliptic regularity result is standard, and essentially shows that weak solutions
to the static Neumann problem are in fact strong solutions whose regularity is two degrees
higher than that of z; in particular, even if we only have z ∈ L2 (I), we gain one degree of
regularity by obtaining u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) when we only assumed u↓ ∈ H 1 (I). Recall that H 0 (I)
is the same as L2 (I).

Lemma 7.24 (Elliptic regularity; see [Mik78, Chapter IV Section 2, Theorems 3 and 4]).
Let k ≥ 0 be an integer and let u ∈ U, z ∈ H k (I) form a weak solution to the static
Neumann problem               (
                                z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in I
                                ∂x u↓ = 0    on {0, 1} .
Then u↓ ∈ H k+2 (I), and moreover ∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} and z = ∂x ∂x u↓ a.e. in I.

   We now give our energy decay result.

Proposition 7.25. There exists a constant K > 0 such that the following holds. Let
u ∈ U. Then for all t > 0,
                              E − (Pt u) ≤ e−Kt E − (u) .

Proof. Let u ∈ U and let u(t) = Pt u be the corresponding solution to the gradient flow
problem. Recall that Proposition 7.20 gives, for all t > 0,
                                            Z
                        −           −
                      E (u(t)) = E (u) +         −∥u′ (s)∥2L2 (I) ds .
                                                 (0,t)

It follows that t 7→ E − (u(t)) is absolutely continuous on every interval [0, T ] with weak
derivative ∂t E − (u(t)) = −∥u′ (t)∥2L2 (I) . Moreover for a.e. t > 0 we have that u(t), u′ (t)
form a weak solution to the static Neumann problem, and thus u′ (t) = ∂x ∂x u(t)↓ a.e.
in I and ∂x u(t)↓ = 0 on {0, 1} by Lemma 7.24. Therefore the Poincaré inequality (for
zero-on-the-boundary functions) yields
                       1                   1                       C
           E − (u(t)) = ∥∂x u(t)↓∥2L2 (I) ≤ C∥∂x ∂x u(t)↓∥2L2 (I) = ∥u′ (t)∥2L2 (I)
                       2                   2                       2
for some constant C > 0. It follows that for a.e. t > 0, we have
                                                            2
                        ∂t E − (u(t)) = −∥u′ (t)∥2L2 (I) ≤ − E − (u(t)) ,
                                                            C

                                              115
which implies that for all t > 0,
                                     E − (u(t)) ≤ e−2t/C E − (u) .

   The exponential decay of t 7→ E − (Pt u) allows us to find a Cauchy sequence in (Pt u)t≥0 ,
and thus establish its strong convergence to some limit in L2 (I). Later on, we will say
more about this limit by reasoning about the weak convergence of Pt u (to the same limit).

Lemma 7.26 (Cauchy sequence). Let u ∈ U, and let (uk )k∈N be given by uk := Pk u. Then
(uk )k is Cauchy as a sequence in L2 (I). As a consequence, uk → u∗ in L2 (I) for some
u∗ ∈ L2 (I).

Proof. The existence of a strong limit from the Cauchy property follows from the fact that
L2 (I) is a complete normed space. Let us now establish the Cauchy property. Fix any
n > m in N. Then
                          Z
       ∥un − um ∥L2 (I) =       u′ (t) dt                    (Absolute continuity)
                            (m,n)                L2 (I)
                          n−1 Z
                          X
                      ≤                    ∥u′ (t)∥L2 (I) dt          (Triangle inequality)
                          j=m    (j,j+1)

                          n−1 Z
                          X                                    1/2
                                                 ′
                      ≤                       ∥u (t)∥2L2 (I) dt       (Jensen’s inequality)
                          j=m       (j,j+1)

                          n−1
                          X                             1/2
                      =          E − (uj ) − E − (uj+1 )                (Proposition 7.20)
                          j=m
                          X∞
                      ≤         E − (uj )1/2                          (E − is nonnegative)
                          j=m
                           ∞
                          X                  1/2
                      ≤          e−Kj E − (u)                           (Proposition 7.25)
                          j=m

                                   e−Km/2
                      = E − (u)1/2                                      (Geometric series)
                                 1 − e−K/2
                      = AE − (u)1/2 e−Bm
for constants A, B > 0 that only depend on the constant K from Proposition 7.25. It
follows that, for every ε > 0, there exists N ∈ N such that, for all n > m > N ,
                 ∥un − um ∥L2 (I) ≤ AE − (u)1/2 e−Bm ≤ AE − (u)1/2 e−BN < ε ,

                                                     116
so (uk )k is Cauchy.

Proposition 7.27 (Strong convergence). Let u ∈ U. Then Pt u converges in L2 (I) to some
u∗ ∈ L2 (I) as t → ∞.

Proof. Let u∗ be such that (Pk u)k∈N converges to u∗ in L2 (I) as k → ∞, as given by
Lemma 7.26. We claim that Pt u → u∗ . Let ε > 0, and let N ∈ N be such that ∥Pk u −
u∗ ∥L2 (I) < ε for all k ≥ N , as given by the convergence of the sequence (Pk u)k . Then for
any t ≥ N , letting j := ⌊t⌋, we have

                   ∥Pt u − u∗ ∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥Pj u − u∗ ∥L2 (I) + ∥Pt u − Pj u∥L2 (I)

by the triangle inequality. We have ∥Pj u − u∗ ∥L2 (I) < ε by the choice of N , and on the
other hand,
                       Z
 ∥Pt u − Pj u∥L2 (I) =     u′ (s) ds                                (Absolute continuity)
                           (j,t)              L2 (I)
                       Z
                  ≤            ∥u′ (s)∥L2 (I) ds                                         (Triangle inequality)
                       (j,t)
                                         Z                           1/2
                                   1/2               ′
                  ≤ (t − j)                       ∥u (s)∥2L2 (I) ds                      (Jensen’s inequality)
                                          (j,t)
                                           1/2
                  ≤ E − (Pj u) − E − (Pt u)                                  (t − j ∈ [0, 1), Proposition 7.20)
                  ≤ e−Kj/2 E − (u)1/2                                            (E − ≥ 0, Proposition 7.25) .

Thus by letting N be large enough, we can ensure that

                ∥Pt u − Pj u∥L2 (I) ≤ e−Kj/2 E − (u)1/2 ≤ e−KN/2 E − (u)1/2 < ε ,

and hence ∥Pt u − u∗ ∥L2 (I) < 2ε. Thus Pt u → u∗ in L2 (I).


7.2.4     Auxiliary results for studying regularity of solutions
The following lemma establishes the intuitive property that, if ∂x u↓ < 0 in a certain region,
then u↑ is constant in that region, i.e. u has no increasing component.

Lemma 7.28 (Functions in D(∂E − ) are well-behaved). Suppose u ∈ D(∂E − ). Let (a, b) ∈
I be a nonempty interval and suppose that ∂x u↓(x) < 0 for all x ∈ (a, b). Then u↑ is
constant in (a, b).

                                                          117
Proof. Let z ∈ L2 (I) be such that −z ∈ ∂E − (u), which is nonempty by hypothesis. By
Proposition 7.21 and Lemma 7.24, we conclude that u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) (which in particular
justifies writing the condition that ∂x u↓ < 0 on (a, b), which we take to mean in terms of
the continuous representative of ∂x u↓ ∈ H 1 (I)).
    By the continuity of ∂x u↓ and the boundary conditions ∂x u↓(0) = ∂x u↓(1) = 0 (which
follows from Lemma 7.24), we may assume without loss of generality (by extending the
interval (a, b) if necessary) that ∂x u↓(a) = ∂x u↓(b) = 0.
   Let                              (
                                     inf [a,b) u↑      if a > 0
                               Z :=    1
                                           R
                                      b−a (a,b)
                                                 u↑ dx if a = 0 ,
which is finite in the first case because the infimum must be no smaller than (say) u↑( a2 ),
and in the second case because u↑ ∈ L2 (I). Next, define v ∈ L2 (I) by
                                   (
                                     u(x)         if x ∈ (0, a) ∪ [b, 1)
                           v(x) :=
                                     u↓(x) + Z if x ∈ [a, b) .

We first observe that v ∈ U, since v = v (1) + v (2) with v (2) := u↓ and v (1) ∈ L2 (I) given by
                                       (
                                        u↑(x) if x ∈ (0, a) ∪ [b, 1)
                          v (1) (x) :=
                                        Z       if x ∈ [a, b) ,

which is nondecreasing because u↑ is and by the definition of Z. Therefore v ∈ D(E − ) and
                              Z                  Z
     −        − (1) (2)     1                  1
   E (v) ≤ D (v , v ) =              (2) 2
                                (∂x v ) dx =       (∂x u↓)2 dx = D− (u↑, u↓) = E − (u) .
                            2 I                2 i

On the other hand, we claim that E − (v) ≥ E − (u) as well. Indeed, let (w(1) , w(2) ) ∈ R(v)
be arbitrary. Construct u(1) ∈ L2 (I) and u(2) ∈ H 1 (I) by u(2) := w(2) and
                                 (
                                  w(1) (x)        if x ∈ (0, a) ∪ [b, 1)
                     u(1) (x) :=           (2)
                                  u(x) − u (x) if x ∈ [a, b) ,

That u = u(1) + u(2) is clear by construction. To show that (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u), it remains
to show that u(1) is nondecreasing. Certainly it is nondecreasing on (0, a) ∪ [b, 1) since w(1)
is nondecreasing. Note that for x ∈ [a, b), we have

u(1) (x) = u(x) − w(2) (x) − w(1) (x) + w(1) (x) = u(x) − v(x) + w(1) (x) = u↑(x) + w(1) (x) − Z .

                                               118
Thus u(1) is nondecreasing on [a, b), since u↑ and w(1) are. For x ∈ (0, a) and y ∈ [a, b),
which only applies when a > 0, the inequality u(1) (x) ≤ u(1) (y) follows from the nonde-
creasing monotonicity of w(1) and the inequality u↑(y) ≥ Z, which holds by the (first case
of the) definition of Z.
     Now, we must show that u(1) (x) ≤ u(1) (y) if x ∈ [a, b) and y ∈ [b, 1). In fact, it suffices
to consider y ∈ (b, 1), because if the inequality holds in all such cases, then u(1) can be
made monotone on all of I by possibly changing its value at b, which does not affect the
a.e. equality u = u(1) + u(2) . Therefore let x ∈ [a, b) and y ∈ (b, 1), which in particular
only applies when b < 1. Recalling that every monotone function has limits from the left
and from the right at every point, the key observation is that
                                                                            
       (1)            (1)                     (2)                       (2)
  lim w (s) − lim− w (s) = lim+ v(s) − w (s) − lim− v(s) − w (s)
 s→b+          s→b               s→b                      s→b
                                                                                 
                                                          (2)
                           = lim+ u↑(s) + u↓(s) − w (b) − lim− u↓(s) + Z + w(2) (b)
                                 s→b                                  s→b

                             = lim+ u↑(s) − Z ,
                                s→b


where we used the fact that (w(1) , w(2) ) ∈ R(v) in the first equality, the definition of v and
continuity of w(2) in the second equality, and the continuity of u↓ in the third equality.
Now, we have

       u(1) (x) ≤ u(1) (y) ⇐⇒ u↑(x) + u↓(x) − w(2) (x) + Z − Z ≤ w(1) (y)
                           ⇐⇒ u↑(x) + w(1) (x) − Z ≤ w(1) (y)
                           ⇐= u↑(x) + w(1) (x) − Z ≤ lim+ w(1) (s)
                                                         s→b

                           ⇐⇒ u↑(x) + w (x) − Z ≤ lim− w(1) (s) + lim+ u↑(s) − Z
                                            (1)
                                                          s→b               s→b

                           ⇐= u↑(x) ≤ lim+ u↑(s) and w (x) ≤ lim− w(1) (s) ,
                                                                (1)
                                          s→b                            s→b


which is true because u↑ and w(1) are nondecreasing and x < b. This establishes that u(1)
is nondecreasing and thus (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u). It follows that
                                   Z                    Z
       −         − (1)           1                    1
                        (2)
      E (u) ≤ D (u , u ) =                 (2) 2
                                      (∂x u ) dx =        (∂x w(2) )2 dx = D− (w(1) , w(2) ) ,
                                 2 I                  2 I

and thus E − (u) ≤ E − (v) as claimed. Thus E − (u) = E − (v), which in particular implies that
E − (v) = D− (v (1) , v (2) ) and hence (v↑, v↓) = (v (1) , v (2) ).


                                                  119
   By definition of subdifferential, the fact that −z ∈ ∂E − (u) implies that
       Z                                                   Z
     1          2        −         −                     1
         (∂x v↓) dx = E (v) ≥ E (u) + ⟨−z, v − u⟩ =           (∂x u↓)2 dx − ⟨z, v − u⟩ .
     2 I                                                 2 I

Since v = u on I \ [a, b] and v↓ = u↓, we conclude that

                   0 ≤ ⟨z, v − u⟩ = ⟨z, v − u⟩L2 (a,b) = ⟨z, Z − u↑⟩L2 (a,b) .

Now, since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ a.e. and ∂x u↓(a) = ∂x u↓(b) = 0, we have

              ⟨z, Z⟩L2 (a,b) = Z ⟨∂x ∂x u↓, 1⟩L2 (a,b) = Z(∂x u↓(b) − ∂x u↓(a)) = 0 ,

and hence
                                       ⟨z, u↑⟩L2 (a,b) ≤ 0 .
Now, suppose for a contradiction that u↑ is not constant in (a, b). Then since u↑ is
nondecreasing, there must exist a′ , b′ with a < a′ < b′ < b and u↑(a′ ) < u↑(b′ ), i.e.
δ := u↑(b′ ) − u↑(a′ ) > 0. Let α := − sup(a′ ,b′ ) ∂x u↓, and note that α > 0 by the extreme
value theorem together with the continuity of ∂x u↓ and the fact that ∂x u↓ < 0 in [a′ , b′ ].
Then Lemma 7.29 below, applied to f = u↑, g = ∂x u↓ and a′ , b′ ∈ J = (a, b), implies that
⟨z, u↑⟩L2 (a,b) = ⟨∂x ∂x u↓, u↑⟩L2 (a,b) ≥ αδ > 0, which is the desired contradiction.

    We relied on the following technical lemma, which intuitively says that if f is nonde-
creasing on an interval and g ≤ 0 attains 0 at the boundaries of that interval, then f and
∂x g are positively correlated.

Lemma 7.29. Let J ⊂ R be a finite, nonempty open interval. Let f ∈ L2 (J) be nonde-
creasing and let g ∈ H 1 (J) be such that g < 0 in J and g = 0 on ∂J, i.e. the endpoints of
J. Let [a, b] ⊂ J, let δ := f (b) − f (a) and let α := − sup(a,b) g. Then ⟨f, ∂x g⟩L2 (J) ≥ αδ.

Proof. See Appendix B.

   The following auxiliary result confirms the natural expectation that, if u has a first
derivative and some degree of regularity, then its components u↑ and u↓ enjoy the same
regularity and, moreover, can be obtained by taking the positive and negative parts of the
derivative ∂x u, respectively.

Proposition 7.30. Let 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞, and let u ∈ U ∩ W 1,p (I). Then u↑, u↓ ∈ W 1,p (I) and,
moreover, we have ∂x u↑ = ∂x+ u and ∂x u↓ = ∂x− u a.e. in I.

                                               120
Proof. Let u(1) , u(2) : I → R be given by
                             Z                                                      Z
     (1)
   u (y) := u(0) + C +           ∂x+ u(x) dx              and     (2)
                                                                u (y) := −C +                 ∂x− u(x) dx
                                (0,y)                                                 (0,y)

for each y ∈ I, where C ∈ R is implicitly defined so as to satisfy
                                     Z
                                         u(2) dx = 0 .
                                              I

Then u(1) is nondecreasing, u(2) is nonincreasing, both are absolutely continuous with
∂x u(1) = ∂x+ u and ∂x u(2) = ∂x− u a.e. in I, and
                                             Z
                   (1)     (2)
                                                   ∂x+ u(x) + ∂x− u(x) dx = u(x)
                                                                      
                 (u + u )(y) = u(0) +
                                                  (0,y)

for all y ∈ I by the absolute continuity of u. It is also clear that u(1) , u(2) ∈ L∞ (I) ⊂ Lp (I),
since they are pointwise upper bounded in magnitude by |u(0)| + |C| + ∥∂x u∥L1 (I) < +∞.
Moreover, since u ∈ W 1,p (I), we have ∂x u ∈ Lp (I) and hence ∂x+ u, ∂x− u ∈ Lp (I), yielding
that u(1) , u(2) ∈ W 1,p (I).
     The proof will be concluded if we show that (u↑, u↓) = (u(1) , u(2) ). However, at this
point we cannot even state that (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u) because we have not established that
u(2) ∈ H 1 (I) = W 1,2 (I) (unless p ≥ 2, of course). However, if we can show that any
(v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R(u) satisfies
                                  Z              Z
                                               ?
                                    (∂x v ) dx ≥ (∂x u(2) )2 dx ,
                                         (2) 2
                                                                                      (7.12)
                                    I                      I

then using the assumption that u ∈ U and the definition of u↑, u↓, we will conclude that
indeed (u↑, u↓) = (u(1) , u(2) ), as needed.
    Let (v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R(u). We claim that ∂x v (2) (x) ≥ ∂x u(2) (x) for a.e. x ∈ I, which
will imply (7.12). Recall that v (2) ∈ H 1 (I) ⊂ W 1,1 (I). Since u = v (1) + v (2) a.e. and
u ∈ W 1,p (I) ⊂ W 1,1 (I), we conclude that v (1) ∈ W 1,1 (I). Hence u, u(1) , u(2) , v (1) , v (2)
are all absolutely continuous. The fundamental theorem of calculus for the Lebesgue
integral implies that, almost everywhere in I, these functions are all differentiable, and
their classical and weak derivatives agree with ∂x u = ∂x u(1) + ∂x u(2) = ∂x v (1) + ∂x v (2) . On
any such point x, the monotonicity of u(1) , u(2) , v (1) , v (2) implies that ∂x u(1) (x), ∂x v (1) (x) ≥ 0
and ∂x u(2) (x), ∂x v (2) (x) ≤ 0. Therefore
    ∂x v (2) (x) = −∂x v (2) (x) = −∂x u(x) + ∂x v (1) (x) = −∂x u(2) (x) − ∂x u(1) (x) + ∂x v (1) (x)
                = ∂x u(2) (x) − ∂x u(1) (x) + ∂x v (1) (x) .

                                                    121
Now, if ∂x u(x) ≥ 0, then ∂x u(2) (x) = 0 by definition, so ∂x v (2) (x) ≥ ∂x u(2) (x) holds
trivially. Otherwise, we conversely have ∂x u(1) (x) = 0 while ∂x v (1) ≥ 0, and hence, by the
above,
                                   ∂x v (2) (x) ≥ ∂x u(2) (x) ,
which concludes the proof.


7.2.5      Preservation of H 1 regularity
We wish to show that if the initial state u is in H 1 (I), then Pt u remains in H 1 (I) for all
times t > 0. To that end, define φ : L2 (I) → [0, +∞] by
                                    (
                                      ∥∂x u∥2L2 (I) if u ∈ H 1 (I)
                           φ(u) :=
                                      +∞            otherwise.

   The theory of maximal monotone operators gives us a recipe to establish that t 7→
φ(Pt u) is nonincreasing. The key ingredients are Claim 7.31 and Lemma 7.33.

Claim 7.31. The functional φ is convex, proper and lower semicontinuous.

Proof. Convexity and properness are straightforward; it remains to verify lower semicon-
tinuity. Since L2 (I) is a metric space, it suffices to check sequential lower semicontinuity.
Let (un )n∈N be a sequence in L2 (I) such that un → u in L2 (I). We need to show that
                                                  ?
                                           φ(u) ≤ lim inf φ(un ) .
                                                      n→∞

The only relevant case is when the RHS above is finite, so suppose there exists a subse-
quence (unk )k∈N such that limk→∞ φ(unk ) = A < +∞. By extracting a subsequence if
necessary, we may assume that φ(unk ) < +∞, and thus unk ∈ H 1 (I), for every k.
    We claim that (unk )k is bounded in H 1 (I). Indeed suppose this is not the case. Then
since ∥unk ∥2H 1 (I) = ∥unk ∥2L2 (I) + ∥∂x unk ∥2L2 (I) and ∥∂x unk ∥2L2 (I) remains bounded due to the
fact that φ(unk ) → A, we conclude that ∥unk ∥L2 (I) gets arbitrarily large as k → ∞. But
this contradicts the fact that unk → u in L2 (I), so the claim holds.
   It follows that we may extract a weakly convergent subsequence (unkℓ )ℓ∈N , and by
uniqueness of weak limits, we obtain that u ∈ H 1 (I) and unkℓ ⇀ u weakly in H 1 (I). By
weak lower semicontinuity the norm in H 1 (I),
∥u∥2L2 (I) + ∥∂x u∥2L2 (I) = ∥u∥2H 1 (I) ≤ lim inf ∥unkℓ ∥2H 1 (I) = lim inf ∥unkℓ ∥2L2 (I) + ∥∂x unkℓ ∥2L2 (I) .
                                             ℓ→∞                       ℓ→∞


                                                      122
Since unkℓ → u in L2 (I), we have ∥unkℓ ∥2L2 (I) → ∥u∥2L2 (I) and hence

  φ(u) = ∥∂x u∥2L2 (I) ≤ −∥u∥2L2 (I) + lim inf ∥unkℓ ∥2L2 (I) + ∥∂x unkℓ ∥2L2 (I) = lim inf φ(unkℓ ) .
                                            ℓ→∞                                      ℓ→∞


      We will need the following standard fact.

Fact 7.32 (See e.g. [EG15, Theorem 4.4]). Let 1 ≤ p < ∞ and let f ∈ W 1,p (I). Then
∂x f = 0 a.e. on {f = 0}.

Lemma 7.33. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ) and let z ∈ −∂E − (u). Then for all λ > 0, φ(u − λz) ≥
φ(u).

Proof. By Proposition 7.21, z is a weak solution to the static Neumann problem, and by
Lemma 7.24 we have u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) with ∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} and z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in L2 (I).
    Note that the result holds trivially if u − λz ̸∈ H 1 (I), in which case φ(u − λz) = +∞.
Therefore assume that u − λz ∈ H 1 (I). We consider four cases: u ∈ H 1 (I); u ∈ W 1,1 (I) \
H 1 (I), i.e. u is AC but not in H 1 (I); u is continuous but not AC; and u is not continuous.3


Case 1. Suppose u ∈ H 1 (I). Note that in this case the assumption that u − λz ∈ H 1 (I)
implies that z ∈ H 1 (I) as well, so in particular ∂x u, ∂x z ∈ L2 (I). Additionally, Lemma 7.24
also yields u↓ ∈ H 3 (I). We have
                     Z                                                    Z
                                      2                 2       2
       φ(u − λz) = (∂x (u − λz)) dx = φ(u) + λ ∥∂x z∥L2 (I) − 2λ (∂x u)(∂x z) dx .
                         I                                                      I

Therefore it suffices to show that
                                        Z
                                                              ?
                                              (∂x u)(∂x z) dx ≤ 0 .                                (7.13)
                                          I

Recalling that u = u↑ + u↓ with u↑, u↓ ∈ H 1 (I) = W 1,2 (I) by Proposition 7.30, we have
                 Z                  Z                   Z
                   (∂x u)(∂x z) dx = (∂x u↑)(∂x z) dx + (∂x u↓)(∂x z) dx ,
                     I                        I                       I
  3
    As usual, phrases such as “u is continuous” should be understood as “the object u ∈ L2 (I) has a
continuous representative”, and in particular the condition “u is continuous but not AC” makes sense
because the continuous representative, if it exists, is unique.



                                                     123
with the second term in the RHS satisfying
         Z                                 Z
                                        1
            (∂x u↓)(∂x z) dx = (∂x u↓)z|0 − (∂x ∂x u↓)z dx = −∥∂x ∂x u↓∥2L2 (I) ≤ 0 .
           I                                        I

By Proposition 7.30, ∂x u↑ = ∂x+ u and ∂x u↓ = ∂x− u in L2 (I). Since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ in L2 (I),
we get                 Z                   Z
                               (∂x u↑)(∂x z) dx =           (∂x+ u)(∂x ∂x ∂x u↓) dx .
                           I                            I

We claim that the quantity above is zero. Indeed, fixing any representative of ∂x u ∈ L2 (I),
let S := {x ∈ I : ∂x u > 0}. First, we have (∂x+ u)(∂x ∂x ∂x− u) = ∂x+ u = 0 on I \ S. Second,
we have ∂x u↓ = ∂x− u = 0 on S, so applying Fact 7.32 twice (recall that u↓ ∈ H 3 (I)) gives
that ∂x ∂x ∂x u↓ = 0 a.e. in S, thus establishing the claim. Thus (7.13) indeed holds, which
concludes the proof in Case 1.


Case 2. Suppose u ∈ W 1,1 (I) \ H 1 (I). We will derive a contradiction, showing that
this case cannot happen. Note that, since u − λz ∈ H 1 (I) by assumption, we conclude
that z ∈ W 1,1 (I) \ H 1 (I), and in particular u, z are AC with ∂x u, ∂x z ∈ L1 (I). As in the
previous case, we have
                                 Z
                   φ(u − λz) = (∂x (u − λz))2 dx                                         (7.14)
                                 ZI
                               = (∂x u − λ∂x z)2 dx                                      (7.15)
                                 Z I

                                     (∂x u)2 − 2λ(∂x u)(∂x z) + λ2 (∂x z)2 dx .
                                                                          
                               =                                                         (7.16)
                                     I

We claim that the function (∂x u)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I). First, by Proposition 7.30 we have u↑ ∈
W 1,1 (I) (while u↓ ∈ H 1 (I) since u↓ ∈ H 2 (I)), as well as ∂x u↑ = ∂x+ u and ∂x u↓ = ∂x− u a.e.
in I. Hence
Z                    Z                                       Z h                                 i
  |(∂x u)(∂x z)| dx = |(∂x u↑)(∂x z) + (∂x u↓)(∂x z)| dx ≤        |(∂x u↑)(∂x z)|+|(∂x u↓)(∂x z)| dx .
 I                     I                                                 I

We claim that (∂x u↑)(∂x z), (∂x u↓)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I). First, we again have that (∂x u↑)(∂x z) =
(∂x u↑)(∂x ∂x ∂x u↓) = 0 a.e. as in the previous case, where in particular we are allowed to
apply Fact 7.32 twice to ∂x u↓ because ∂x u↓ ∈ W 2,1 (I) by virtue of the fact that ∂x ∂x u↓ =



                                                    124
z ∈ W 1,1 (I) in the current case. Hence (∂x u↑)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I). Second, note that ∂x u↓ is AC
and hence bounded, while ∂x z ∈ L1 (I) since z is AC. Therefore
                     Z
                       |(∂x u↓)(∂x z)| dx ≤ ∥∂x u↓∥L∞ (I) ∥∂x z∥L1 (I) < +∞ ,
                      I

and hence (∂x u↓)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I). Hence |(∂x u↑)(∂x z)| + |(∂x u↓)(∂x z)| ∈ L1 (I) and
          Z                      Z                     Z
            |(∂x u)(∂x z)| dx ≤ |(∂x u↑)(∂x z)| dx + |(∂x u↓)(∂x z)| dx < +∞ ,
             I                      I                         I

so (∂x u)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I) as claimed. Now, since φ(u − λz) < +∞ by assumption, (7.16)
shows that (∂x u)2 − 2λ(∂x u)(∂x z) + λ2 (∂x z)2 ∈ L1 (I), while we have just established that
2λ(∂x u)(∂x z) ∈ L1 (I). We conclude that (∂x u)2 + λ2 (∂x z)2 ∈ L1 (I), i.e.
                              Z
                                 (∂x u)2 + λ2 (∂x z)2 dx < +∞ .
                                                     
                                I

On the other hand, the fact that u, z ∈ W 1,1 (I) \ H 1 (I) implies that
                  Z                                  Z
                          2
                    (∂x u) dx = +∞        and            (∂x z)2 dx = +∞ ,
                      I                                   I

which is the desired contradiction. This concludes the proof in Case 2.


Case 3. Suppose u is continuous but not AC (and hence the same is true of u↑). Then
by the definition of absolute continuity, there exists ε > 0 such that,     P for all δ > 0, there
exists a set of pairwise disjoint intervals ((ai , bi ))i∈[k] in I such that ki=1 (bi − ai ) < δ and
Pk
  i=1 |u(ai ) − u(bi )| > ε.

   We claim that, moreover, the sequences ((ai , bi ))i∈[k] above can always be taken to satisfy
u(ai ) < u(bi ) for every i ∈ [k]. Indeed, let ε > 0 be as in the paragraph above, let δ > 0,
and let ((ai , bi ))i∈[k] be the corresponding sequence. Let S := {i ∈ [k] : u(ai ) ≥ u(bi )}.
Then for each i ∈ S, we have
                                      h                i h                 i
|u(ai ) − u(bi )| = u(ai ) − u(bi ) = u↓(ai ) − u↓(bi ) + u↑(ai ) − u↑(bi ) ≤ |u↓(ai ) − u↓(bi )| .
                                      |       {z       } |        {z       }
                                            ≥0                    ≤0

Now, since u↓ is AC, let δ > 0 be small enough so that
                                X                        ε
                                    |u↓(ai ) − u↓(bi )| ≤ .
                                i∈S
                                                         2

                                                 125
It follows that
     k
     X                           X                                X                          ε X
ε<         |u(ai ) − u(bi )| ≤         |u↓(ai ) − u↓(bi )|+               |u(ai ) − u(bi )| ≤ +  |u(ai ) − u(bi )| ,
     i=1                         i∈S
                                                                                             2
                                                                i∈[k]\S                           i∈[k]\S

and hence                                    X                                ε
                                                      |u(ai ) − u(bi )| >       ,
                                                                              2
                                            i∈[k]\S
                                                                          P
and of course u(ai ) < u(bi ) for each i ∈ [k] \ S and                       i∈[k]\S (bi − ai ) < δ.   This establishes
the claim.
    Let v := u − λz for convenience, and fix any sequence ((ai , bi ))i∈[k] of pairwise disjoint
intervals satisfying u(ai ) < u(bi ) for each i ∈ [k]. Using Lemma 7.35 below, we map each
interval (ai , bi ) into an interval (a′i , b′i ) ⊆ (ai , bi ) such that

                                                                |u(ai ) − u(bi )|
                                        |v(a′i ) − v(b′i )| ≥                     .
                                                                        2
This implies that v is not AC and hence φ(v) = +∞, thus concluding the proof in this
case.


Case 4. Suppose u is not continuous. By Lemma 7.36 below, u − λz is not continuous,
which implies that u − λz ̸∈ H 1 (I) and φ(u − λz) = +∞, concluding the proof.

  We now give Lemmas 7.35 and 7.36, which we used above. The following fact is an
immediate application of the Sobolev embedding theorem (see e.g. [Eva10; Maz11]).

Fact 7.34. Let f ∈ H 2 (I). Then f ∈ C 1,1/2 (I). In particular, f is continuously differen-
tiable.

Lemma 7.35. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ), suppose u is continuous, and let z ∈ −∂E − (u). Let λ > 0
and let v := u − λz. Let 0 < a < b < 1 and suppose u(a) < u(b). Then for all ε > 0, there
exist a′ , b′ with a ≤ a′ < b′ ≤ b such that

                                       v(b′ ) − v(a′ ) ≥ |u(a) − u(b)| − ε .

Proof. Recall that, by Proposition 7.21, u, z form a weak solution to the static Neumann
problem, and by Lemma 7.24 we have u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) with ∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} and z = ∂x ∂x u↓
in L2 (I). In particular, u↓ is continuously differentiable by Fact 7.34.

                                                            126
   We first observe that it cannot be the case that ∂x u↓(x) < 0 for all x ∈ (a, b), since
otherwise Lemma 7.28 would imply that u↑ is constant in (a, b), which by continuity would
imply that u↑(a) = u↑(b) and hence u(a) ≥ u(b), a contradiction.
     We first construct a′ ∈ (a, b). In particular, we wish a′ to satisfy
                                  ?          ε                     ?
                           u(a′ ) ≤ u(a) +         and      z(a′ ) ≥ 0 .                 (7.17)
                                             2
Let x∗ ∈ [a, b) be given by
                              x∗ := inf{x ∈ (a, b) : ∂x u↓(x) = 0} ,
which is well-defined by the observation above and the fact that ∂x u↓ ≤ 0 in all of I (since
u↓ is nonincreasing and continuously differentiable). By the continuity of ∂x u↓, we have
that ∂x u↓(x∗ ) = 0. Since ∂x u↓(a) ≤ 0, it must be the case that either a = x∗ or
                              L {x ∈ (a, x∗ ) : ∂x ∂x u↓(x) ≥ 0} > 0 .                   (7.18)
We consider each case separately. First, suppose a = x∗ . We claim that for all δ > 0, there
exists x ∈ (a, a + δ) such that z(x) ≥ 0. Suppose for a contradiction that this is not the
case, and fix δ > 0 such that for all x ∈ (a, a + δ), z(x) < 0. Then since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ almost
everywhere, we conclude that ∂x ∂x u↓ < 0 a.e. in (a, a + δ). Hence ∂x u↓(x) < 0 for all
x ∈ (a, a + δ), contradicting the assumption that a = x∗ given the definition of x∗ . Thus
the claim holds. Now, using the continuity of u, choose δ > 0 small enough and choose
a′ ∈ (a, a + δ) so that z(a′ ) ≥ 0 and moreover u(a′ ) ≤ u(a) + ε/2. This choice of a′ satisfies
(7.17).
    Second, suppose a < x∗ and (7.18) holds. Since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ almost everywhere, choose
a ∈ (a, x∗ ) such that z(a′ ) ≥ 0, which is possible by (7.18). Now, since ∂x u↓ < 0 for
 ′

all x ∈ (a, a′ ) ⊂ (a, x∗ ) by the choice of x∗ , Lemma 7.28 implies that u↑ is constant in
(a, a′ ). By the continuity of u↑, we conclude that u↑(a) = u↑(a′ ) and hence, since u↓ is
nonincreasing, we have
                       u(a′ ) = u↑(a′ ) + u↓(a′ ) ≤ u↑(a) + u↓(a) = u(a) ,
and again (7.17) is satisfied. This concludes the choice of a′ .
    Now, we may assume without loss of generality that ε < |u(a) − u(b)|/2. Therefore
our choice of a′ yields an interval (a′ , b) which, using (7.17) and recalling that u(a) < u(b),
satisfies u(a′ ) < u(b). Therefore, repeating a symmetric version of the argument above
yields a choice of b′ ∈ (a′ , b) satisfying
                                             ε
                             u(b′ ) ≥ u(b) −       and      z(b′ ) ≤ 0 .                  (7.19)
                                             2

                                                 127
Combining (7.17) and (7.19), we conclude that
                  h               i   h               i
 v(b′ ) − v(a′ ) = u(b′ ) − u(a′ ) − λ z(b′ ) − z(a′ ) ≥ u(b) − u(a) − ε = |u(a) − u(b)| − ε .
                                      |       {z      }
                                            ≤0


Lemma 7.36. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ), suppose u is not continuous, and let z ∈ −∂E − (u). Let
λ > 0. Then u − λz is not continuous.

Proof. Recall that, by Proposition 7.21, u, z form a weak solution to the static Neumann
problem, and by Lemma 7.24 we have u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) with ∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} and z = ∂x ∂x u↓
in L2 (I). In particular, u↓ is continuously differentiable by Fact 7.34.
   Since u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) is continuous while u is not continuous, we conclude that u↑ is not
continuous and, since it is monotone, it contains only jump discontinuities. Let x0 ∈ I be
a point of jump discontinuity of u↑, i.e. a point such that L− < L+ where

                      L− := lim− u↑(x)        and      L+ := lim+ u↑(x) .
                             x→x0                             x→x0


We first claim that ∂x u↓(x0 ) = 0. Indeed, it is clear that ∂x u↓ ≤ 0 since u↓ is nonincreasing
and continuously differentiable. If we had ∂x u↓(x0 ) < 0, then by continuity ∂x u↓ would
be strictly negative in a neighbourhood of x0 , in which case Lemma 7.28 would imply that
u↑ is constant in a neighbourhood of x0 , contradicting the fact that L− < L+ . Hence the
claim holds.
    We now claim that, for all δ > 0, there exists x ∈ (x0 , x0 + δ) such that z(x) ≤ 0.
Suppose for a contradiction that there exists δ > 0 such that for all x ∈ (x0 , x0 + δ),
z(x) > 0. Then, since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ a.e. and ∂x u↓(x0 ) = 0, we conclude that ∂x u↓ > 0 in
(x0 , x0 + δ), contradicting the fact that ∂x u↓ ≤ 0. Hence the claim holds. By the same
reasoning, we conclude that for all δ > 0 there exists x ∈ (x0 − δ, x0 ) such that z(x) ≥ 0.
   Thus, for all δ > 0 there exist points x− ∈ (x0 − δ, x0 ), x+ ∈ (x0 , x0 + δ) such that
z(x+ ) − z(x− ) ≤ 0 and hence
                               h                 i h                    i    h             i
(u − λz)(x+ ) − (u − λz)(x− ) = u↑(x+ ) − u↑(x− ) + u↓(x+ ) − u↓(x− ) − λ z(x+ ) − z(x− )
                               h                 i h                    i
                              ≥ u↑(x+ ) − u↑(x− ) + u↓(x+ ) − u↓(x− ) .

Since u↑ → L+ as x ↓ x0 and u↑ → L− as x ↑ x0 and u↑ is nondecreasing, we have
u↑(x+ ) − u↑(x− ) ≥ L+ − L− . By the continuity of u↓, we can let δ > 0 be small enough so

                                                 128
that u↓(x+ ) − u↓(x− ) ≥ − L+ −L2
                                  −
                                    . We conclude that, for all sufficiently small δ > 0, there
exist points x− ∈ (x0 − δ, x0 ), x+ ∈ (x0 , x0 + δ) such that

                                                           L+ − L−
                         (u − λz)(x+ ) − (u − λz)(x− ) ≥           ,
                                                              2
and thus u − λz is not continuous.

   We are ready to obtain our preservation of regularity result. We will use the following
tool from the theory of maximal monotone operators.

Lemma 7.37 (Specialization of [Bre73, Theorem 4.4]). Let H be a Hilbert space and let
τ : H → [0, +∞] be a convex, proper, and lower semicontinuous functional such that
τ (ProjD(A) x) ≤ τ (x) for all x ∈ H. Let A : H → 2H be a maximal monotone operator and
let St be the semigroup generated by −A. Then the following are equivalent:

  1. τ ((I + λA)−1 x) ≤ τ (x) for all x ∈ H and λ > 0; and

  2. τ (St x) ≤ τ (x) for all x ∈ D(A) and t ≥ 0.

     In the statement above, (I + λA)−1 : H → D(A) is the resolvent of A (also denoted by
Jλ , see e.g. [Eva10, p. 563]).
    We will need the following fact and observation about the density of our domains of
interest in L2 (I).

Fact 7.38 (See e.g. [Bar76, Chapter II, Corollary 2.1]). The set D(∂E − ) is a dense subset
of D(E − ) = U.

Observation 7.39. Since U contains H 1 (I), which is dense in L2 (I), Fact 7.38 implies
that
                         D(∂E − ) = D(E − ) = U = L2 (I) .

Proposition 7.40 (φ-monotonicity of solutions). Let u0 ∈ U and let u ∈
C([0, +∞); L2 (I)) be the solution to the gradient flow problem with initial data u0 . Then
for all 0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 < +∞, we have φ(u(t1 )) ≥ φ(u(t2 )).

Proof. This is a direct consequence of Lemma 7.37. Indeed, letting H := L2 (I) and
A := ∂E − (which is maximal monotone as remarked earlier), we first observe that indeed


                                             129
φ(ProjD(A) f ) ≤ φ(f ) for all f ∈ L2 (I), since by Observation 7.39 we have ProjD(A) f = f .
Thus it suffices to show that for all f ∈ L2 (I) and all λ > 0,
                                                        ?
                                  φ((I + λA)−1 f ) ≤ φ(f ) .

But this is equivalent to showing that, for all u ∈ D(A), −z ∈ A(u) and λ > 0,
                                              ?
                                     φ(u) ≤ φ(u − λz) ,

which is precisely Lemma 7.33.

Corollary 7.41 (Preservation of H 1 regularity). Suppose u0 ∈ H 1 (I), and let u ∈
C([0, +∞); L2 (I)) be the solution to the gradient flow problem with initial data u0 . Then
u(t) ∈ H 1 (I) for all t > 0.

Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Proposition 7.40 and the definition of φ.


7.2.6     Preservation of Lipschitz regularity
It will also be useful to control the Lipschitz regularity of solutions. At a high level, we
follow a similar strategy as in Section 7.2.5. Recall that W 1,∞ (I) is equivalent to the space
of Lipschitz real-valued functions on I, up to identification of almost everywhere equal
functions. Define ψ : L2 (I) → [0, +∞] by
                                    (
                                      ∥∂x u∥L∞ (I) if u ∈ W 1,∞ (I)
                           ψ(u) :=
                                      +∞           otherwise.

Fact 7.42. Let u ∈ L2 (I) and let M ∈ R≥0 . Then ψ(u) ≤ M if and only if u = f a.e. for
some M -Lipschitz function f : I → R. Moreover, in this case f is the (unique) continuous
representative of u and ψ(u) is the Lipschitz constant of f .

Claim 7.43. The functional ψ is convex, proper and lower semicontinuous.

Proof. Convexity and properness are straightforward; it remains to verify lower semicon-
tinuity. Since L2 (I) is a metric space, it suffices to check sequential lower semicontinuity.
Let (un )n∈N be a sequence in L2 (I) such that un → u in L2 (I). We need to show that
                                          ?
                                    ψ(u) ≤ lim inf ψ(un ) .
                                                  n→∞


                                                  130
The only relevant case is when the RHS above is finite, so suppose there exists a subse-
quence (unk )k∈N such that limk→∞ ψ(unk ) = M < +∞. By extracting a subsequence if
necessary, we may assume that ψ(unk ) < +∞, and thus unk ∈ W 1,∞ (I), for every k. For
simplicity and using Fact 7.42, fix for each nk the continuous representative of unk , which
we denote by the same name. Then each unk is Mk -Lipschitz with Mk → M .
    Since unk → u in L2 (I), it is standard that we may extract a subsequence that converges
to u pointwise almost everywhere. Denote this further subsequence again by (unk )k , and
let N ⊂ I be a measure zero set such that unk → u pointwise in I \ N . Then for each
x ̸= y in I \ N , we have

           |u(x) − u(y)| = lim |unk (x) − unk (y)| ≤ lim Mk |x − y| = M |x − y| .
                            k→∞                         k→∞

By Lemma 7.44 below, u is a.e. equal to an M -Lipschitz function, so ψ(u) ≤ M by
Fact 7.42, as needed.

   We used the following simple lemma.

Lemma 7.44 (From “almost Lipschitz” to Lipschitz). Let M ∈ R≥0 and let N ⊂ I be a
measure zero set. Suppose f : I → R satisfies |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ M |x − y| for all x, y ∈ I \ N .
Then there exists a M -Lipschitz function g : I → R such that f = g in I \ N .

Proof. See Appendix B.

Definition 7.45. For any w : I → R and distinct x, y ∈ I, let
                                                   w(y) − w(x)
                                slopew (x, y) :=               .
                                                      y−x
Lemma 7.46. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ) and let z ∈ −∂E − (u). Then for all λ > 0, ψ(u − λz) ≥
ψ(u).

Proof. We follow the proof outline from Lemma 7.33, but some of the technical details are
different. As in that proof, we have u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) with ∂x u↓ = 0 on {0, 1} and z = ∂x ∂x u↓
in L2 (I).
   We may assume that u − λz ∈ W 1,∞ (I), since otherwise ψ(u − λz) = +∞ and there is
nothing to prove. In particular, this establishes that u − λz is continuous.
   When u is not continuous, Lemma 7.36 yields that u − λz is not continuous, a con-
tradiction. Therefore we may assume that u is continuous. Since both u and u − λz are

                                              131
continuous, we conclude that z is also continuous. Let v := u − λz. By Fact 7.42, it suffices
to show that for every (a, b) ⊂ I and all ε > 0, there exists (a′ , b′ ) ⊂ I such that
                                                     ?
                                   |slopev (a′ , b′ )| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)| − ε .                   (7.20)

If u(a) < u(b), then the interval (a′ , b′ ) ⊆ (a, b) given by Lemma 7.35 with parameter
ε(b − a) satisfies (7.20); and if u(a) = u(b), then any interval will do. Therefore suppose
u(a) > u(b), so in particular slopeu (a, b) < 0.
    Note that a sufficient condition for (7.20) is that |slopeu (a′ , b′ )| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)| − ε with
u(a ) > u(b′ ), z(a′ ) ≤ 0 and z(b′ ) ≥ 0, since in that case,
   ′


                    |(u − λz)(b′ ) − (u − λz)(a′ )|
                                                                                                       
          ′ ′                                             ′      ′            ′        ′           1
|slopev (a , b )| =                                 = u(b ) − u(a ) −λ (z(b ) − z(a ))
                               b ′ − a′               |     {z    }       |      {z      }     b ′ − a′
                                                                    <0               ≥0
                            ′     ′
                     |u(b ) − u(a )|
                 ≥                   = |slopeu (a′ , b′ )| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)| − ε ,
                         b ′ − a′
which is (7.20). We now find a′ and b′ satisfying the aforementioned conditions.
   For each point x ∈ I, say x is left-favourable if every neighbourhood (x−δ, x+δ) contains
a point x′ such that z(x′ ) ≤ 0. Similarly, say x is right-favourable if every neighbourhood
(x − δ, x + δ) contains a point x′ such that z(x′ ) ≥ 0.
    We claim that there exist points a∗ < b∗ in I such that a∗ is left-favourable, b∗ is
right-favourable, and |slopeu (a∗ , b∗ )| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)| with u(a∗ ) > u(b∗ ). Let us first show
that this claim yields the desired points a′ and b′ , and then proceed to prove the claim.
Suppose we have a∗ and b∗ as claimed. Then by the continuity of u, we may fix sufficiently
small δ > 0 and find points a′ ∈ (a∗ − δ, a∗ + δ) and b′ ∈ (b∗ − δ, b∗ + δ) such that a′ < b′ ,
                                                                 ∗ −a∗               ε(b∗ −a∗ )
z(a′ ) ≤ 0, z(b′ ) ≥ 0, u(a′ ) > u(b′ ), and, for α := 2ε · u(ab∗ )−u(b ∗ ) and β :=     2
                                                                                                ,

                        u(a′ ) − u(b′ )   u(a∗ ) − u(b∗ ) − β      u(a∗ ) − u(b∗ )             ε/2
    |slopeu (a′ , b′ )| =    ′    ′
                                        ≥    ∗    ∗
                                                                 ≥      ∗    ∗
                                                                                   (1 − α) −
                           b −a            (b − a )(1 + α)             b −a                   1+α
                           ∗         ∗
                        u(a ) − u(b )
                      ≥      ∗     ∗
                                        − ε = |slopeu (a∗ , b∗ )| − ε ≥ |slopeu (a, b)| − ε ,
                           b −a
                                          1
as desired, where we used the inequality 1+α ≥ 1 − α. We now establish the existence of
 ∗       ∗
a and b .
   We first find a∗ . If a is left-favourable, then choose a∗ = a; note that, of course, we have
u(a∗ ) > u(b) and |slopeu (a∗ , b)| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)|. Otherwise, a is not left-favourable, which

                                                      132
gives some δ > 0 such that z(x) > 0 for every x ∈ (a − δ, a + δ), and hence ∂x ∂x u↓ > 0
a.e. in (a − δ, a + δ). We now consider two cases. Recall that slopeu (a, b) < 0.
    First, suppose ∂x u↓(a) ≥ slopeu (a, b). Note that it cannot be the case that ∂x u↓(x) >
slopeu (a, b) for all x ∈ (a, b), since otherwise we would have
                                             Z
u(b) = u↑(b) + u↓(b) ≥ u↑(a) + u↓(a) +             ∂x u↓ dx > u(a) + (b − a) slopeu (a, b) = u(b) ,
                                             (a,b)

a contradiction. Therefore we may let

                        a∗ := inf {x ∈ (a, b) : ∂x u↓(x) ≤ slopeu (a, b)} .

By the continuity of ∂x u↓ (recall that u↓ ∈ H 2 (I) is continuously differentiable), we con-
clude that ∂x u↓(a∗ ) = slopeu (a, b). We also observe that we must have a∗ > a since,
as noted above, we have ∂x ∂x u↓(x) > 0 a.e. in some neighbourhood (a − δ, a + δ),
which implies that ∂x u↓(x) > ∂x u↓(a) ≥ slopeu (a, b) for all x ∈ (a, a + δ). We claim
that a∗ is left-favourable. Indeed, otherwise there would be some δ > 0 such that
z(x) > 0 for all x ∈ (a∗ − δ, a∗ + δ), and since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ a.e. we would conclude
that ∂x u↓(x) < ∂x u↓(a∗ ) = slopeu (a, b) for x ∈ (a∗ − δ, a∗ ), contradicting the choice of
a∗ . Hence we have found a left-favourable a∗ in this case; we claim that a∗ also satisfies
u(a∗ ) > u(b) and |slopeu (a∗ , b)| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)|. The first inequality holds since

    u(a∗ ) − u(b) = u↓(a∗ ) + u↑(a∗ ) − u(a) + (b − a) slopeu (a, b)
                                                                      
                              Z
                  ≥ u↓(a) +             ∂x u↓ dx + u↑(a) − u↑(a) − u↓(a) − (b − a) slopeu (a, b)
                                (a,a∗ )
                                                        
                    Z
                                                                       ∗
                  =          ∂x u↓(x) − slopeu (a, b) dx − (b − a ) slopeu (a, b)
                                                        
                         ∗
                     (a,a )   |    {z    }                                | {z }
                             >slopeu (a,b)                                    <0

                 > 0,




                                               133
and the second inequality holds since
                                                   
        ∗                   ∗
  (b − a )(b − a) |slopeu (a , b)| − |slopeu (a, b)|
                            u(a∗ ) − u(b) u(a) − u(b)
                                                         
                ∗
       = (b − a )(b − a)                     −
                                b − a∗             b−a
                                                  
       = u(a∗ ) − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                               Z                           !
                                                                                
       = u↑(a∗ ) + u↓(a) +               ∂x u↓(x) dx − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                                 (a,a∗ ) | {z }
                                      >slopeu (a,b)
                                                                          
        > u↑(a) + u↓(a) + (a∗ − a) slopeu (a, b) − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                         u(b) − u(a)                             
        = u(a) + (a∗ − a)             − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                          b−a                      
        = u(a) − u(b) (b − a) − (b − a∗ ) − (a∗ − a)
        = 0.

Therefore in the first case we have found a left-favourable a∗ ∈ (a, b) such that u(a∗ ) > u(b)
and |slopeu (a∗ , b)| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)|.
    Second, suppose ∂x u↓(a) < slopeu (a, b). We proceed similarly, but with points to the left
of a instead. Namely, it cannot be the case that ∂x u↓(x) < slopeu (a, b) for all x ∈ (0, a),
since by continuity this would imply that ∂x u↓(0) ≤ slopeu (a, b) < 0, a contradiction.
Hence we may define

                       a∗ := sup {x ∈ (0, a) : ∂x u↓(x) ≥ slopeu (a, b)} .

By continuity, we conclude that ∂x u↓(a∗ ) = slopeu (a, b), which also implies that a∗ < a.
We claim that a∗ is left-favourable. Indeed, if it was not, then for some δ > 0 we would
have z(x) > 0 for all x ∈ (a∗ − δ, a∗ + δ), and since z = ∂x ∂x u↓ a.e. we would conclude
that ∂x u↓(x) > ∂x u↓(a∗ ) = slopeu (a, b) for all x ∈ (a∗ , a∗ + δ), contradicting the choice of
a∗ . We now claim that a∗ also satisfies u(a∗ ) > u(b) and |slopeu (a∗ , b)| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)|.
   To prove the first inequality, we first observe that ∂x u↓(x) < slopeu (a, b) < 0 for all
x ∈ (a∗ , a), which by Lemma 7.28 implies that u↑ is constant in (a∗ , a). Since u↑ is
continuous (because u and u↓ are), we conclude that u↑(a∗ ) = u↑(a). Therefore we have

                             u(a∗ ) − u(a) = u↓(a∗ ) − u↓(a) ≥ 0


                                                 134
since u↓ is nonincreasing, and hence u(a∗ ) ≥ u(a) > u(b). As for the second inequality, we
have
                                                    
         ∗                   ∗
   (b − a )(b − a) |slopeu (a , b)| − |slopeu (a, b)|
                             u(a∗ ) − u(b) u(a) − u(b)
                                                          
                 ∗
        = (b − a )(b − a)                     −
                                 b − a∗             b−a
                                                   
        = u(a∗ ) − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                               Z                           !
                                                                                
        = u↑(a) + u↓(a) −                ∂x u↓(x) dx − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                                 (a∗ ,a) | {z }
                                        <slopeu (a,b)
                                              !
                            u(b) − u(a)                            
         > u(a) − (a − a∗ )             − u(b) (b − a) − u(a) − u(b) (b − a∗ )
                               b−a
                                                   
         = u(a) − u(b) (b − a) − (b − a∗ ) + (a − a∗ )
         = 0.

Therefore in any case we have found a left-favourable a∗ ∈ (0, b) such that u(a∗ ) > u(b)
and |slopeu (a∗ , b)| ≥ |slopeu (a, b)|.
    Repeating an analogous argument for the right endpoint of the interval (a∗ , b), we find
a right-favourable b∗ ∈ (a∗ , 1) such that u(a∗ ) > u(b∗ ) and |slopeu (a∗ , b∗ )| ≥ |slopeu (a∗ , b)|,
which concludes the proof as explained above.

Proposition 7.47 (ψ-monotonicity of solutions). Let u0 ∈ U and let u ∈
C([0, +∞); L2 (I)) be the solution to the gradient flow problem with initial data u0 . Then
for all 0 ≤ t1 ≤ t2 < +∞, we have ψ(u(t1 )) ≥ ψ(u(t2 )).

Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 7.40, this follows from Lemmas 7.37 and 7.46.

Corollary 7.48 (Preservation of Lipschitz regularity). Suppose u0 ∈ W 1,∞ (I), and let
u ∈ C([0, +∞); L2 (I)) be the solution to the gradient flow problem with initial data u0 .
Then u(t) ∈ W 1,∞ (I) for all t > 0.

Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Proposition 7.47 and the definition of ψ.




                                                   135
7.2.7     Nonexpansiveness and order preservation
Our goal in this section is to establish that the semigroup Pt is nonexpansive and order
preserving. These properties will help us show that applying Pt to line restrictions in the
multidimensional setting behaves as expected by “making progress” toward monotonicity
with each application.
   In the context of PDEs, one desirable way to show that a property is preserved through
time is to differentiate in time, and then pass the derivative inside the integral to exploit
the definition of the PDE. However, we need to establish some technical results before we
can justify such calculations.
    We start with the following lemma, slightly adapted from [CT80], which reveals a
close connection between order preservation and nonexpansiveness (here, in the supremum
norm) of operators. Hence our strategy will be to establish order preservation, and conclude
nonexpansiveness.

Lemma 7.49. Let (Ω, Σ, µ) be a finite measure space, and let 1 ≤ p ≤ +∞. Let L∞ (Ω) ⊂
C ⊂ Lp (Ω) have the property that for all f ∈ C and r ∈ R, f + r ∈ C. Let T : C → Lp (Ω)
be continuous as a map from Lp (Ω) to Lp (Ω) (the continuity requirement may be dropped
if p = ∞) satisfying
                               T (f + r) = T (f ) + r a.e.                        (7.21)
for every f ∈ C and r ∈ R. Then the following are equivalent:

 (a) For all f, g ∈ C, if f ≤ g a.e. then T f ≤ T g a.e. .

 (b) For all f, g ∈ C, (T f − T g)+ ≤ ess sup(f − g)+ a.e. .

 (c) For all f, g ∈ C, |T f − T g| ≤ ess sup|f − g| a.e. .

Proof. We show (a) =⇒ (b) =⇒ (c) =⇒ (a). First, assume (a) holds, and let f, g ∈ C.
Suppose r := ess sup(f − g)+ < +∞, since otherwise there is nothing to prove. Note that
g + r ≥ f and g + r ≥ g both a.e. . Thus by (a) and (7.21), we have

                 T g + (T f − T g)+ = T f ∨ T g ≤ T (g + r) = T g + r a.e. ,

so (T f − T g)+ ≤ r a.e. as needed. Next, suppose (b) holds, and let f, g ∈ C. Let
r1 := ess sup(f − g)+ and r2 := ess sup(g − f )+ ; note that ess sup|f − g| = max{r1 , r2 }, so



                                             136
we may assume that r1 , r2 < +∞, since otherwise there is nothing to show. Then indeed,
using (b),

    |T f − T g| = max (T f − T g)+ , (T g − T f )+ ≤ max{r1 , r2 } = ess sup|f − g| a.e. ,
                     


as needed. Finally, suppose (c) holds, and let f, g ∈ C satisfy f ≤ g a.e. . First, suppose
f, g ∈ L∞ (Ω). Let r := ess sup(g − f ), so that 0 ≤ r < +∞ by assumption. Then, by (c)
and (7.21),

        ess sup{T f − T g + r} = ess sup{T (f + r) − T g} ≤ ess sup|T (f + r) − T g|
                               ≤ ess sup|f − g + r| ≤ r ,

so T f ≤ T g a.e. as needed.
    Now, for general f, g ∈ C with f ≤ g a.e. , we may approximate them by sequences
(fn )n , (gn )n in L∞ (Ω) ⊂ C such that fn → f and gn → g in Lp (Ω) and moreover fn ≤
gn a.e. for each n; indeed, letting fn := max{−n, min{n, f }} and likewise for gn , it is
immediate that fn , gn ∈ L∞ (Ω) with fn ≤ gn a.e. , and the convergences fn → f and
                                                                                    p
gn → g in Lp (Ω) follow from the dominated convergence theorem:    R since |fp− fn | → 0
pointwise and |f − fn | ≤ |f | pointwise for each n, we have limn→∞ Ω |fn − f | dµ = 0.
    The previous case yields T fn ≤ T gn a.e. for each n, and we claim that the continuity
of T implies that T f ≤ T g a.e. as well. Indeed, we have T fn → T f an T gn → T g in Lp (Ω)
and thus

      (T f − T g)+ − (T fn − T gn )+ Lp (Ω) ≤ ∥(T f − T g) − (T fn − T gn )∥Lp (Ω)
                                            ≤ ∥T f − T fn ∥Lp (Ω) + ∥T g − T gn ∥Lp (Ω) → 0 ,

which means that (T fn − T gn )+ → (T f − T g)+ in Lp (Ω). But since (T fn − T gn )+ = 0 a.e.
and hence in Lp (Ω) for each n, we conclude that (T f − T g)+ = 0 a.e. , i.e. T f ≤ T g a.e.
as needed.

   The following lemma is a specific formulation of the well-known Leibniz rule for differ-
entiating under the integral sign. It is a specialization of the version stated in [Che], and
can be proved by a standard argument using the Fubini-Tonelli theorem.

Lemma 7.50 (Differentiating under the integral sign). Let (Ω, Σ, µ) be a measure space
and let [a, b] ⊂ R. Let f : [a, b] × Ω → R be a jointly measurable function satisfying the
following:


                                              137
  1. f (t, ·) ∈ L1 (Ω) for a.e. t ∈ (a, b).

  2. f (·, x) is AC for a.e. x ∈ Ω. (Its a.e. defined partial derivative is denoted by ∂t f as
     usual.)

  3. It holds that                 Z         Z
                                                  |∂t f (t, x)| dµ dt < +∞ .
                                     (a,b)    Ω

                      R
Then the function t 7→ Ω f (t, x) dµ is AC and
                    Z               Z
                 ∂t f (t, x) dµ =       ∂t f (t, x) dµ            for a.e. t ∈ (a, b).
                       Ω                 Ω


   The following fact is a standard consequence of the definition of absolute continuity.

Fact 7.51. Let J ⊂ R be a compact interval. If f, g : J → R are AC, then f ∨ g is AC.

   We will also use the following standard fact about the weak derivative of the positive
part of a function.

Fact 7.52 (See e.g. [EG15, Theorem 4.4]). Let J ⊂ R be a compact interval. Let 1 ≤ p <
∞ and let f ∈ W 1,p (J). Then f + ∈ W 1,p (J) and ∂x (f + ) = χ{f >0} ∂x f a.e. in J.

     We also use the following standard formulation of a chain rule for Sobolev functions.
This version follows e.g. from [EG15, Theorem 4.4], which is stated for globally Lipschitz
functions F , by using the fact that the image of f on J is bounded, so that the local
Lipschitz condition suffices (e.g. extend F linearly outside the image of f to obtain a
C 1 (R), globally Lipschitz function F̃ ).

Fact 7.53. Let J ⊂ R be a compact interval. Let 1 ≤ p < ∞, let f ∈ W 1,p (J), and let
F ∈ C 1 (R) be locally Lipschitz. Then F ◦ f ∈ W 1,p (J) and ∂x (F ◦ f )(x) = F ′ (f (x))∂x f (x)
for a. e. x ∈ J.

   The following lemma essentially says that, given an element of a Bochner space, we
can get a handle on a concrete jointly measurable function “representing” that element in
a precise sense. This makes concrete the intuitive expectation that a solution u to our
PDEs, which maps each point in time to an element of L2 (I), should also give us a specific
value at each point in time and space “u(t, x)”.

                                                     138
Lemma 7.54. [DS58, Theorem 17, p. 198] Let (S, ΣS , µ) and (T, ΣT , λ) be measure
spaces which are either both finite or both positive and σ-finite, and let (R, ΣR , ρ) be their
product. Let 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ and let F be a µ-integrable function on S to Lp (T, ΣT , λ, X ) where
 X is a real or complex Banach space. Then there is a ρ-measurable function f on R to X ,
which is uniquely determined except for a set of ρ-measure zero, such that f (s, ·) = F (s) for
Rµ-almost all s in S. Moreover f (·, t) is µ-integrable on S for
                                                              R λ-almost all t and
                                                                                p
                                                                                   the integral
  S
    f (s, t)µ(ds), as a function of t is equal to the element S F (s)µ(ds) of L (T, ΣT , λ, X ).

Corollary 7.55. Let [a, b] ⊂ R be a compact interval endowed with the Lebesgue measure,
and let F ∈ L1 (a, b; L2 (I)). Then there exists a jointly measurable function f ∗ : [a, b] × I →
R satisfying

   1. f ∗ (s, ·) = F (s) in L2 (I) for a.e. s ∈ (a, b).

   2. f ∗ (·, x) ∈ L1 (a, b) for all x ∈ I.

                                                           f ∗ (r, x) dr and
                                                 R                             R
   3. For all s ∈ [a, b], the functions x 7→         (a,s)                     (a,s)
                                                                                       F (r) dr are equal in
      L2 (I).

Proof. Let condition 2̃ denote condition 2 with “all x ∈ I” replaced by “a.e. x ∈ I”. We first
apply Lemma 7.54 with S = [a, b] and T = I, both endowed with the Lebesgue measure,
to obtain a function f satisfying conditions 1 and 2̃, as well condition 3 for s = b.
    We now show that condition 3 also holds for other values of s ∈ [a, b) using the a.e.
uniqueness given by Lemma 7.54. For any s ∈ [a, b), weR may apply that Rlemma with
S̃ = [a, s] instead to obtain a function f˜ satisfying x 7→ (a,s) f˜(r, x) dr = (a,s) F (r) dr
in L2 (I). But since both g = f˜ and g = f satisfy that g(r, ·) = F (r) in L2 (I) for
a.e. r ∈ (a, s), Lemma 7.54 implies that f˜ = f except for a subset of [a, s] × I of joint
measure zero.R We conclude that,      for a.e. x ∈ I, we have f˜(·, x) R= f (·, x) a.e. in (a, s)
                                      ˜
                                R
and hence (a,s) f (r, x) dr = (a,s) f (r, x) dr. It follows that x 7→ (a,s) f (r, x) dr = x 7→
     f˜(r, x) dr =
R                  R
 (a,s)
                        F (r) in L2 (I), as claimed.
                     (a,s)

   The final step is to construct a jointly measurable function f ∗ : [a, b] × I → R satisfying
condition 2 rather than just 2̃, while preserving conditions 1 and 3. Let N ⊂ I be a
measure zero set such that f (·, x) ∈ L1 (a, b) for all x ∈ I \ N . Define f ∗ by
                                           (
                                            f (s, x) if x ∈ I \ N
                             f ∗ (s, x) :=
                                            0         otherwise.


                                                 139
We note that f ∗ is jointly measurable; indeed, this follows from the facts that f = f ∗ on
[a, b] × (I \ N ) and that the set [a, b] × (I \ N ) is jointly measurable. By construction, f ∗
satisfies condition 2, and it is clear that f ∗ also satisfies conditions 1 and 3 since f does
and N is a null set.

Lemma 7.56. Let 0 ≤ a < b < +∞, and let u ∈ C([a, b]; L2 (I)) be the restriction to
domain [a, b] of any solution to the gradient flow problem, with u′ : [a, b] → L2 (I) its
weak derivative restricted in the same way. Then there exists a jointly measurable function
ũ′ : [a, b] × I → R satisfying

  1. ũ′ (t, ·) = u′ (t) in L2 (I) for a.e. t ∈ (a, b).

  2. ũ′ (·, x) ∈ L1 (a, b) for all x ∈ I.

                                                           ũ′ (s, x) ds and                   u′ (s) ds are equal in
                                                  R                                R
  3. For all t ∈ [a, b], the functions x 7→        (a,t)                               (a,t)
     L2 (I).

Moreover, fixing any representative of u(a) ∈ L2 (I), the function ũ : [a, b] × I → R given
by                                             Z
                              ũ(t, x) := u(a)(x) +                ũ′ (s, x) ds
                                                           (a,t)

is jointly measurable and satisfies

  4. For each t ∈ [a, b], ũ(t, ·) = u(t) in L2 (I).

  5. For each x ∈ I, ũ(·, x) is absolutely continuous with weak derivative ∂t ũ(t, x) =
     ũ′ (t, x).

Proof. Apply Corollary 7.55 to u′ , which is integrable since it is the weak derivative of u,
to obtain jointly measurable ũ′ : [a, b] × I → R satisfying properties 1–3. We now verify
that ũ satisfies properties 4 and 5. Note that these two properties then imply that ũ is a
Carathéodory function and hence jointly measurable (see e.g. [AB06, Lemma 4.51]).
   For each t ∈ [a, b], the definition of u (in particular its absolute continuity) implies that
                              Z                         Z              Z
                                      ′                           ′
     u(t) − u(a) = u(0) +            u (s) ds − u(0) +           u (s) ds =       u′ (s) ds
                                  (0,t)                               (0,a)                        (a,t)




                                                 140
in L2 (I). Property 3 implies that, for a.e. x ∈ I,
                                             Z
                      u(t)(x) = u(a)(x) +         ũ′ (s, x) ds = ũ(t, x) ,
                                                (a,t)

which is property 4. Finally, property 5 is an immediate consequence of the definition of
ũ.

   We are now prepared to differentiate in time in order to establish that Pt is order
preserving.

Proposition 7.57. Let u0 , v0 ∈ H 1 (I), and let u, v be the solutions to the gradient flow
problem with initial data u0 , v0 respectively. Then the function ∆ : [0, +∞) → [0, +∞)
given by                                Z
                                       1                  2
                             ∆(t) :=         (u(t) − v(t))+ dx
                                       2 I
is nonincreasing.

Proof. Let 0 ≤ a < b < +∞, so that it suffices to show that ∆(a) ≥ ∆(b). Apply
Lemma 7.56 to u and v to obtain functions ũ′ , ũ, ṽ ′ , and ṽ with the properties stated in
that lemma. Define the function f : [a, b] × I → R by
                                       1                      2
                           f (t, x) :=   (ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x))+ .
                                       2
Note that f is jointly measurable, since both ũ and ṽ are. We also obtain that, for each
t ∈ [a, b],                                Z
                                      ∆(t) =        f (t, x) dx .
                                                I
We now verify that f satisfies the conditions of Lemma 7.50. Let us verify the first
condition. Since ũ(t, ·), ṽ(t, ·) ∈ L2 (I), it follows that f (t, ·) ∈ L1 (I), as desired.
     We now verify the second condition. We already have that, for all x ∈ I, ũ(·, x) and
ṽ(·, x) are AC. Fact 7.52 implies that, for all x ∈ I, the function t 7→ (ũ(·, x) − ṽ(·, x))+
is AC. But the function y 7→ y 2 is locally Lipschitz, so Fact 7.53 implies that f (·, x) is AC
for each x, so the second condition is satisfied. Moreover, using Facts 7.52 and 7.53, its
weak derivative is
             ∂t f (t, x) = (ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x))+ ∂t (ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x))+
                                                                                   

                         = (ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x))+ χ{ũ(t,x)>ṽ(t,x)} [∂t ũ(t, x) − ∂t ṽ(t, x)]
                                                     

                         = χ{ũ(t,x)>ṽ(t,x)} [ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x)] [ũ′ (t, x) − ṽ ′ (t, x)] .

                                                141
                     R           R
We claim that            (a,b)   I
                                     |∂t f (t, x)| dx dt < +∞. Indeed, we have
Z        Z
        |∂t f (t, x)| dx dt
 (a,b)   I
      Z     Z
    =            χ{ũ(t,x)>ṽ(t,x)} [ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x)] [ũ′ (t, x) − ṽ ′ (t, x)] dx dt
       (a,b) I
        Z      Z                                         Z      Z
      1                                               1
    ≤                                      2
                  (ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x)) dx dt +                    (ũ′ (t, x) − ṽ ′ (t, x))2 dx dt
      2 (a,b) I                                       2 (a,b) I
      Z     Z                         Z      Z                       Z      Z                        Z       Z
                                                                                  ′
    ≤                    2
                ũ(t, x) dx dt +                        2
                                               ṽ(t, x) dx dt +                           2
                                                                                ũ (t, x) dx dt +                ṽ ′ (t, x)2 dx dt .
         (a,b)   I                           (a,b)    I                     (a,b)   I                (a,b)   I

We claim that each of the four terms above is finite. First, using Tonelli’s theorem, the
definition of ũ and Jensen’s inequality, and letting L := b − a, we have
    Z     Z                   Z Z                 Z                    2
                     2                                      ′
             ũ(t, x) dx dt =            u(a)(x) +        ũ (s, x) ds dt dx
     (a,b) I                   I (a,b)              (a,t)
                               Z Z                             Z Z        Z
                            ≤2                  2
                                        u(a)(x) dt dx + 2L                     ũ′ (s, x)2 ds dt dx
                               ZI (a,b)
                                     Z                         ZI (a,b)Z (a,t)
                                                                            Z
                            ≤2                  2
                                        u(a)(x) dx dt + 2L                     ũ′ (s, x)2 dx ds dt
                                (a,b) I                          (a,b) (a,b) I
                                                    Z      Z
                            = 2L∥u(a)∥2L2 (I) + 2L2           ũ′ (s, x)2 dx ds ,
                                                                    (a,b)    I


where in the last line we write ∥u(a)∥2L2 (I) , which is finite, since u(a) ∈ L2 (I). Hence, since
the argument for the v terms proceeds identically, all we need to show is that
                                Z   Z
                                                           ?
                                        ũ′ (t, x)2 dx dt < +∞ .
                                              (a,b)       I


Since ũ′ (t, ·) = u′ (t) in L2 (I) for a.e. t ∈ (a, b), this is equivalent to showing that
                                     Z
                                                              ?
                                           ∥u′ (t)∥2L2 (I) dt < +∞ .                                             (7.22)
                                                (a,b)


Recall that, by Definition 7.16, u′ ∈ L2 (0, b; L2 (I)), so in particular u′ ∈ L2 (a, b; L2 (I)),
which by definition implies (7.22). Hence the claim holds and the third condition of
Lemma 7.50 is satisfied.

                                                              142
                                                        R
   Therefore, Lemma 7.50 implies that ∆(·) = I f (·, x) dx is AC and, for a.e. t ∈ (a, b),
               Z                 Z
  ∂t ∆(t) = ∂t f (t, x) dx = ∂t f (t, x) dx
            Z I                   I

          = χ{ũ(t,x)>ṽ(t,x)} [ũ(t, x) − ṽ(t, x)] [ũ′ (t, x) − ṽ ′ (t, x)] dx    (Shown above)
            ZI

          = χ{u(t)>v(t)} [u(t) − v(t)] [u′ (t) − v ′ (t)] dx                        (By Lemma 7.56)
            ZI

          = [u(t) − v(t)]+ ∂x ∂x [u(t)↓ − v(t)↓] dx                                (By Lemma 7.24).
              I

By Corollary 7.41, u(t), v(t) ∈ H 1 (I) and hence are AC, and by Fact 7.52, [u(t) − v(t)]+ is
AC. Therefore we can integrate by parts and, using Fact 7.52 and the boundary condition
∂x u(t)↓ = ∂x v(t)↓ = 0 on {0, 1} from Lemma 7.24, we obtain
               Z
  ∂t ∆(t) = − χ{u(t)>v(t)} [∂x (u(t) − v(t))] [∂x (u(t)↓ − u(t)↓)]
               ZI
          = − χ{u(t)>v(t)} [∂x u(t) − ∂x v(t)] ∂x− u(t) − ∂x− u(t) (By Proposition 7.30).
                                                                 
                  I

But for any numbers α, β ∈ R, it is the case that α ≥ β =⇒ (α ∧ 0) ≥ (β ∧ 0) and
α ≤ β =⇒ (α ∧ 0) ≤ (β ∧ 0). Hence the integrand above is pointwise nonnegative, and
we conclude that ∂t ∆(t) ≤ 0 for a.e. t ∈ (a, b). Hence ∆(a) ≥ ∆(b), as needed.

Corollary 7.58 (“Directed nonexpansiveness” of Pt ). Let u, v ∈ L2 (I). Then for all t > 0,
                     Z                         Z
                                      + 2
                                                            2
                                                   (u − v)+ dx .
                                               
                         (Pt u − Pt v)    dx ≤
                           I                          I


Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Proposition 7.57 when u, v ∈ H 1 (I), and the
general case follows by approximating u and v by H 1 (I) functions and using the continuity
of the map w 7→ Pt w from L2 (I) to L2 (I).

Corollary 7.59 (Pt is order preserving). Let u, v ∈ L2 (I), and suppose u ≤ v a.e. . Then
Pt u ≤ Pt v a.e. for all t > 0.

Proof. This is an immediate consequence of Corollary 7.58.

   We also note below the that the semigroup Pt has no effect on monotone functions.

                                               143
Lemma 7.60. Every nondecreasing u ∈ L2 (I) is a stationary point of Pt , i.e. Pt u = u for
all t.

Proof. By definition, u = u↑ + u↓ with u↑ = u and u↓ = 0, so E − (u) = 0. Thus for every
v ∈ L2 (I),
                            E − (v) ≥ 0 = E − (u) + ⟨0, v − u⟩ ,
so 0 ∈ ∂E − (u). Thus u(t) = u is the solution to the gradient flow problem with initial
state u.

Observation 7.61. Corollary 7.59 in particular implies that if u ≥ a a.e. for some a ∈ R,
then Pt u ≥ Pt a = a a.e. for all t > 0, the equality by Lemma 7.60.

  The following results show that Pt is degree one positively homogeneous and additive
when one argument is a constant function.

Lemma 7.62. Let u ∈ U, β ∈ R, and v := u + β. Then v ∈ U with v↑ = u↑ + β and
v↓ = u↓, and thus E − (v) = E − (u).

Proof. This is a straightforward consequence of the definition of v↑, v↓.

Lemma 7.63. Let u ∈ U, α > 0, and v := αu. Then v ∈ U with v↑ = αu↑ and v↓ = αu↓,
and thus E − (v) = α2 E − (u).

Proof. This is a straightforward consequence of the definitions of v↑, v↓ and E − .

Lemma 7.64. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ), β ∈ R, and v := u + β. Then ∂E − (u) = ∂E − (v).

Proof. By symmetry, it suffices to prove that ∂E − (u) ⊆ ∂E − (v). Let z ∈ ∂E − (u). Then
for all w ∈ U, using Lemma 7.62 twice and the definition of subdifferential,

          E − (w) = E − (w − β) ≥ E − (u) + ⟨z, w − β − u⟩ = E − (v) + ⟨z, w − v⟩ ,

and hence z ∈ ∂E − (v) as desired.

Lemma 7.65. Let u ∈ D(∂E − ), α > 0, and v := αu. Then ∂E − (v) = α∂E − (u).




                                            144
Proof. By symmetry, it suffices to prove that α∂E − (u) ⊆ ∂E − (v). Let z ∈ ∂E − (u); we
claim that αz ∈ ∂E − (v). Indeed for all w ∈ U, using Lemma 7.63 twice and the definition
of subdifferential,

        E − (w) = α2 E − α1 w ≥ α2 E − (u) + z, α1 w − u = E − (v) + ⟨αz, w − v⟩ ,
                                                       

and hence αz ∈ ∂E − (v) as desired.

Proposition 7.66 (Effect of certain affine transformations on Pt ). Let u ∈ L2 (I), α > 0,
and β ∈ R. Then Pt (αu + β) = αPt u + β.

Proof. We suffices to prove the statement for u ∈ U; the general case then follows by
approximating U by H 1 (I) functions and the continuity of Pt from L2 (I) to L2 (I). For
v := u + β, we observe that v(t) := u(t) + β with v ′ (t) := u′ (t) is a solution to the gradient
flow problem with initial state v, since for each t > 0 for which −u′ (t) ∈ ∂E − (u(t)),
Lemma 7.64 implies that −v ′ (t) ∈ ∂E − (v(t)).
    Similarly, let w := αu. Then w(t) := αu(t) with w′ (t) := αu′ (t) is the solution to
the gradient flow problem with initial state w, since for each t > 0 for which −u′ (t) ∈
∂E − (u(t)), Lemma 7.65 implies that −w′ (t) ∈ ∂E − (w).


7.2.8     Convergence to monotone equilibrium
Since the directed Dirichlet energy E − (Pt u) decays over time and Pt u converges to some
limit as t → ∞ (by Proposition 7.27), we expect this limit to be a monotone function. Let
us establish this fact and other properties of that limit.

Lemma 7.67. Let u ∈ U satisfy E − (u) = 0. Then u is nondecreasing.

Proof. Since E − (u) = 0, we have ∂x u↓ = 0 a.e. in I. Hence u↓ is a constant function, while
u↑ is nondecreasing by definition.

Proposition 7.68. Let u ∈ L2 (I). Then there exists a nondecreasing u∗ ∈ U, unique as
an element of L2 (I), such that Pt u → u∗ in L2 (I) as t → ∞.

Proof. Since E − achieves its minimum (namely 0, on e.g. constant functions) and Pt u ∈
D(∂E − ) for all t > 0, [AC84, Theorem 2, p. 160] implies that there exists a minimizer u∗
of E − such that Pt u ⇀ u∗ weakly in L2 (I). This means that u∗ ∈ U with E − (u∗ ) = 0, so
by Lemma 7.67 u∗ is nondecreasing. By Proposition 7.27 (which we may apply because,

                                              145
fixing any t0 > 0, we have Pt0 u ∈ D(∂E − ) ⊆ D(E − ) = U), Pt u also converges strongly
in L2 (I), and it is standard that the weak and strong limits agree and that this limit is
unique.

   Therefore the following definition is justified.

Definition 7.69 (Monotone equilibrium). Let P∞ : L2 (I) → U be the operator mapping
each u ∈ L2 (I) to the unique (as an element of L2 (I)) nondecreasing u∗ ∈ U such that
Pt u → u∗ in L2 (I) as t → ∞. We call P∞ u the monotone equilibrium of u.

   We now pass to the limit P∞ some useful properties of Pt .

Proposition 7.70 (“Directed nonexpansiveness” of P∞ ). Let u, v ∈ L2 (I). Then
                   Z                          Z
                                     + 2
                                                         2
                                                 (u − v)+ dx .
                                              
                        (P∞ u − P∞ v)    dx ≤
                          I                            I

Proof. This follows by a standard limit argument as follows. Let u, v ∈ L2 (I). By Corol-
lary 7.58, ∥(Pt u − Pt v)+ ∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥(u − v)+ ∥L2 (I) for all t > 0. By definition of P∞ , we have
Pt u → P∞ u and Pt v → P∞ v in L2 (I) as t → ∞. Using the triangle inequality, we obtain
   ∥(Pt u − Pt v)+ − (P∞ u − P∞ v)+ ∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥(Pt u − Pt v) − (P∞ u − P∞ v)∥L2 (I)
                                            ≤ ∥Pt u − P∞ u∥L( I) + ∥Pt v − P∞ v∥L2 (I) → 0 ,
so (Pt u − Pt v)+ → (P∞ u − P∞ v)+ in L2 (I) as t → ∞. Since ∥(Pt u − Pt v)+ ∥L2 (I) ≤
∥(u − v)+ ∥L2 (I) for all t > 0, we conclude that ∥(P∞ u − P∞ v)+ ∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥(u − v)+ ∥L2 (I) ,
which gives the conclusion.

Corollary 7.71 (P∞ is order preserving). Let u, v ∈ L2 (I), and suppose u ≤ v a.e. . Then
P∞ u ≤ P∞ v a.e. .

Proof. This is a direct consequence of Proposition 7.70.

Proposition 7.72. P∞ is nonexpansive, and therefore continuous, as an L2 (I) → L2 (I)
map.

Proof. Let u, v ∈ L2 (I). In the proof of Proposition 7.70, we showed that ∥(Pt u − Pt v) −
(P∞ u − P∞ v)∥L2 (I) → 0, which implies that ∥Pt u − Pt v∥L2 (I) → ∥P∞ u − P∞ v∥L2 (I) . But
∥Pt u − Pt v∥L2 (I) ≤ ∥u − v∥L2 (I) for all t > 0 since (Pt )t≥0 is a nonexpansive semigroup, so
the conclusion follows.

                                               146
Lemma 7.73. For every nondecreasing u ∈ L2 (I), we have P∞ u = u.

Proof. This follows from Lemma 7.60 along with the convergence Pt u → P∞ u in L2 (I).

   Strong convergence to the monotone equilibrium, together with the preservation of reg-
ularity results from Section 7.2.5, allows us to obtain regularity of the monotone equilibrium
as well:

Proposition 7.74 (H 1 regularity of the monotone equilibrium). Let u ∈ H 1 (I). Then
P∞ u ∈ H 1 (I) with φ(P∞ u) ≤ φ(u).

Proof. Recall the functional φ from Section 7.2.5. Since u ∈ H 1 (I), φ(u) < +∞. By
Proposition 7.40, we conclude that φ(Pt u) ≤ φ(u) < +∞ for all t > 0. Since φ is lower
semicontinuous by Claim 7.31 and Pt u → P∞ u in L2 (I) by Proposition 7.27, we conclude
that φ(P∞ u) ≤ φ(u) < +∞. Hence P∞ u ∈ H 1 (I).

Proposition 7.75 (Lipschitz regularity of the monotone equilibrium). Let u ∈ W 1,∞ (I).
Then P∞ u ∈ W 1,∞ (I) with ψ(P∞ u) ≤ ψ(u).

Proof. Recall the functional ψ from Section 7.2.6. Since u ∈ W 1,∞ (I), ψ(u) < +∞. By
Proposition 7.47, we conclude that ψ(Pt u) ≤ ψ(u) < +∞ for all t > 0. Since ψ is lower
semicontinuous by Claim 7.43 and Pt u → P∞ u in L2 (I) by Proposition 7.27, we conclude
that ψ(P∞ u) ≤ ψ(u) < +∞. Hence P∞ u ∈ W 1,∞ (I).

  We observe that P∞ also behaves nicely under the appropriate class of affine transfor-
mations.

Proposition 7.76 (Effect of certain affine transformations on P∞ ). Let u ∈ L2 (I), α > 0,
and β ∈ R. Then P∞ (αu + β) = αP∞ u + β.

Proof. Since Pt v → P∞ v as t → ∞ for each v ∈ L2 (I), applying Proposition 7.66 yields
                                                         h       i
   P∞ (αu + β) = lim Pt (αu + β) = lim [αPt u + β] = α lim Pt u + β = αP∞ u + β .
                    t→∞                t→∞                   t→∞


   We can finally conclude, via Lemma 7.49, that P∞ is nonexpansive in the L∞ norm.

Proposition 7.77 (P∞ is nonexpansive in L∞ norm). Let u, v ∈ L2 (I).                    Then
|P∞ u − P∞ v| ≤ ess sup|u − v| a.e. in I.

                                             147
Proof. We verify the conditions of Lemma 7.49 with (Ω, Σ, µ) the set I endowed with the
Lebesgue measure, p = 2, C = L2 (I), and T = P∞ . It is clear that for all f ∈ L2 (I)
and r ∈ R, f + r ∈ L2 (I). By Proposition 7.72, P∞ is a continuous L2 (I) → L2 (I) map.
Moreover, for all f ∈ L2 (I) and r ∈ R, the condition P∞ (f + r) = P∞ f + r holds by
Proposition 7.76. Finally, for all f, g ∈ L2 (I) with f ≤ g a.e. , we have that P∞ f ≤ P∞ g
a.e. by Corollary 7.71. The conclusion follows.


7.3      Directed transport-energy inequality
In this section, we establish a connection between the PDE studied above and the Wasser-
stein distance between the initial state u and its monotone equilibrium P∞ u, via the dynam-
ical approach embodied by the Benamou-Brenier formula, and then tensorize this result
from one dimension to [0, 1]d . For optimal transport concepts, we follow the presentation
and formalism of [San15], and also refer to [AGS05; Vil09].
    This section is organized as follows. After preliminary considerations in Section 7.3.1,
Section 7.3.2 shows that the PDE results from Section 7.2 imply a result about optimal
transport (Wasserstein) distance, namely a one-dimensional transport-energy inequality,
thereby implementing the ideas described in Section 7.1.3 of the proof overview. The idea
is to show that our solution to the directed heat equation
                                         ∂t u = ∂x ∂x− u
satisfies the so-called continuity equation
                                     ∂t ϱt + ∂x (ϱt vt ) = 0 ,
which prescribes that “particles” (distributed according to measure ϱt ) move according to
the velocity field vt ; in our setting, we have dϱt = u dx and vt = − ∂xuu↓ (Proposition 7.85),
so that indeed ∂x (ϱt vt ) = −∂x ∂x u↓ = −∂t ϱt . For functions u bounded close to 1, we can
informally disregard the denominator in vt and imagine, for simplicity, that vt ≈ −∂x u↓.
Then thanks to the exponential decay of
                                                Z
                                       −      1
                                     E (u) =      (∂x u↓)2 dx
                                              2
from the previous section, we conclude that the right-hand side of the Benamou-Brenier
formula
                         Z 1                                                             
           2                        2
         W2 (µ, ν) = min       ∥vt ∥L2 (ϱt ) dt : ∂t ϱt + ∂x (ϱt vt ) = 0, ϱ0 = µ, ϱ1 = ν
                              0


                                               148
from Proposition 7.83 is roughly upper bounded by E − (u), where (informally) the measures
dµ = u dx and dν = (P∞ u) dx correspond to the initial state and monotone equilibrium of
the directed heat equation, as probability measures4. Therefore we conclude in Theorem 7.2
the transport-energy inequality in one dimension,

                                       W22 (µ, µ∞ ) ≲ E − (u) .

Finally, the continuity equation also lets us conclude natural and useful properties of solu-
tions of the directed heat equation, such as mass conservation (Corollaries 7.86 and 7.87)
and the property that solutions can only ever lose mass in any given prefix of the interval
[0, 1] (Corollary 7.91).
    The next goal is to establish the tensorized (multidimensional) transport-energy in-
equality, thereby implementing the ideas described in Section 7.1.4 of the proof overview.
In Section 7.3.3, we develop the definitions and technical tools required to show our
“Pythagorean composition” result (Lemma 7.3), which yields a recipe for proving mul-
tidimensional transport-energy inequalities (with respect to the “directed Wasserstein dis-
tance”) by induction (Lemma 7.110).
    Finally, Section 7.3.4 ties together the tensorization recipe described above with the
one-dimensional results specific to our PDE from the previous sections. We show that, by
taking an initial state f : [0, 1]d → R with corresponding measure dµ = f dx, applying the
directed heat semigroup one coordinate at a time, and putting together the one-dimensional
transport-energy inequalities at each of these steps via properties of our PDE such as order
preservation and nonexpansiveness (which enable the induction to go through), we indeed
obtain a monotone final state f ∗ : [0, 1]d → R with corresponding measure dµ∗ = f ∗ dx for
which the multidimensional transport-energy inequality applies (Theorem 7.4):
                                               Z
                                           ∗               2
                                   2
                                W2 (µ → µ ) ≲        ∇− f dx .
                                                    [0,1]d



7.3.1      Preliminaries for optimal transport
We start by introducing notation and definitions relevant to the theory of optimal trans-
port.
   4
     More formally, we decompose the evolution from time t = 0 to time t → ∞ into intervals of unit time
length, but by the exponential energy decay, this summation is dominated by the initial term E − (u).




                                                  149
Projections. Say X × Y is a product space and z = (x, y) is an element in this space.
Then the projection operator onto the first coordinate, denoted interchangeably by π1 or
πx depending on the context, is given by π1 (z) = πx (z) = x. Similarly, π2 (z) = πy (z) = y.
We extend this definition in the natural way to projections from larger product spaces onto
smaller product spaces. For example, given the product space X1 × · · · × Xd and index set
I ⊂ [d], I = {i1 , . . . , in }, the operator πI projects any element in this space down to an
element of Xi1 × · · · × Xin . We also use the shorthand π−I := π[d]\I .
    Now, let Ω ⊂ Rd be a Borel set and let I ⊆ [d]. For a point x ∈ Ω, we write the
projections xI := πI (x) and x−I := π−I (x), and we also write x = (xI , x−I ). Then, for the
set Ω, we write the projections ΩI := {xI : x ∈ Ω} and Ω−I := {x−I : x ∈ Ω}. For small
sets I or [d] \ I, we also use shorthand notation such as xi := x{i} and Ω−i−j := Ω−{i,j} .


Pushforward measure. Given measurable spaces (X, ΣX ) and (Y, ΣY ), measure µ on
X, and measurable map T : X → Y , the pushforward measure T# µ on Y is the measure
satisfying

                 (T# µ)(B) = µ(T −1 (B))              for all B ∈ ΣY , or equivalently,
       Z                      Z
            ϕ(y) d(T# µ)(y) =   ϕ(T (x)) dµ(x)         for all measurable ϕ : Y → R.
        Y                     X


  For a measure γ on product space X × Y , we say that (π1 )# γ and (π2 )# γ, which are
measures on X and Y respectively, are the first and second marginals of γ, respectively.
   If (Ω3 , Σ3 ) is another measurable space and S : Y → Z a measurable map, then it holds
that (S ◦ T )# µ = S# (T# µ).


Transport plans. For two probability spaces (Ω1 , Σ1 , µ1 ) and (Ω2 , Σ2 , µ2 ), we write
Π(µ1 , µ2 ) for the set of couplings, or transport plans, between µ1 and µ2 , namely prob-
ability measures γ on the product space Ω1 × Ω2 whose first and second marginals are µ1
and µ2 , respectively.


Space of probability measures. For any Borel set Ω ⊂ Rd , let P (Ω) denote the space
of all (Borel) probability measures on Ω. We endow P (Ω) with the weak topology, which is
the topology of weak convergence with respect to bounded continuous
                                                               R    functionals.
                                                                           R     Namely,
we say µn converges weakly to µ in P (Ω), and write µn ⇀ µ, if Ω ϕ dµn → Ω ϕ dµ for all
bounded continuous ϕ : Ω → R.

                                             150
Wasserstein distances. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set and let p ∈ [1, +∞). Let
µ, ν ∈ P (Ω). Given transport plan γ ∈ Π(µ, ν), we define the cost Cp (γ) by
                                        Z                       1/p
                                                            p
                            Cp (γ) :=            |x − y| dγ(x, y)     .
                                           Ω×Ω

We then define the p-Wasserstein distance between µ and ν by

                                  Wp (µ, ν) :=        inf       Cp (γ) ,
                                                   γ∈Π(µ,ν)


and we also often refer to the quantity Wpp (µ, ν) := Wp (µ, ν)p . It is standard that Wp (·, ·)
is a distance metric on P (Ω).

Fact 7.78 (Wasserstein distance metrizes weak convergence; see e.g. [San15, Theo-
rems 5.10 and 5.11]). Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set, and let p ∈ [1, ∞). Then
for a sequence (µn )n in P (Ω) and µ ∈ P (Ω), we have µn ⇀ µ if and only if Wp (µn , µ) → 0.

Corollary 7.79. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set, and let p ∈ [1, ∞). Then for
sequences (µn )n and (νn )n in P (Ω) with µn ⇀ µ and νn ⇀ ν for µ, ν ∈ P (Ω), we have
Wp (µn , νn ) → Wp (µ, ν). In other words, the p-Wasserstein distance is continuous in (the
weak topology on) P (Ω).

Proof. By the triangle inequality, we have

  Wp (µ, ν) − Wp (µ, µn ) − Wp (νn , ν) ≤ Wp (µn , νn ) ≤ Wp (µn , µ) + Wp (µ, ν) + Wp (ν, νn ) .

By Fact 7.78, the LHS and RHS converge to Wp (µ, ν) as n → ∞, so the conclusion
follows.


7.3.2     Optimal transport via Benamou-Brenier
Let {ϱt : t ∈ [0, T ]} be a family of measures on I and {vt : t ∈ [0, T ]} be a family of velocity
fields such that vt ∈ L1 (ϱt ) for each t. We start by defining what it means for the family
(ϱt , vt ) to solve the continuity equation

                                        ∂t ϱt + ∂x (ϱt vt ) = 0 .




                                                  151
Definition 7.80 (Weak solution; see [San15, Section 4.1.2]). Let (ϱt , vt ) be a family of
measure/velocity field pairs indexed by t ∈ [0, T ] such that vt ∈ L1 (ϱ) for each t. We
say that (ϱt , vt ) is a weak solution
                                R      to the continuity equation if, for every test function
ψ ∈ C 1 (I), the function t 7→ I ψ dϱt is absolutely continuous in t and, for a.e. t, we have
                                     Z         Z
                                  ∂t ψ dϱt = (∂x ψ)vt dϱt .                             (7.23)
                                     I          I

In this case, we call ϱ0 and ϱT the initial and final states of the solution, respectively (this
makes sense because the above implies that t 7→ ϱt is continuous for the weak convergence
of measures).

Remark 7.81. We will only work with absolutely continuous measures dϱt = u dx, u ∈
L2 (I).

Remark 7.82. Applying (7.23) with a constant test function ψ shows that every solution
to the continuity equation is mass conserving. In particular, Proposition 7.85 below implies
that this is true of the semigroup Pt ; see Corollary 7.86.

   The continuity equation is connected to Wasserstein distance via the Benamou-Brenier
formula:

Proposition 7.83 (Benamou-Brenier formula; see e.g. [San15, Theorem 5.28]). Let µ, ν
be probability measures on I. Then
                         Z 1                                                           
            2                      2
         W2 (µ, ν) = min      ∥vt ∥L2 (ϱt ) dt : ∂t ϱt + ∂x (ϱt vt ) = 0, ϱ0 = µ, ϱ1 = ν ,
                              0

where the constraint above means that (ϱt , vt )t∈[0,1] is a weak solution to the continuity
equation with initial state µ and final state ν.

   We now show our solution to the directed heat equation yields a solution to the conti-
nuity equation. This allows us to conclude several nice properties of this solution, such as
mass conservation, as well as apply the Benamou-Brenier formula to obtain a transport-
energy inequality.
                                                                                   R
Condition 7.84. u ∈ U is a.e. positive and bounded away from zero, and satisfies I u dx =
1.


                                              152
Proposition 7.85. Let u ∈ U satisfy Condition 7.84. Let u(t) be the solution to the
gradient flow problem with initial state u, and u′ (t) its weak derivative for each t ≥ 0. Let
T > 0 and define the measure/velocity field family (ϱt , vt )t∈[0,T ] by

                                                                         ∂x u(t)↓
                            dϱt := u(t) dx             and     vt := −
                                                                           u(t)

for each t ∈ [0, T ]. Then (ϱt , vt ) is a weak solution to the continuity equation with initial
state u(0) dx and final state u(T ) dx.

Proof. We first note that, by Observation 7.61, each u(t) is a.e. positive and bounded away
from zero, uniformly in t. In particular, this justifies the denominator in the definition of
vt . Furthermore, recall that u(t) ∈ U for all t ≥ 0 by Corollary 7.23 and Definition 7.18,
so the numerator in the definition of vt is defined up to sets of measure zero for each t. (In
fact, by Definition 7.19, Proposition 7.21, and Lemma 7.24 we have u(t)↓ ∈ H 2 (I) for a.e.
t > 0, in which case the numerator is even pointwise well-defined.)
   We now verify that (ϱt , vt ) satisfies Definition 7.80. The initial and final states are
as claimed by construction. Let ψ ∈ C 1 (I). Let ũ′ , ũ : [0, T ] × I → R be obtained
by applying Lemma 7.56 to u with time domain [0, T ]. Define the (jointly measurable)
function f : [0, T ] × I → R by

                                             f (t, x) := ψ(x)ũ(t, x) .

We claim that f satisfies the properties of Lemma 7.50. It is clear that f (t, ·) ∈ L2 (I) ⊂
L1 (I) for each t ∈ [0, T ] since u(t, ·) ∈ L2 (I) while ψ is bounded, so the first property
is satisfied. Also, for each x ∈ I we have that ũ(·, x) is AC and hence so is f (·, x), so
the second property is satisfied. Finally, by properties 1 and 5 of Lemma 7.56 and the
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
Z     Z                        Z  Z                                   Z
                                           ′
         |∂t f (t, x)| dx dt =      |ψ(x)ũ (t, x)| dx dt ≤ ∥ψ∥L2 (I)   ∥u′ (t)∥L2 (I) dt < +∞ ,
 (0,T )   I                     (0,T )   I                                           (0,T )


the last inequality since ψ ∈ C 1 (I) while u′ ∈ L2 (0, T ; L2 (I)) by Definition 7.16. Hence
the third property is satisfied and Lemma 7.50 applies. Thus the function mapping each
t ∈ [0, T ] to   Z           Z             Z                      Z
                      ψ dϱt =         ψu(t) dx =           ψ(x)ũ(t, x) dx =        f (t, x) dx
                  I               I                    I                        I




                                                       153
is absolutely continuous and, for a.e. t ∈ (0, T ),
    Z         Z               Z
∂t ψ dϱt = ∂t f (t, x) dx = ψ(x)ũ′ (t, x) dx                       (Property 5 of Lemma 7.56)
     I        ZI                I

           = ψu′ (t) dx                                             (Property 1 of Lemma 7.56)
              ZI

           = ψ∂x ∂x u(t)↓ dx                                 (Proposition 7.21 and Lemma 7.24)
               IZ

           = − (∂x ψ)(∂x u(t)↓) dx                           (Integration by parts, Lemma 7.24)
                 I
              Z                               Z
                         ∂x u(t)↓
           = (∂x ψ) −               u(t) dx = (∂x ψ)vt dϱt .
               I           u(t)                   I
                                                                              R
Corollary
R           7.86 (Pt is mass conserving). Let u ∈ L2 (I). Then for all t > 0, I Pt u dx =
  I
    u dx.

Proof. If u satisfies Condition 7.84, then this follows from Proposition 7.85 by taking any
constant test function ψ in Definition 7.80.
    If u ∈ H 1 (I), then it is bounded, so let α > 0, β ∈ R be such that v := αu + β ∈ H 1 (I)
satisfies Condition 7.84. Then u = α1 v − αβ and, by Proposition 7.66 and the above,
                  Z             Z                            Z
                                     1        β          β   1
                     Pt u dx =         Pt v −     dx = − +       Pt v dx
                   I             I   α        α          α α I
                                          Z         Z                Z
                                   β   1                1    β
                             =− +            v dx =       v−     dx = u dx .
                                   α α I             I  α    α           I

Finally, let u ∈ U be arbitrary. Since H 1 (I) is dense in L2 (I), let (un )n be a sequence in
H 1 (I) such that un → u in L2 (I). By the continuity of Pt from L2 (I) to L2 (I), and using
the above,         Z                Z                  Z           Z
                     Pt u dx = lim    Pt un dx = lim      un dx = u dx .
                    I          n→∞   I             n→∞   I          I

  By passing to the limit Pt u → P∞ u in L2 (I), we also conclude
                                                                R       R
Corollary 7.87 (P∞ is mass conserving). Let u ∈ L2 (I). Then I P∞ u dx = I u dx.

    We now upper bound the Wasserstein distance between u ∈ U and its monotone equi-
librium by combining the Benamou-Brenier formula with the exponential decay of the
directed Dirichlet energy, at least as long as u is positive and bounded away from zero.

                                             154
Theorem 7.2 (Transport-energy inequality in one dimension). There exists a constant
C > 0 such
       R      that the following holds. Let u ∈ U be positive, bounded away from zero, and
satisfy (0,1) u dx = 1. Define the measures dµ := u dx and dµ∞ := (P∞ u) dx. Then
                                                    C −
                                 W22 (µ, µ∞ ) ≤         E (u) .
                                                  inf u
Proof. Let a := inf u. By Corollaries 7.59 and 7.86, Pt u satisfies Condition 7.84 with
Pt u ≥ a a.e. for all t ≥ 0. For each t ≥ 0, define the measure dϱt := (Pt u) dx. Let
ℓ ∈ Z≥0 . Then Proposition 7.85 applies to time interval [ℓ, ℓ+1] (we refrain from introducing
excessive notation for such relabeling of intervals) with initial/final states ϱℓ and ϱℓ+1 ,
respectively, so that Proposition 7.83 gives
                         Z ℓ+1 Z                2              Z ℓ+1 Z
          2                             ∂x u(t)↓                          (∂x u(t)↓)2
       W2 (ϱℓ , ϱℓ+1 ) ≤              −             u(t) dx dt =                      dx dt
                          ℓ     I         u(t)                    ℓ     I     u(t)
                         1 ℓ+1                            2 ℓ+1 −
                            Z     Z                         Z
                                                2
                       ≤             (∂x u(t)↓) dx dt =           E (Pt u) dt
                         a ℓ       I                      a ℓ
                                  Z ℓ+1                      Z ∞
                         2 −               −Kt       2 −                    2e−Kℓ −
                       ≤ E (u)           e     dt < E (u)        e−Kt dt =         E (u) ,
                         a          ℓ                a         ℓ              aK
where the penultimate inequality and the constant K come from Proposition 7.25. Now,
by the triangle inequality (on the distance W2 , not the squared distance W22 ), for every
ℓ ∈ Z≥1 we have
                 ℓ−1                            1/2 X∞                     1/2
                 X                        2 −              −Kj/2      2 −              1
 W2 (ϱ0 , ϱℓ ) ≤     W2 (ϱj , ϱj+1 ) ≤      E (u)         e      =      E (u)                .
                 j=0
                                         aK           j=0
                                                                     aK            1 − e−K/2

Therefore, extracting the appropriate constant C from the terms involving K, we obtain
                                                C
                                W2 (ϱ0 , ϱℓ ) ≤ 1/2 (E − (u))1/2 .
                                               a
Recall that Pt u ⇀ P∞ u weakly in L2 (I) by Proposition 7.68. Hence, defining the absolutely
continuous measure dϱ∞ := (P∞ u) dx, we conclude that ϱt ⇀ ϱ∞ as t → ∞. Then by
Corollary 7.79,
                                                           C
                     W2 (ϱ0 , ϱ∞ ) = lim W2 (ϱ0 , ϱℓ ) ≤ 1/2 (E − (u))1/2 .
                                     ℓ→∞                  a
    The definition of the velocity field vt in Proposition 7.85, along with the fact that
∂x u(t)↓ ≤ 0, gives vt ≥ 0, which intuitively says that “particles only move to the right”.
This suggests that the solution u(t) can only lose mass in any prefix of the interval (0, 1)
over time. The following items make this observation rigorous.

                                             155
Lemma 7.88. Let δ ∈ I and let J := (0, δ). Let u ∈ L2 (I). Then for all t > 0,
                               Z             Z
                                 (Pt u) dx ≤ u dx .
                                              J             J


Proof. Suppose u satisfies Condition 7.84; the general case will then follow by the same
arguments as in the proof of Corollary 7.86. Let J ′ := (−∞, δ), let χJ ′ : R → [0, 1] be
the characteristic function for the set J ′ , and for each ε > 0, let χεJ ′ be its mollification
by the standard mollifier. Note that each χεJ ′ is nonincreasing. Also note that χJ ′ = χJ
pointwise in I. Now, fix T > 0. Since the family (ϱt , vt )t∈[0,T ] given by Proposition 7.85
solves
     R the   continuity equation, applying (7.23) with test function χεJ ′ ∈ C ∞ (I) gives that
t 7→ I χεJ ′ u(t) dx is AC and, for a.e. t ∈ [0, T ],
                           Z                Z
                         ∂t χJ ′ u(t) dx = (∂x χεJ ′ ) vt u(t) dx ≤ 0 .
                               ε
                            I                 I | {z } |{z} |{z}
                                                       ≤0       ≥0    ≥0
             R
Hence t 7→    I
                  χεJ ′ u(t) dx is nonincreasing, and obtain
                                    Z               Z
                     ε                 ε
                  ⟨χJ ′ , u⟩L2 (I) = χJ ′ u(0) dx ≥ χεJ ′ u(T ) dx = ⟨χεJ ′ , PT u⟩L2 (I) .
                                    I                  I

Now, since χJ ′ ∈ L2loc (R), we have that χεJ ′ → χJ ′ in L2loc (R), so in particular χεJ ′ → χJ ′ =
χJ in L2 (I). Thus we have
Z                                                                                                  Z
                                        ε                         ε
  (PT u) dx = ⟨χJ , PT u⟩L2 (I) = lim ⟨χJ ′ , PT u⟩L2 (I) ≤ lim ⟨χJ ′ , u⟩L2 (I) = ⟨χJ , u⟩L2 (I) = u dx .
 J                                      ε→0                     ε→0                               J



Corollary 7.89. Let δ ∈ I and let J := (0, δ). Let u ∈ L2 (I). Then
                               Z               Z
                                  (P∞ u) dx ≤ u dx .
                                              J             J


Proof. This follows from Lemma 7.88 along with the convergence Pt u → P∞ u in L2 (I).

Definition 7.90. Let µ and ν be probability measures on R. We say µ dominates ν, and
write µ ⪰ ν, if for every x ∈ R we have µ(−∞, x) ≥ ν(−∞, x).

Corollary 7.91. Let u ∈ U satisfy Condition 7.84. Define the measures dµ := u dx and
dµ∞ := (P∞ u) dx. Then µ ⪰ µ∞ .

                                                    156
Proof. We may view µ and µ∞ as absolutely continuous measures on all of R, taking zero
outside [0, 1]. Now, for each x ∈ [0, 1], Corollary 7.89 gives
                               Z             Z
                  µ(−∞, x) =          u dy ≥       (P∞ u) dy = µ∞ (−∞, x) .
                                (0,x)         (0,x)

On the other hand, for x < 0 both sides are zero, and for x > 1, both sides are 1 by
Corollary 7.87.


7.3.3    Directed optimal transport and Pythagorean composition
We now introduce directed versions of basic optimal transport concepts and theory, with the
goal of combining a directed version of weak Kantorovich duality with a multidimensional
directed version of the transport-energy inequality from Theorem 7.2 to obtain our desired
directed Poincaré inequality via a perturbation argument. In the interest of space, we
refrain starting a systematic study of directed optimal transport, but rather limit ourselves
to the results we require.

Definition 7.92 (Quasimetric). Let X be a set. An extended real-valued function d :
X × X → [0, +∞], not necessarily symmetric, is called a quasimetric on X if it satisfies
the following:

  1. For all x, y ∈ X, d(x, y) ≥ 0 with d(x, y) = 0 if and only if x = y.
  2. For all x, y, z ∈ X, d(x, z) ≤ d(x, y) + d(y, z).

Definition 7.93. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a Borel set, and let µ and ν be probability measures on
Ω. We define the set Π(µ → ν) of directed couplings, or directed transport plans, from µ to
ν as                                        Z                         
                Π(µ → ν) := γ ∈ Π(µ, ν) :         χ{x̸⪯y} dγ(x, y) = 0 ,
                                                   Ω×Ω
where the integral is well-defined because the set {(x, y) ∈ Rd × Rd : x ̸⪯ y} is open and
hence Borel measurable. Note that the condition could also be written as γ ({x ̸⪯ y}) = 0,
or γ ({x ⪯ y}) = 1.

Definition 7.94 (Directed Wasserstein distance). Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set
and let p ∈ [1, ∞). Given two probability distributions µ, ν over Ω, we define the directed
p-Wasserstein distance from µ to ν by
                               Wp (µ → ν) :=       inf    Cp (γ) ,
                                               γ∈Π(µ→ν)


                                             157
and we write Wpp (µ → ν) := Wp (µ → ν)p . Note that we may have Wp (µ → ν) = +∞, and
that Wp (· → ·) is not symmetric in general.

Observation 7.95. For all measures µ and ν, we have Π(µ → ν) ⊂ Π(µ, ν) and hence
Wp (µ, ν) ≤ Wp (µ → ν).

Lemma 7.96 (Gluing lemma; see e.g. [San15, Lemma 5.5]). Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a Borel set.
Let µ, ϱ, ν be probability measures on Ω, and let γ + ∈ Π(µ, ϱ) and γ − ∈ Π(ϱ, ν). Then there
exists a probability measure σ on Ω × Ω × Ω such that (πx,y )# σ = γ + and (πy,z )# σ = γ − .

    The proof of that Wp (· → ·) is a quasimetric follows the presentation of [San15, Lemma
5.4], with a simple additional argument to handle directed couplings.

Lemma 7.97 (Composition of directed transport plans). In Lemma 7.96, if γ + ∈ Π(µ →
ϱ) and γ − ∈ Π(ϱ → ν), then (πx,z )# σ ∈ Π(µ → ν).

Proof. Let γ := (πx,z )# σ. First, since (πx )# γ = (πx ◦ πx,z )# σ = (πx ◦ πx,y )# σ = (πx )# γ + =
µ, and similarly (πz )# γ = ν, we have γ ∈ Π(µ, ν). Moreover, by definition of pushforward
measure we have
 Z                        Z                               Z
                                                                                      
       χ{x̸⪯z} dγ(x, z) =           χ{x̸⪯z} dσ(x, y, z) ≤           χ{x̸⪯y} + χ{y̸⪯z} dσ(x, y, z)
   Ω×Ω
                          ZΩ×Ω×Ω                          Z Ω×Ω×Ω
                        =           χ{x̸⪯y} dσ(x, y, z) +          χ{y̸⪯z} dσ(x, y, z)
                            Ω×Ω×Ω                          Ω×Ω×Ω
                          Z                           Z
                        =                   +
                                χ{x̸⪯y} dγ (x, y) +         χ{y̸⪯z} dγ − (y, z) = 0 ,
                            Ω×Ω                        Ω×Ω

the last equality since γ + and γ − are directed couplings. Hence γ ∈ Π(µ → ν) as claimed.


Proposition 7.98. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set and p ∈ [1, ∞). Then Wp (· → ·) is
a quasimetric on P (Ω).

Proof. It is clear that Wp (µ → ν) ≥ 0 always. If µ = ν then the identity coupling shows
that Wp (µ → ν) = 0, and conversely if Wp (µ → ν) = 0 then, by Observation 7.95,
Wp (µ, ν) = 0 and hence µ = ν. It remains to show that Wp (· → ·) satisfies the triangle
inequality.
  Let µ, ϱ, ν be probability measures on Ω. Let γ + ∈ Π(µ → ϱ) and γ − ∈ Π(ϱ → ν).
Then since we also have γ + ∈ Π(µ, ϱ) and γ − ∈ Π(ϱ, ν), apply Lemma 7.96 to obtain a

                                                158
probability measure σ on Ω × Ω × Ω such that (πx,y )# σ = γ + and (πy,z )# σ = γ − . Let
γ := (πx,z )# σ, so that γ ∈ Π(µ → ν) by Lemma 7.97. Then
                  Z                            1/p       Z                             1/p
                                   p                                            p
  Wp (µ → ν) ≤               |x − z| dγ(x, z)          =               |x − z| dσ(x, y, z)
                       Ω×Ω                                  Ω×Ω×Ω
              = ∥|x − z|∥Lp (σ) ≤ ∥|x − y| + |y − z|∥Lp (σ) ≤ ∥|x − y|∥Lp (σ) + ∥|y − z|∥Lp (σ)
                Z                            1/p Z                               1/p
                                  p                                    p
              =           |x − y| dσ(x, y, z)      +            |y − z| dσ(x, y, z)
                    Ω×Ω×Ω                                         Ω×Ω×Ω
                  Z                          1/p Z                                  1/p
                                    p  +                                    p       −
              =              |x − y| dγ (x, y)    +                   |y − z| dγ (y, z)     .
                    Ω×Ω                                         Ω×Ω

Since γ + ∈ Π(µ → ϱ), γ − ∈ Π(ϱ → ν) were arbitrary, Wp (µ → ν) ≤ Wp (µ → ϱ) + Wp (ϱ →
ν).

   The directed Wasserstein distance arises naturally in the one-dimensional case when
one probability measure dominates the other in the sense of Definition 7.90, as we now
show.

Proposition 7.99 (Specialization of [San15, Theorem 2.9]). Let p ∈ (1, +∞). Let µ and ν
be two absolutely continuous probability measures on I with strictly positive densities. Then
there exists a unique γ ∈ Π(µ, ν) attaining Cp (γ) = Wp (µ, ν), and in fact γ = (id, Tmon )# µ
where Tmon : I → I is a nondecreasing function that is a.e. uniquely determined, and id
denotes the identity map.

Corollary 7.100. If in Proposition 7.99 we have µ ⪰ ν, then in fact γ ∈ Π(µ → ν). As
a consequence, Wp (µ → ν) = Wp (µ, ν).

Proof. We claim that Tmon (x) ≥ x for every x ∈ I. Indeed, suppose Tmon (x) < x for some
x ∈ I. Then
                                                       −1
          ν(0, Tmon (x)) = (Tmon# µ)(0, Tmon (x)) = µ(Tmon (0, Tmon (x))) ≥ µ(0, x) ,
                                            −1
the inequality because certainly (0, x) ⊆ Tmon (0, Tmon (x)), but we do not rule out at this
point that T remains constant for a while after x. But since Tmon (x) < x and ν has strictly
positive density by assumption, we conclude that

                                 ν(0, x) > ν(0, Tmon (x)) ≥ µ(0, x) ,


                                                   159
contradicting the assumption that µ ⪰ ν. Hence Tmon (x) ≥ x for every x ∈ I as claimed.
We now show that γ ∈ Π(µ → ν). Let S := {(x, y) ∈ I ×I : x ≤ y}. Since γ = (id, Tmon )# µ,
we have

            γ(S) = µ((id, Tmon )−1 (S)) = µ({x ∈ I : x ≤ Tmon (x)}) = µ(I) = 1 ,

so γ ∈ Π(µ → ν) as claimed.

    We now introduce the formal language for two related operations: constructing a prob-
ability measure by its marginal and conditional distributions, and the inverse process of
extracting marginal and conditionals from a probability measure, which is also called dis-
integration. We refer the reader to [AGS05, Section 5.3] for an overview of these ideas from
a measure-theoretic perspective.
    We use the following definition from [AGS05]. For X and Y separable metric spaces
and x ∈ X 7→ µx ∈ P (Y ) a measure-valued map, we say µx is a Borel map if x 7→ µx (B) is
a Borel map for any Borel set B ⊂ Y , or equivalently if this holds for any open set A ⊂ Y .
In this case we also have that
                                       Z
                                  x 7→    f (x, y) dµx (y)
                                            Y

is Borel for any bounded (or nonnegative) Borel function f : X × Y → R.

Definition 7.101 (Construction and disintegration). Let S be a finite set and let I ⊂ S.
Let xS\I ∈ RS\I 7→ µ|xS\I ∈ P (RI ) be a Borel map (the conditionals). Then for any
bounded (or nonnegative) Borel function f : RS → R, the RS\I → R map
                                  Z
                          xS\I 7→     f (xS\I , xI ) dµ|xS\I (xI )                 (7.24)
                                       RI

is Borel. Therefore, for any µS\I ∈ P (RS\I ) (the marginal ), we define µ ∈ P (RS ) implicitly
by                Z           Z                  Z
                    f dµ =       dµS\I (xS\I )             f (xS\I , xI ) dµ|xS\I (xI ) ,   (7.25)
                   RS       RS\I                      RI
                         R
and we formally write µ = RS\I µ|xS\I dµS\I .
    Conversely, given µ ∈ P (RS ), we let µS\I := (πS\I )# µ ∈ P (RS\I ) and write
(µ|xS\I )xS\I ∈RS\I ⊂ P (RI ) for the µS\I -a.e. uniquely determined Borel family of probability
                             R
measures such that µ = RS\I µ|xS\I dµS\I , and we call this decomposition a disintegration
of µ.

                                                160
Examples and simplified notational conventions. Since the index notation in the
definition above can be somewhat laborious to parse, let us briefly give two concrete set-
tings we will use below, and introduce simplified notational conventions for those settings.
The simplifications are supposed to be mnemonic for what we have already defined for
projections.

  1. For a probability measure µ ∈ P (Rd ) and index i ∈ [d], we may disintegrate µ into
     a marginal on index
                      R  set [d] \ {i} and conditionals supported along i-th coordinate,
     and write µ = R[d]\{i} µ|x[d]\{i} dµ[d]\{i} . We simplify this notation by writing µ =
     R
      Rd
         µ|x−i dµ−i .
        −i


  2. For a transport plan γ ∈ P (Rd × Rd ), we write the index set as [2d] = S = Sx ∪ Sy
     for Sx := [d] and Sy := [2d] \ [d], so we write each element in the support of γ as
     a tuple (x, y) with x ∈ RSx and y ∈ RSy . Then, given index set I ⊂ [d], we may
     disintegrate γ into a marginal on index set SM := (Sx \ Ix ) ∪ (Sy \ Iy ) for Ix := I and
     Iy := {d + i : i ∈ I}, so that we think of the marginal as determining all but the I-
     indexed coordinates of the points x and y; and we view Rthe conditionals as supported
     along the Ix ∪ Iy directions. This disintegration is γ = RSM γ|xSM dγSM . To be clear,
     here we have γSM ∈ P (RSM ) and γ|xSM ∈ P (RIx ∪Iy ) for each xSM ∈ RSM . We make
                                                                 R
     the notation somewhat more mnemonic by writing γ = Rd ×Rd γ|x−I ,y−I dγ−Ix −Iy .
                                                                   −I   −I
     When we are considering a singleton I = {i}, we further simplify the notation by
     directly writing i in the place of I in this formula.

   For absolutely continuous probability measures on [0, 1]d , the following more familiar
characterization of disintegrations will be useful:

Proposition 7.102. Let µ be an absolutely continuous probability measure whose density
is Borel measurable and supported in [0, 1]d . Namely, write dµ = u dx whereR    u : [0, 1]d →
[0, +∞) is a Borel map. Let i ∈ [d]. Then the disintegration µ = Rd µ|x−i dµ−i is
                                                                              −i
as follows: µ−i and each µ|x−i are absolutely continuous probability measures with Borel
densities supported in [0, 1]d−i and [0, 1] respectively; and writing dµ−i = u−i dx−i , and
dµ|x−i = u|x−i dxi for each x−i , where the (Borel) density functions are u−i : [0, 1]d−i →
[0, +∞) and u|x−i : [0, 1] → [0, +∞) for each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , we have (marginal density)
                                              Z
                                 u−i (x−i ) = u(x−i , xi ) dxi
                                              I




                                             161
for each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , and (conditional density)

                                                                  u(x)
                                             u|x−i (xi ) =
                                                                u−i (x−i )

for each x ∈ [0, 1]d where the denominator is nonzero, or 1 by convention otherwise.

Proof. First, note that it is standard that u−i is a Borel map since it is the integral of
the section u(x−i , ·) at each point x−i . It is hence immediate that each u|x−i is also Borel.
Thus µ−i and all µ|x−i are indeed absolutely continuous probability measures.
    We now check the conditions of Definition 7.101. We claim that the map x−i ∈ Rd−i 7→
µ|x−i ∈ P (R) is Borel. Let B ⊂ R be a Borel set; we may assume that B ⊂ [0, 1]
without loss of generality, since all measures assign zero outside this interval. Then the
map x−i ∈ Rd−i 7→ µ|x−i (B) takes value zero outside [0, 1]d−i , and for x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , it is
                                               Z
                                         1
                             x−i 7→               u(x−i , xi ) dxi .
                                     u−i (x−i ) B
This is again, at each point, the integral of a section over the subspace B, so it is standard
that this map is Borel. Hence the claim holds.
   It remains to verify (7.25). Let f : Rd → [0, +∞) be a nonnegative Borel function (and
the result for bounded f will also follow). By the definition of the measures and Tonelli’s
theorem, we have
   Z               Z                             Z                Z
        dµ−i (x−i ) f (x−i , xi ) du|x−i (xi ) =   u−i (x−i ) dx−i f (x−i , xi )u|x−i (xi ) dxi
    R−i                   R                                  [0,1]d−i                 I
              Z                                          Z
          =            f (x)u−i (x−i )u|x−i (xi ) dx =              f (x)u(x) dx ,
              [0,1]d                                      [0,1]d

where the last equality holds because u(x)             =    u−i (x−i )u|x−i (xi ) whenever
−i (x−i ) d> 0, and if u−i (x−i ) = 0 then u(x−i , ·) = 0 almost everywhere, so
u
  x ∈ [0, 1] : u(x) > 0 and u−i (x−i ) = 0 is Borel and has measure zero (by another
application of Tonelli’s theorem).

Definition 7.103 (Aligned transport plans). Let I ⊊ [d]R be nonempty and let µ, ν ∈
P (Rd ). Let γ ∈ Π(µ, ν) and write its disintegration γ = Rd ×Rd γ|x−I ,y−I dγ−Ix −Iy . We
                                                                                 −I       −I
say γ is I-aligned if its marginal γ−Ix −Iy ∈ P (Rd−I × Rd−I ) satisfies the following:

                   γ−Ix −Iy (x−I , y−I ) ∈ Rd−I × Rd−I : x−I ̸= y−I = 0 .
                                                                      


                                                         162
Note that this condition is well-defined because the set being measured is open and hence
Borel. By convention, we say that every γ ∈ Π(µ, ν) is [d]-aligned. For any nonempty
I ⊆ [d], we denote the set of I-aligned transport plans by ΠI (µ, ν). When we have a
singleton I = {i}, we write i directly in the place of I in this definition.

Definition 7.104. For nonempty I ⊆ [d] and µ, ν ∈ P (Rd ), write ΠI (µ → ν) := Π(µ →
ν) ∩ ΠI (µ, ν).

Lemma 7.105 (Alternative characterization of I-aligned plans). Let I ⊊ [d] be nonempty
and let µ, ν ∈ P (Rd ). Then γ ∈ Π(µ, ν) is I-aligned if and only if
                              Z
                                    χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ(x, y) = 0 .
                                   Rd ×Rd

                                             R
Proof. Writing the disintegration γ =            Rd−I ×Rd−I
                                                              γ|x−I ,y−I dγ−Ix −Iy , we have
                                   Z                                          Z
      γ−Ix −Iy ({x−I ̸= y−I }) =                  χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ−Ix −Iy                  dγ|x−I ,y−I (xI , yI )
                                    Rd−I ×Rd−I                                    RI ×RI
                                                                              |                {z              }
                                                                                               =1
                                   Z                            Z
                              =                   dγ−Ix −Iy               χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ|x−I ,y−I (xI , yI )
                                    Rd−I ×Rd−I                   RI ×RI
                                   Z
                              =              χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ .
                                    Rd ×Rd


   While we defined I-aligned transport plans for probability measures on all of Rd , we
extend the definition to measures on subsets Ω ⊂ Rd (e.g. on the cube) by canonically
extending any such measure to all of Rd by assigning zero outside of Ω.

Lemma 7.106 (Composition of aligned transport plans). Let I, J ⊆ [d] be nonempty.
Then in Lemma 7.96, if γ + ∈ ΠI (µ, ϱ) and γ − ∈ ΠJ (ϱ, ν), then (πx,z )# σ ∈ ΠI∪J (µ, ν).

Proof. Let γ := (πx,z )# σ and K := I ∪ J. As in the proof of Lemma 7.97, we do have
γ ∈ Π(µ, ν), so it remains to show that γ is K-aligned (and we may assume that K ⊊ [n],




                                                      163
otherwise there is nothing to prove). We have
   Z
           χ{x−K ̸=z−K } dγ
    Rd ×Rd
           Z
        =               χ{x−K ̸=z−K } (x, z) dσ(x, y, z)                           (Pushforward)
            Rd ×Rd ×Rd
           Z
                                                                       
        ≤                χ{x−K ̸=y−K } (x, y) + χ{y−K ̸=z−K } (y, z) dσ(x, y, z)
             d    d   d
           ZR ×R ×R                          Z
        =               χ{x−K ̸=y−K } dσ +                  χ{y−K ̸=z−K } dσ
            Rd ×Rd ×Rd                          Rd ×Rd ×Rd
           Z                               Z
        =           χ{x−K ̸=y−K } dγ ++
                                                     χ{y−K ̸=z−K } dγ −            (Pushforward)
             d    d                           d    d
           ZR ×R                         Z R ×R
        ≤           χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ + +            χ{y−J ̸=z−J } dγ −                (I, J ⊆ K)
             Rd ×Rd                       Rd ×Rd
         = 0,

the last step since γ + is I-aligned and γ − is J-aligned and by Lemma 7.105; and again by
the latter, γ is K-aligned.

   The following results let us find aligned transport plans by transporting mass only
within i-aligned lines.

Lemma 7.107 (Measurable selection; specialization of [Vil09, Corollary 5.22]). Let Ω ⊂ Rd
be a bounded set. Let p ∈ [1, ∞). Let A be a measurable space and let a 7→ (µa , νa ) be
a measurable function A → P (R) × P (R) with each µa and νa having bounded support.
Then there is a measurable choice a 7→ γa such that, for each a ∈ A, γa ∈ Π(µa , νa ) and
Cp (γa ) = Wp (µa , νa ).

Lemma 7.108. Let p ∈ [1, ∞), i ∈ [d], and let µ, ν ∈ P (Rd ) be supported inside some
bounded set. Suppose µ−i = ν−i . Then there exists γ ∈ Πi (µ, ν) satisfying
                                  Z
                             p
                       Cp (γ) =       Wpp (µ|x−i , ν|x−i ) dµ−i (x−i ) .
                                         Rd−i


Proof. Let A := Rd−i be equipped with the Borel σ-algebra on R[d]\{i} . Then the A →
P (R) × P (R) function x−i 7→ (µ|x−i , ν|x−i ) is Borel measurable because, by disintegration,
both x−i 7→ µ|x−i and x−i 7→ ν|x−i are Borel measurable. By Lemma 7.107, we obtain a


                                                   164
Borel measurable map x−i 7→ γx−i such that, for each x−i ∈ Rd−i , γx−i ∈ Π(µ|x−i , ν|x−i ) and
Cp (γx−i )p = Wpp (µ|x−i , ν|x−i ).
                                                     R
    Define γ ∈ P (Rd × Rd ) by its disintegration γ = Rd ×Rd γ|x−i ,y−i dγ−ix −iy as follows.
                                                                                   −i   −i
First, for the marginal γ−ix −iy ∈ P (Rd−i × Rd−i ), for each Borel Z ⊂ Rd−i × Rd−i we set
                                         Z
                         γ−ix −iy (Z) :=     χZ (x−i , x−i ) dµ−i (x−i ) ,
                                                   Rd−i


where the integral is well-defined because the set {x−i ∈ Rd−i : (x−i , x−i ) ∈ Z} is Borel by
standard arguments. We remark that γ−ix −iy is indeed a probability measure because it is
nonnegative, it assigns zero to the empty set, it is additive over countable disjoint unions,
and                                                 Z
                                       d     d
                            γ−ix −iy (R−i × R−i ) =    dµ−i = 1 .
                                                                     Rd−i

It follows that for every bounded (or nonnegative) Borel function f : Rd−i × Rd−i → R, we
have         Z                                                Z
                      f (x−i , y−i ) dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i ) =   f (x−i , x−i ) dµ−i (x−i ) . (7.26)
                Rd−i ×Rd−i                                                  Rd−i

Second, for the conditionals, we simply set γ|x−i ,y−i := γx−i for each (x−i , y−i ) ∈ Rd−i × Rd−i .
    We claim that γ ∈ Πi (µ, ν). The i-aligned condition holds by construction, so it remains
to show that γ ∈ Π(µ, ν). We first verify that (π1 )# γ = µ. It suffices to verify that these
measures agree on each rectangle X := X−i × Xi of Borel sets X−i ⊂ Rd−i , Xi ⊂ R. We
have

     ((π1 )# γ)(X)
           Z
        =           χX (x) dγ(x, y)                                                                       (Pushforward)
             Rd ×Rd
           Z                                Z
        =            dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )               χX (x−i , xi ) dγ|x−i ,y−i (xi , yi )         (Disintegration)
             Rd−i ×Rd−i                          R×R
            Z                                                    Z
        =                 χX−i (x−i ) dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )            χXi (xi ) dγx−i (xi , yi )
             Rd−i ×Rd−i                                           R×R

                                                                                             (Definition of X, γ|x−i ,y−i )
            Z
        =                 χX−i (x−i )((π1 )# γx−i )(Xi ) dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )                           (Pushforward)
             Rd−i ×Rd−i



                                                           165
            Z
        =                  χX−i (x−i )µ|x−i (Xi ) dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )                      (γx−i ∈ Π(µ|x−i , ν|x−i ))
             Rd−i ×Rd−i
            Z
        =           χX−i (x−i )µ|x−i (Xi ) dµ−i (x−i )                                       (Application of (7.26))
             Rd−i
            Z                                   Z
        =           χX−i (x−i ) dµ−i (x−i )           χXi (xi ) dµ|x−i (xi )
             Rd−i                                 R
            Z                     Z
        =           dµ−i (x−i )        χX (x−i , xi ) dµ|x−i (xi )                                     (Definition of X)
             Rd−i                  R
            Z
        =         χX dµ = µ(X) ,                                                                         (Disintegration)
             Rd

as desired. Thanks to the hypothesis that µ−i = ν−i , an analogous calculation on the
second variable yields that (π2 )# γ = ν and hence γ ∈ Π(µ, ν). Thus γ ∈ Πi (µ, ν) as
claimed.
   Finally, we compute the cost of the plan γ. Again using its disintegration and (7.26),
we have
                Z
            p
     Cp (γ) =          |x − y|p dγ(x, y)
                  d  d
                ZR ×R                           Z
              =          dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )   |(x−i , xi ) − (y−i , yi )|p dγ|x−i ,y−i (xi , yi )
                      Rd ×Rd−i                              R×R
                    Z −i                   Z
                =            dµ−i (x−i )         |(x−i , xi ) − (x−i , yi )|p dγ|x−i ,x−i (xi , yi )
                      Rd−i                 R×R
                    Z                      Z
                =            dµ−i (x−i )         |xi − yi |p dγx−i (xi , yi )
                      Rd                   R×R
                    Z −i                                   Z
                                                      p
                =            dµ−i (x−i )Cp (γx−i ) =                Wpp (µ|x−i , ν|x−i ) dµ−i (x−i ) .
                      Rd−i                                   Rd−i


   We may combine the above to find directed transport plans by transporting mass within
axis-aligned lines, as long as the first probability distribution dominates the second in each
such line.

Lemma 7.109. Let p ∈ (1, +∞), and let µ, ν ∈ P ([0, 1]d ) be absolutely continuous prob-
ability measures with strictly positive densities. Let i ∈ [d] and suppose that 1) µ−i = ν−i



                                                            166
and 2) µ|x−i ⪰ ν|x−i for each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i . Then there exists γ ∈ Πi (µ → ν) satisfying
                                  Z
                               p
                         Cp (γ) =          Wpp (µ|x−i , ν|x−i ) dµ−i (x−i ) .            (7.27)
                                                    [0,1]d−i


Proof. Let γ ∈ Πi (µ, ν) be the plan obtained from Lemma 7.108, which satisfies (7.27).
After recalling the definition of γ in Lemma 7.108, Corollary 7.100 implies that γ|x−i ,y−i ∈
Π(µ|x−i → ν|x−i ) for each (x−i , y−i ) ∈ [0, 1]d−i × [0, 1]d−i . It remains to confirm that γ ∈
Π(µ → ν). Indeed,
  Z
          χ{x̸⪯y} dγ(x, y)
   Rd ×Rd
        Z                                Z
     =            dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )   χ{x̸⪯y} ((x−i , xi ), (y−i , yi )) dγ|x−i ,y−i (xi , yi )
         Rd−i ×Rd−i                                 R×R

                                                                                                                    (Disintegration)
         Z                                         Z
     ≤                    dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )           χ{x−i ̸⪯y−i } (x−i , y−i ) dγ|x−i ,y−i (xi , yi )
             Rd−i ×Rd−i                             R×R
                 Z                                        Z
             +                  dγ−ix −iy (x−i , y−i )               χ{xi >yi } (xi , yi ) dγ|x−i ,y−i (xi , yi )
                   Rd−i ×Rd−i                                  R×R
                                                          |                          {z                        }
                                                                 = 0 since γ|x−i ,y−i is a directed plan
         Z                                          Z                            Z
     =                    χ{x−i ̸⪯y−i } dγ−ix −iy              dγ|x−i ,y−i =            χ{x−i ̸⪯x−i } dµ−i (x−i ) (By (7.26))
         Rd−i ×Rd−i                                     R×R                        Rd−i |   {z }
                                                    |           {z       }                    =0
                                                                =1
     = 0.

    Now, we show that the directed, aligned 2-Wasserstein distance enjoys a nice
“Pythagorean” composition property: composing I-aligned and J-aligned directed trans-
port plans, for I and J disjoint, yields an I ∪ J-aligned directed transport plan whose cost
is obtained from the costs of the two other plans via the Pythagorean theorem. Arguments
of this nature are well-known in the undirected case, e.g. a similar statement appears in
[Vil09, p. 572].

Lemma 7.3 (Pythagorean composition of transport plans). Let I, J ⊆ [d] be nonempty
disjoint sets. Let µ, ϱ, ν ∈ P (Rd ) be supported in bounded sets, and let γ + ∈ ΠI (µ → ϱ)
and γ − ∈ ΠJ (ϱ → ν). Then there exists γ ∈ ΠI∪J (µ → ν) satisfying C2 (γ)2 = C2 (γ + )2 +
C2 (γ − )2 .

                                                                     167
Proof. Using Lemma 7.96, we obtain σ ∈ P (Rd × Rd × Rd ) such that (π1,2 )# σ = γ + and
(π2,3 )# σ = γ − , and by Lemma 7.97 and Lemma 7.106, we have γ := (π1,3 )# σ ∈ ΠI∪J (µ →
ν). To compute the cost of γ, we first claim that σ assigns zero measure to points x, y, z
such that x−I ̸= y−I or y−J ̸= z−J . Indeed,
                  Z
            0≤                 (1 − χ{x−I =y−I and y−J =z−J } ) dσ(x, y, z)
                    Rd ×Rd ×Rd
                  Z                                        Z
              ≤                χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dσ(x, y, z) +              χ{y−J ̸=z−J } dσ(x, y, z)
                    Rd ×Rd ×Rd                              Rd ×Rd ×Rd
                  Z                                    Z
              =                             +
                           χ{x−I ̸=y−I } dγ (x, y) +           χ{y−J ̸=z−J } dγ − (y, z) = 0 ,
                 Rd ×Rd                                  Rd ×Rd

                                          +         −
Rthe last step
            R by Lemma 7.105 since γ and γ are I- and J-aligned, respectively. Hence
   f dσ = f χ{x−I =y−I and y−J =z−J } dσ for any bounded or nonnegative Borel function f .
Therefore, using the assumption that I and J are disjoint to apply the Pythagorean theo-
rem, we obtain
                     Z                            Z
                 2                  2
           C2 (γ) =         |x − z| dγ(x, z) =                   |x − z|2 dσ(x, y, z)
                       d  d                          d    d    d
                     ZR ×R                          R ×R ×R

                   =            χ{x−I =y−I and y−J =z−J } |x − z|2 dσ(x, y, z)
                       d  d   d
                     ZR ×R ×R
                                χ{x−I =y−I and y−J =z−J } |x − y|2 + |y − z|2 dσ(x, y, z)
                                                                                 
                   =
                       d  d   d
                     ZR ×R ×R
                                 |x − y|2 + |y − z|2 dσ(x, y, z)
                                                       
                   =
                       d  d   d
                     ZR ×R ×R                            Z
                                       2
                   =            |x − y| dσ(x, y, z) +                  |y − z|2 dσ(x, y, z)
                       d  d   d                              d    d  d
                     ZR ×R ×R                       Z       R ×R ×R

                   =        |x − y|2 dγ + (x, y) +            |y − z|2 dγ − (y, z)
                     Rd ×Rd                                   Rd ×Rd
                  = C2 (γ + )2 + C2 (γ − )2 .

Lemma 7.110 (Induction over coordinates). Let (µ(i) )i∈[d+1] be a family of absolutely
continuous probability measures on [0, 1]d with strictly positive densities. Suppose that, for
each i ∈ [d], we have 1) µ(i) −i = µ(i+1) −i and 2) µ(i) |x−i ⪰ µ(i+1) |x−i for each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i .
Then
                                   Xd Z
               2  (1)    (d+1)
             W2 (µ → µ         )≤              W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dµ(i) −i (x−i ) .
                                       i=1   [0,1]d−i


                                                        168
Proof. For each k ∈ [d + 1], let A(k) be the following proposition: there exists γ ∈
Π[k] (µ(1) → µ(k+1) ) satisfying
                             k Z
                             X
                        2
                  C2 (γ) =                    W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dµ(i) −i (x−i ) .
                             i=1   [0,1]d−i

Note that A(d) implies the result we want to prove, while A(1) holds by Lemma 7.109.
Now let 2 ≤ k ≤ d. Suppose A(k − 1) holds, and thus let γ + ∈ Π[k−1] (µ(1) → µ(k) ) satisfy
                             k−1 Z
                             X
                      + 2
                 C2 (γ ) =                     W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dµ(i) −i (x−i ) .
                             i=1    [0,1]d−i

Apply Lemma 7.109 with i = k to obtain a plan γ − ∈ Πk (µ(k) → µ(k+1) ) satisfying
                          Z
                    − 2
               C2 (γ ) =        W22 (µ(k) |x−k , µ(k+1) |x−k ) dµ(k) −k (x−k ) .
                               [0,1]d−k

Then, use Lemma 7.3 with I = [k − 1] and J = {k} to obtain γ ∈ Π[k] (µ(1) → µ(k+1) )
satisfying
                                     k Z
                                     X
              2       + 2       − 2
        C2 (γ) = C2 (γ ) + C2 (γ ) =       W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dµ(i) −i (x−i ) ,
                                               i=1   [0,1]d−i

which implies that A(k) holds. Thus A(d) follows by induction.


7.3.4    From one-dimensional PDE to optimal transport in the
         cube
We now tie most of the foregoing theory together by showing how to inductively transform
a function on the unit cube into a monotone function, one coordinate at a time via the
directed heat semigroup machinery, keeping track of the cost using the directed optimal
transport machinery.
    For this part of the proof, it is convenient to restrict our attention to Lipschitz func-
tions. As we will see, the Lipschitz property of f : [0, 1]d → R is preserved under taking
the monotone equilibrium along each axis-aligned direction, which enables an inductive
argument over the coordinates.
   Denote the set of Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R by Lip (the dimension d will always
be clear from context).

                                                     169
Observation 7.111. A function f : [0, 1]d → R is Lipschitz if and only if its restriction
to every axis-aligned line is uniformly Lipschitz, i.e. there exists some M > 0 such that,
for every i ∈ [d] and x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , f (x−i , ·) : [0, 1] → R is M -Lipschitz.

Definition 7.112 (i- and I-monotonicity). Let i ∈ [d]. We say f : [0, 1]d → R is i-
monotone if its every restriction along direction i is nondecreasing, i.e. if for every x−i ∈
[0, 1]d−i , f (x−i , ·) is nondecreasing. For I ⊆ [d], we say f is I-monotone if it is i-monotone
for every i ∈ I. We write MonI for the set of I-monotone functions.

Observation 7.113. Mon[d] is simply the set of monotone functions on [0, 1]d .

    The following useful characterization of i-monotone functions in terms of k-aligned lines
follows by definition:

Observation 7.114. Let i, k ∈ [d] be distinct. Then for all f : [0, 1]d → R, f is i-monotone
if and only if the following holds: for every z−i−k ∈ [0, 1]d−i−k , and for all xi ≤ yi in [0, 1],
f (z−i−k , xi , ·) ≤ f (z−i−k , yi , ·).

Definition 7.115 (Monotone equilibrium operator). Let k ∈ [d]. We define the operator
Mk : Lip → ([0, 1]d → R) as follows: for each function f ∈ Lip, x−k ∈ [0, 1]d−k and
xk ∈ [0, 1], the function Mk f : [0, 1]d → R satisfies

                            (Mk f )(x−k , xk ) := (P∞ f (x−k , ·))(xk ) ,

where the application of P∞ is well-defined because each f (x−k , ·) is Lipschitz and hence
in L2 (I).

   The following lemma shows that Mk preserves Lipschitzness, confirming that Mk f is
well-defined pointwise as a real-valued function, as opposed to only defined up to sets of
measure zero.

Lemma 7.116. Let k ∈ [d]. Let f ∈ Lip. Then Mk f ∈ Lip.

Proof. Let M > 0 be such that every axis-aligned line restriction of f is M -Lipschitz. We
claim that every axis-aligned line restriction of Mk f is M -Lipschitz. We first check the
k-aligned lines. For any x−k ∈ [0, 1]d−k Proposition 7.75 implies that

                 ψ((Mk f )(x−k , ·)) = ψ(P∞ f (x−k , ·)) ≤ ψ(f (x−k , ·)) ≤ M ,

the last inequality and the conclusion that (Mk f )(x−k , ·) is M -Lipschitz by Fact 7.42.

                                                170
    It remains to check the other line restrictions. Let i ∈ [d]\{k} and let z−i−k ∈ [0, 1]d−i−k .
Let xi ̸= yi ∈ [0, 1]. Since the axis-aligned line restrictions of f (in particular, in direction
i) are M -Lipschitz, we have

                       sup |f (z−i−k , xi , wk ) − f (z−i−k , yi , wk )| ≤ M |xi − yi | .
                     wk ∈[0,1]


Proposition 7.77 implies that

     |P∞ f (z−i−k , xi , ·) − P∞ f (z−i−k , yi , ·)| ≤ ess sup|f (z−i−k , xi , wk ) − f (z−i−k , yi , wk )|
                                                       wk ∈[0,1]

                                                    ≤ M |xi − yi |                                       (7.28)

a.e. in I, and since P∞ f (z−i−k , xi , ·) and P∞ f (z−i−k , yi , ·) are (Lipschitz) continuous as
observed above, we conclude that (7.28) holds pointwise. Since (7.28) holds for every
i ∈ [d] \ {k} and z−i−k ∈ [0, 1]d−i−k , and since

    |(Mk f )(z−i−k , xi , ·) − (Mk f )(z−i−k , yi , ·)| = |P∞ f (z−i−k , xi , ·) − P∞ f (z−i−k , yi , ·)|

pointwise, we get that every axis-aligned line restriction of Mk f is M -Lipschitz, and
Mk f ∈ Lip.

Lemma 7.117 (Mk application makes progress). Let k ∈ [d], and let I ⊆ [d] \ {k}. Let
f ∈ Lip ∩ MonI . Then Mk f ∈ Lip ∩ MonI∪{k} .

Proof. The fact that Mk f ∈ Lip is given by Lemma 7.116, and the fact that Mk f is
k-monotone follows from the definition of Mk and the fact that the monotone equilib-
rium P∞ f (x−k , ·) is nondecreasing. Now, let i ∈ I, so that f is i-monotone. By Ob-
servation 7.114, we have that for every z−i−k ∈ [0, 1]d−i−k , and for all xi ≤ yi in [0, 1],
f (z−i−k , xi , ·) ≤ f (z−i−k , yi , ·). By Corollary 7.71, we obtain that P∞ f (z−i−k , xi , ·) ≤
P∞ f (z−i−k , yi , ·) a.e. in I, and since these two functions are (Lipschitz) continuous, this
inequality holds pointwise. Thus (Mk f )(z−i−k , xi , ·) ≤ (Mk f )(z−i−k , yi , ·), and again by
Observation 7.114, Mk f is i-monotone. This concludes the proof.

Lemma 7.118 (Mk preserves bounds). Let f ∈ Lip. Let a ≤ b be real numbers and
suppose a ≤ f ≤ b. Then a ≤ Mk f ≤ b.

Proof. This follows by the definition of Mk together with Corollary 7.71 and Lemma 7.73.



                                                     171
Lemma 7.119 (Mk is nonexpansive in L2 ). Let f, g ∈ Lip. Then
                 Z                           Z
                                     2
                      (Mk f − Mk g) dx ≤           (f − g)2 dx .
                            [0,1]d                                           [0,1]d


Proof. This follows from Proposition 7.72 and Tonelli’s theorem, as follows:
  Z                         Z            Z
                       2
       (Mk f − Mk g) dx =          dx−k [(Mk f )(x−k , xk ) − (Mk g)(x−k , xk )]2 dxk
   [0,1]d                            [0,1]d−k              I
                                     Z                     Z
                                =                   dx−k           [(P∞ f (x−k , ·))(xk ) − (P∞ g(x−k , ·))(xk )]2 dxk
                                     [0,1]d−k              I
                                     Z                     Z
                                ≤                   dx−k           [f (x−k , xk ) − g(x−k , xk )]2 dxk
                                         [0,1]d−k              I
                                     Z
                                =              (f − g)2 dx .
                                     [0,1]d


   Similarly, combining Corollary 7.87 with Fubini’s theorem yields

Lemma 7.120. Let f ∈ Lip. Then
                          Z                                             Z
                                                    (Mk f ) dx =                   f dx .
                                          [0,1]d                          [0,1]d


   The following result is essentially an L2 version of [Fer23, Proposition 3.14].

Lemma 7.121 (Effect of Mk on the directed Dirichlet energy). Let i, k ∈ [d] be distinct
and let f ∈ Lip. Then
                Z                                 Z
                       −
                      E ((Mk f )(x−i , ·)) dx−i ≤   E − (f (x−i , ·)) dx−i .
                 [0,1]d−i                                                   [0,1]d−i


Proof. For any g ∈ Lip, i ∈ [d] and h ∈ R \ {0}, define the Qg,i,h : [0, 1]d → R by
                                 (
                                   g(x−i ,xi +h)−g(x−i ,xi )
                                               h
                                                             if xi + h ∈ (0, 1)
                   Qg,i,h (x) :=                                                                                 (7.29)
                                  0                          otherwise.




                                                               172
By Rademacher’s theorem on the open domain (0, 1)d , g is differentiable almost everywhere.
In particular, the function Dg,i : [0, 1]d → R given by
                                  (
                                    limh→0 Qg,i,h (x) if the limit exists
                      Dg,i (x) :=
                                    0                 otherwise

gives the partial derivative of g in direction i for a.e. x ∈ [0, 1]d , and is measurable as the
limit of the measurable functions Qg,i,h . Moreover, letting M > 0 be such that the axis-
aligned line restrictions of g are M -Lipschitz, we have |Qg,i,h | ≤ M pointwise. Finally, fixing
any x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , g(x−i , ·) is (Lipschitz and hence) in H 1 (I), and the partial derivative
Dg,i (x−i , ·) agrees with any weak derivative ∂xi g(x−i , ·) a.e. in [0, 1]. In particular, all of
these considerations apply to the functions f and Mk f by Lemma 7.116. We conclude
that, for g = f or g = Mk f and each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i ,
                                   Z                            Z
                 −              1  −                 2       1                   2
               E (g(x−i , ·)) =       ∂xi g(x−i , xi ) dxi =       Dg,i (x−i , xi )− dxi
                                2 I                            2 I
                                   Z
                                1                            2
                                     lim Qg,i,h (x−i , xi )− dxi ,
                                                           
                              =
                                2 I  h→0


where for simplicity we write the limit in the last expression with the understanding that it
is only defined almost everywhere in [0, 1]. Note that the measurability of the last integrand
over [0, 1]d justifies writing the integrals in the statement of the lemma via Tonelli’s theorem
(as the computation below shows). Define for each h ∈ R the set
                                         (
                                           (0, 1 − h) if h ≥ 0
                                   Ih :=
                                           (−h, 1)      otherwise,

so that Qg,i,h (x) is defined by the first case of (7.29) if and only if xi ∈ Ih . Then, by
repeated applications of Tonelli’s theorem and the dominated convergence theorem, we
obtain
   Z                                        Z            Z
               −                          1                                         2
                                                     dx−i lim QMk f,i,h (x−i , xi )− dxi
                                                                
              E ((Mk f )(x−i , ·)) dx−i =
     [0,1]d−i                             2 [0,1]d−i      I h→0
           Z                                         Z
        1                            2      1                           2
                 lim QMk f,i,h (x)− dx = lim               QMk f,i,h (x)− dx
                                                         
    =
        2 [0,1]d h→0 |     {z         }      2 h→0 [0,1]d
                             ≤M 2
             Z                      Z         Z
    1                                                                           2
                                                   QMk f,i,h (x−i−k , xi , xk )− dxk
                                                  
   = lim                   dx−i−k       dxi
    2 h→0     [0,1]d−i−k            I         I


                                                         173
             Z                         Z
    1
   = lim                    dx−i−k          dxi
    2 h→0      [0,1]d−i−k              Ih
              Z "                                                                       − #2
                        (Mk f )(x−i−k , xi + h, xk ) − (Mk f )(x−i−k , xi , xk )
                                                                                                 dxk
                 I                                h
             Z                   Z
    1
   = lim                 dx−i−k     dxi
    2 h→0      [0,1]d−i−k              Ih
              Z "                                                                − #2
                   (P∞ f (x−i−k , xi + h, ·))(xk ) − (P∞ f (x−i−k , xi , ·))(xk )
                                                                                          dxk
           I                                       h
                                       Z "                                                  − #2
                                              f (x−i−k , xi + h, xk ) − f (x−i−k , xi , xk )
         Z                    Z
    1
   ≤ lim             dx−i−k        dxi                                                             dxk
    2 h→0 [0,1]d−i−k            Ih       I                            h
         Z                    Z       Z
    1                                                                2
                                           Qf,i,h (x−i−k , xi , xk )− dxk
                                          
   = lim             dx−i−k dxi
    2 h→0 [0,1]d−i−k            I      I
         Z                                  Z
    1                        − 2          1                           2
                                                   lim Qf,i,h (x)− dx
                                                     
   = lim           Qf,i,h (x)      dx =
    2 h→0 [0,1]d |      {z      }         2 [0,1]d h→0
                                ≤M 2
         Z                  Z                                   Z
     1                                                 2
                                lim Qf,i,h (x−i , xi )− dxi =               E − (f (x−i , ·)) dx−i ,
                                   
   =                 dx−i
     2   [0,1]d−i           I h→0                                [0,1]d−i

                                                                                2                 2
the inequality by Proposition 7.70 via the identity [(a − b)+ ] = [(b − a)− ] .

Definition 7.122 (Coordinate-wise monotone equilibrium). For each f ∈ Lip, define f ∗ ∈
Lip, the coordinate-wise monotone equilibrium of f , by

                                             f ∗ := Md Md−1 · · · M1 f .

   Note that indeed f ∗ is indeed Lipschitz by Lemma 7.116, and it is monotone:

Proposition 7.123. Let f ∈ Lip. Then f ∗ is monotone.

Proof. This follows by repeatedly applying Lemma 7.117, and recalling that Mon[d] is the
set of monotone functions on [0, 1]d .

  By Proposition 7.76 and the definition of Mk , we also observe that the coordinate-wise
monotone equilibrium behaves nicely with respect to certain affine transformations:


                                                        174
Observation 7.124. Let f ∈ Lip. Let α > 0 and β ∈ R. Then (αf + β)∗ = αf ∗ + β.

    Similarly, Lemma 7.119 implies that taking the coordinate-wise monotone equilibrium
is a nonexpansive operation:

Observation 7.125. Let f, g ∈ Lip. Then ∥f ∗ − g ∗ ∥L2 ((0,1)d ) ≤ ∥f − g∥L2 ((0,1)d ) . Since
0∗ = 0 by Lemma 7.73 (where we write 0 for the constant zero function), we conclude in
particular that ∥f ∗ ∥L2 ((0,1)d ) ≤ ∥f ∥L2 ((0,1)d ) .

    We are now ready to combine the ingredients from the previous sections and estab-
lish the transport-energy inequality. Note that this inequality is most effective when the
function f is pointwise bounded close to 1.

Theorem 7.4 (Transport-energy inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such     that the following holds. Let a ∈ (0, 1), and let f ∈ Lip satisfy 1 − a ≤ f ≤ 1 + a and
         f dx = 1. Define the probability measures dµ := f dx and dµ∗ := f ∗ dx on [0, 1]d .
R
  [0,1]d
Then
                                            C(1 + a)2
                                                        Z
                                       ∗                            2
                              2
                            W2 (µ → µ ) ≤                     ∇− f dx .
                                             (1 − a)3 [0,1]d

Proof. Define the family (f (i) )i∈[d+1] ⊂ Lip by f (1) := f and f (i+1) := RMi f (i) for each
i ∈ [d], so that f (d+1) = f ∗ . Note that we have 1 − a ≤ f (i) ≤ 1 + a and [0,1]d f (i) dx = 1
for each i ∈ [d + 1] by Lemmas 7.118 and 7.120. Then, define the family (µ(i) )i∈[d+1] of
probability measures on [0, 1]d by dµ(i) := f (i) dx, so that µ(1) = µ and µ(d+1) = µ∗ .
   We claim (µ(i) )i∈[d+1] satisfies the conditions of Lemma 7.110. First, they have strictly
positive densities because 1 − a ≤ f (i) ≤ 1 + a for each i ∈ [d + 1] as observed above.
They are also absolutely continuous with Borel measurable density because each f (i) is
continuous and hence Borel.

                 R Proposition 7.102, for each i, j ∈ [d + 1] we may characterize the disin-
   Recall that, by
tegration µ(j) = Rd µ(j) |x−i dµ(j) −i as follows: the marginal and all conditional measures
                    −i
are both absolutely continuous supported in [0, 1]d−i and [0, 1] respectively, and we have
dµ(j) −i = f (j) −i dx−i where
                                            Z
                               f −i (x−i ) = f (j) (x−i , xi ) dxi
                                (j)
                                                                                     (7.30)
                                               I




                                              175
for each x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , and dµ(j) |x−i = f (j) |x−i dxi where

                                                                       f (j) (x)
                                          f (j) |x−i (xi ) =                                                                    (7.31)
                                                                    f (j) −i (x−i )
for each x ∈ [0, 1]d (note that the denominator is nonzero since f (j) ≥ 1 − a).
   Now, fix any i ∈ [d]. Then the condition µ(i) −i = µ(i+1) −i is implied by the pointwise
condition     Z                     Z
                 f (x−i , xi ) dxi = f (i+1) (x−i , xi ) dxi
                  (i)
                                                             ∀x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i ,      (7.32)
                  I                             I

which in turn holds by the definitions of f (i+1) and Mi , and Corollary 7.87. Finally, fixing
x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i , we verify the condition µ(i) |x−i ⪰ µ(i+1) |x−i . By Corollary 7.91, it suffices to
show that
                                                  ?
                                     f (i+1) |x−i = P∞ f (i) |x−i .                            (7.33)
By (7.30) and (7.31), this is equivalent to
                                                                                                                       
                      1                                ?                                  1
          R
               (i+1)
                                     f (i+1) (x−i , ·) = P∞               R                                (i)
                                                                                                          f (x−i , ·)       .
           I
             f       (x−i , xi ) dxi                                          I
                                                                                  f (i) (x−i , xi ) dxi
Since f (i+1) (x−i , ·) = P∞ f (i) (x−i , ·), and applying Proposition 7.76, the above is equivalent
to
                          1                  (i)            ?            1
            R
                   (i+1) (x , x ) dx
                                       P ∞ f     (x −i , ·) = R
                                                                   (i) (x , x ) dx
                                                                                     P∞ f (i) (x−i , ·) ,
               I
                 f         −i  i     i                         I
                                                                 f       −i  i     i

which is true again by (7.32), so indeed µ(i) |x−i ⪰ µ(i+1) |x−i . Thus, by Lemma 7.110, we
have
                             Xd Z
                2       ∗
             W2 (µ → µ ) ≤             W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dµ(i) −i (x−i )
                                                 d
                                    i=1 [0,1]−i
                                    Xd Z
                                =                      W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i )f (i) −i (x−i ) dx−i
                                    i=1     [0,1]d−i
                                               d Z
                                               X
                                ≤ (1 + a)                           W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) dx−i ,
                                                i=1      [0,1]d−i

the last inequality because 1 − a ≤ f (i) ≤ 1 + a also implies that 1 − a ≤ f (i) −i ≤ 1 + a.
Now, applying Theorem 7.2 via (7.33), we have
                                                                         C
                          W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) ≤                         E − (f (i) |x−i )
                                                                    inf f (i) |x−i

                                                            176
for each i ∈ [d] and x−i ∈ [0, 1]d−i . Note that f (i) |x−i ≥ 1−a
                                                              1+a
                                                                  by the pointwise bounds on
  (i)      (i)               −          2 −
f and f −i , and that E (αg) = α E (g) for any α ≥ 0 and (say) Lipschitz g by the
definition of E − . Therefore, applying (7.31), we obtain
                                                             2
                                 C(1 + a)            1                                       C(1 + a) − (i)
W22 (µ(i) |x−i , µ(i+1) |x−i ) ≤                 (i)
                                                                   E − (f (i) (x−i , ·)) ≤            E (f (x−i , ·)) .
                                1−a             f −i (x−i )                                  (1 − a)3

Hence we have
                                           d Z
                            ∗    C(1 + a)2 X
                    2
                   W2 (µ → µ ) ≤                       E − (f (i) (x−i , ·)) dx−i .
                                 (1 − a)3 i=1 [0,1]d−i

Recall that f (1) = f while f (i) = Mi−1 · · · M1 f for each i = 2, . . . , d + 1. Hence, by induc-
tively applying Lemma 7.121 for each i ≥ 2, and by Tonelli’s theorem and the definition
of E − , we obtain
                                           d Z
                         ∗    C(1 + a)2 X
                 2
                W2 (µ → µ ) ≤                        E − (f (x−i , ·)) dx−i
                               (1 − a)3 i=1 [0,1]d−i
                                          d Z
                              C(1 + a)2 X
                                                           Z
                                                                                 2
                            =          3
                                                     dx−i      ∂x−i f (x−i , xi ) dxi
                              2(1 − a) i=1 [0,1]d−i          I
                                               d
                              C(1 + a)2
                                         Z     X          2
                            =          3
                                                     ∂i− f dx
                              2(1 − a) [0,1]d i=1
                              C(1 + a)2
                                         Z
                                                       2
                            =                  ∇− f dx .
                              2(1 − a)3 [0,1]d


7.4       Directed Poincaré from Wasserstein and Kan-
          torovich
In this section, we establish our directed Poincaré inequality (Theorem 7.1) by combin-
ing the transport-energy inequality from Theorem 7.4 with a directed version of (weak)
Kantorovich duality via a perturbation argument, thereby implementing the ideas from
Section 7.1.5 of the proof overview. The general theme of going between transport inequal-
ities and Poincaré inequalities, as well as the spirit of the technical arguments presented
here, are well-known in the undirected case; we refer the reader to [Vil09, Chapters 7 and

                                                       177
22] for a comprehensive presentation and primary references, and to [Liu20] for an undi-
rected version of the precise reduction we instantiate here (that is, from a transport-energy
inequality to a Poincaré inequality).
    For simplicity, we do not attempt to initiate a systematic study of duality in directed
optimal transport, or to state results in the broadest possible generality, but rather limit
ourselves to what is required for the aforementioned goal. In Section 7.4.1, we introduce
the notion of directed weak Kantorovich duality and establish some of its properties. The
main results are Proposition 7.129, which gives a lower bound on the directed Wasserstein
distance between two measures in terms the so-called (directed) Hamilton-Jacobi operator
H⃗ (recall that the previous section gave an upper bound on this distance via the transport-
energy inequality), and Proposition 7.131, which relates the action H ⃗ t h(x) of this operator
                                 +
back to the directed gradient ∇ h(x) (which, recall, we wish to have in the right-hand side
of our Poincaré inequality). Then, in Section 7.4.2, we apply these tools via a careful choice
of dual function (a “perturbation argument”) to conclude the directed Poincaré inequality,
first for continuously differentiable functions (Theorem 7.133) and then, via a standard
approximation argument, for all H 1 functions (Theorem 7.1).


7.4.1     Directed weak Kantorovich duality and Hamilton-Jacobi
          operator
Kantorovich duality plays a fundamental role in the study of Wasserstein distance. The
weak part of this duality allows one to lower bound the Wasserstein distance between
two distributions by means of “test functions” satisfying a certain constraint. Here, we
translate a small part of this rich theory to the directed setting.

Lemma 7.126 (Weak duality). Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set and let µ, ν ∈ P (Ω).
Suppose ϕ ∈ L1 (ν) and ψ ∈ L1 (µ) satisfy

                          ϕ(y) − ψ(x) ≤ |x − y|2       ∀x ⪯ y in Ω .

Then                                         Z             Z
                             W22 (µ → ν) ≥        ϕ dν −       ψ dµ .
                                              Ω            Ω


Proof. Suppose γ ∈ Π(µ → ν). Then
             Z
          2
    C2 (γ) =      |x − y|2 dγ(x, y)
                Ω×Ω


                                             178
                Z
            =             χ{x⪯y} |x − y|2 dγ(x, y)                         (Since γ ∈ Π(µ → ν))
                Ω×Ω
                Z
            ≥             χ{x⪯y} (ϕ(y) − ψ(x)) dγ(x, y)                              (Hypothesis)
                    Ω×Ω
                Z
            =     (ϕ(y) − ψ(x)) dγ(x, y)                                   (Since γ ∈ Π(µ → ν))
                Ω×Ω
              Z        Z
            =   ϕ dν − ψ dµ                                     (Since (π1 )# γ = µ, (π2 )# γ = ν) .
                Ω               Ω

Since this holds for every γ ∈ Π(µ → ν), the result follows.

   This duality results motivates the following definition. Let Cb (Ω) denote the set of
bounded continuous functions Ω → R.

Definition 7.127 (Directed Hamilton-Jacobi operator). Let Ω ⊂ Rd . For each t ≥ 0,
                                             ⃗ t : Cb (Ω) → (Ω → R) as follows: for each
define the directed Hamilton-Jacobi operator H
h ∈ Cb (Ω) and x ∈ Ω, we set
                                (
                    ⃗ t h)(x) := h(x) 
                   (H
                                                             if t = 0
                                                                                  (7.34)
                                                 1       2
                                 supy⪰x h(y) − 2t |x − y|    otherwise.
Remark 7.128. The definition above is a directed analogue of the so-called (backward)
                                                                 ⃗ t forms a semigroup.
Hamilton-Jacobi-Hopf-Lax-Oleinik semigroup. We do not claim that H

Proposition 7.129. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Borel set, and let µ, ν ∈ P (Ω). Let
h ∈ Cb (Ω). Then                    Z       Z
                      1  2
                        W (µ → ν) ≥   h dν − (H⃗ 1 h) dµ .
                                2   2
                                                     Ω          Ω


Proof. Let ϕ := 2h and ψ := 2H   ⃗ 1 h. Note that ϕ ∈ L1 (ν) since h is bounded. The fact that
h is bounded also implies that H  ⃗ 1 h is bounded, as can be verified from its definition, and
            1
hence ψ ∈ L (µ). Finally, for each x ⪯ y in Ω we have
                                                     
                                      ′     1     ′ 2
ϕ(y) − ψ(x) = 2h(y) − 2 sup h(y ) − |x − y |
                         y ′ ⪰x             2
                                                                             
                      2                   1      2                ′   1      ′ 2
             = |x − y| + 2 h(y) − |x − y| − sup h(y ) − |x − y |                    ≤ |x − y|2 .
                                          2              y ′ ⪰x       2
                          |                             {z                        }
                                                           ≤0

Thus Lemma 7.126 gives the conclusion.

                                                     179
       The following simple lemma plays a key role in the perturbation argument.
                                                             ⃗ 1 (th) = tH
Lemma 7.130. Let Ω ⊂ Rd . Let t > 0 and let h ∈ Cb (Ω). Then H           ⃗ t h.

Proof. Indeed, for each x ∈ Ω we have
                                                           
                              1       2             1
   ⃗ 1 (th))(x) = sup th(y) − |x − y| = t sup h(y) − |x − y| = t((H
                                                            2     ⃗ t h)(x)) .
  (H
                  y⪰x         2           y⪰x       2t


Notation. For Ω ⊂ Rd an open set and k ∈ N ∪ {+∞}, write C k (Ω) for the set of
restrictions to Ω of functions in C k (Rd ).
   For Ω ⊂ Rd , point x ∈ Ω, and r > 0, let BΩ◦ (x, r) := B ◦ (x, r) ∩ Ω, where B ◦ (x, r) :=
{y ∈ Rd : 0 < |x − y| < r} is the open ball of radius r centered at x with x itself excluded,
and let BΩ+ (x, r) := BΩ◦ (x, r) ∩ {y ∈ Rd : y ⪰ x}.
   The following result gives a directed analogue to some of the properties of the Hamilton-
Jacobi semigroup, as presented in [Vil09, Theorem 22.16].5

Proposition 7.131 (Some properties of the directed Hamilton-Jacobi operator). Let Ω ⊂
Rd be a bounded open set. Let h ∈ C 1 (Ω).

 (a) Let C := sup h − inf h, which is well-defined because h is continuous over the compact
     set Ω and thus bounded. Then for
                                  +
                                       √ each t > 0 and x ∈ Ω, the supremum in (7.34)
     may be taken over the set BΩ (x, 2Ct).

  (b) For each x ∈ Ω,
                                              ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)
                                              H                 |∇+ h(x)|2
                                    lim sup                   ≤            .
                                     t→0+             t             2

  (c) The quotient
                                           ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)
                                           H
                                                   t
         is nonnegative and bounded, uniformly in t > 0 and x ∈ Ω.
   5
    Note that our use of the notation ∇+ h = 0 ∨ ∇h, ∇− h = 0 ∧ ∇h is unrelated to the use of similar
notation in [Vil09], where it denotes a notion of norm of the gradient for functions in more general spaces
where the usual derivative may not be defined. In particular, their definition agrees with the norm of the
gradient for differentiable functions, while the point is the our definition (the directed gradient) does not.



                                                    180
                                                                               √
Proof. Let us first show (a). For any x ⪯ y in Ω and t > 0, if |x − y| ≥           2Ct then
                                  1                       1
                         h(y) −      |x − y|2 ≤ h(x) + C − 2Ct = h(x) ,
                                  2t                      2t
so y is irrelevant to the supremum in (7.34). Moreover, by the continuity of h, we may
drop x√itself from the supremum. Thus y is irrelevant to the supremum whenever y ̸∈
BΩ+ (x, 2Ct), as claimed.
   We now show (b) using (a). Let x ∈ Ω and t > 0. We have
                         supy∈B + (x,√2Ct) h(y) − 2t1 |x − y|2 − h(x)
                                            
       ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)
       H                          Ω
                       =
               t                                t                  
                                          h(y) − h(x)     1       2
                       =      sup√                    − 2 |x − y|
                         y∈BΩ+
                               (x, 2Ct)        t         2t
                                          (h(y) − h(x))+
                                                                       
                                                             1        2
                       ≤      sup√                        − 2 |x − y|
                         y∈BΩ+
                               (x, 2Ct)          t          2t
                                        (                                   2 )
                                          (h(y) − h(x))+ |x − y| 1 |x − y|
                                                                     
                       =      sup√                              −                .
                         y∈B + (x, 2Ct)       |x − y|       t      2      t
                                  Ω


Using the inequality αβ − 12 β 2 ≤ 21 α2 , we obtain
                    ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)                                     2
                                                         (h(y) − h(x))+
                                                       
                    H                 1
                                    ≤        sup                           .                  (7.35)
                            t         2 y∈B + (x,√2Ct)       |x − y|
                                              Ω


Using Lemma 7.132 and the fact that the term inside the supremum is nonnegative, we
conclude that
                                                                    !2
              ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)
              H                 1                    (h(y) − h(x))+      |∇+ h(x)|2
      lim sup                 ≤    lim+    sup√                        =            ,
        t→0+          t         2 t→0 y∈B + (x, 2Ct)     |x − y|             2
                                                  Ω


as desired. We may also obtain (c) from (7.35) as follows. First note that H   ⃗ t h(x) ≥ h(x)
for all t ≥ 0 and x ∈ Ω. It is standard that C 1 functions are Lipschitz on compact sets, so
h is Lipschitz on Ω. Let M > 0 be its Lipschitz constant. Then from (7.35) we conclude
that, for each x ∈ Ω and t > 0,
                      ⃗ t h(x) − h(x)                                2
                                                                          M2
                                                         
                     H                  1                  M |x − y|
                 0≤                   ≤        sup                      =    ,
                              t         2 y∈B + (x,√2Ct)    |x − y|       2
                                                  Ω


which establishes (c).

                                                  181
Lemma 7.132. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be an open set. Let h ∈ C 1 (Ω). Then for each x ∈ Ω,
                                                       (h(y) − h(x))+
                           |∇h(x)| = lim+     sup
                                       r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                              Ω
                                                           |x − y|

and
                                                       (h(y) − h(x))+
                          |∇+ h(x)| = lim+    sup                     .
                                       r→0 y∈B + (x,r)     |x − y|
                                               Ω



Proof. The first part of the statement is known, but let us give a proof for completeness.
Let x ∈ Ω. We have
                h(y) − h(x)                   h(y) − h(x) − ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x) + ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
lim+    sup                 = lim+ sup                                                      .
r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
       Ω
                  |x − y|     r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                     Ω
                                                                |x − y|

By definition of derivative, we have
                              h(y) − h(x) − ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
                          lim                              = 0,
                          y→x            |x − y|
and hence, by ℓ2 norm duality,
                h(y) − h(x)                   ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
 lim+   sup                 = lim+ sup                       = sup ∇h(x)⊤ v = |∇h(x)| .
r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
       Ω
                  |x − y|     r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                     Ω
                                                 |x − y|      v∈Rd :|v|=1

Similarly, we also have

                |h(y) − h(x)|                   h(y) − h(x) − ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x) + ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
lim+    sup                   = lim+ sup
r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
       Ω
                   |x − y|      r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                       Ω
                                                                  |x − y|
                                              h(y) − h(x) − ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x) + ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
                            ≤ lim+ sup
                              r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                     Ω
                                                                 |x − y|
                                                ∇h(x)⊤ (y − x)
                            = lim+     sup                     = sup ∇h(x)⊤ v = |∇h(x)| .
                                r→0 y∈B ◦ (x,r)
                                       Ω
                                                   |x − y|      v∈Rd :|v|=1

Since h(y) − h(x) ≤ (h(y) − h(x))+ ≤ |h(y) − h(x)|, the first part of the statement follows.
   We now establish the second part. Write the partition [d] = P ∪ N for

                                 P := {i ∈ [d] : ∂i h(x) > 0} ,
                                 N := {i ∈ [d] : ∂i h(x) ≤ 0} .

                                              182
Assume for a moment6 that P ̸= ∅. Define ΩP ⊂ RP by

                           ΩP := {yP : y ∈ Ω satisfies supp(y − x) ⊆ P } ,

and let hP ∈ C 1 (ΩP ) be given by hP (yP ) := h(yP , x−P ) for each yP ∈ ΩP , i.e. hP is the
restriction of h to the space obtained by fixing the N -coordinates of inputs to those of x.
Note that ∂i h(x) = ∂i hP (xP ) for each i ∈ P , and hence |∇+ h(x)| = |∇hP (xP )|. Applying
the first part of the statement to ΩP , hP and xP gives

                                                                  (hP (yP ) − hP (xP ))+
                  |∇+ h(x)| = |∇hP (xP )| = lim+         sup                               (7.36)
                                              r→0 yP ∈B ◦ (xP ,r)
                                                         P
                                                                        |xP − yP |
                                                         Ω


We claim that
                              (hP (yP ) − hP (xP ))+ ?                 (h(y) − h(x))+
          lim+      sup                              = lim+ sup                       ,    (7.37)
          r→0 yP ∈B ◦ (xP ,r)
                     P
                                    |xP − yP |         r→0 y∈B + (x,r)     |x − y|
                    Ω                                            Ω


with the LHS replaced by 0 if P = ∅, which will conclude the proof.
    For each set A ⊆ [d], let XA := {y ∈ Ω : yA ⪰ xA } and YA := {y ∈ Ω : yA ⪯ xA }.
Note that for all r > 0, BΩ+ (x, r) = BΩ◦ (x, r) ∩ XP ∩ XN and moreover, defining BΩ′ (x, r) :=
BΩ◦ (x, r) ∩ XN ∩ YN , when P ̸= ∅ we have

                              (hP (yP ) − hP (xP ))+                   (h(y) − h(x))+
           lim+      sup                             = lim+ sup                            (7.38)
          r→0 yP ∈B ◦ (xP ,r)
                     P
                                    |xP − yP |         r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)
                                                              Ω
                                                                           |x − y|
                     Ω


by definition of the objects involved.
    Note that, when P ̸= ∅, mini∈P ∂i h(x) > 0 by the definition of P . Since h is continuously
differentiable, it follows that there exists r0 > 0 such that, for all y ∈ BΩ◦ (x, r0 ) and every
i ∈ P , we have ∂i h(y) > 0. Since Ω is open, we can also let r0 be small enough so that
B(x, r0 ) ⊂ Ω.
    Now, suppose y ∈ BΩ◦ (x, r0 ) and i ∈ P are such that yi < xi . Then define z ∈ Rd by
zi := yi + 2(xi − yi ) > xi , and zj := yj for j ∈ [d] \ {i}. Then |x − z| = |x − y|, and in
particular z ∈ B ◦ (x, r0 ) ⊂ Ω. Also, since i ∈ P and z agrees with y on all j ̸= i, we have
that y ∈ XN (resp. YN ) if and only if z ∈ XN (resp. YN ). Moreover, since ∂i h(w) > 0 for
all w in the line segment connecting y and z (which is contained in BΩ◦ (x, r0 ) ∪ {x}), the
fundamental theorem of calculus implies that h(z) > h(y).
  6
      We track the edge case P = ∅ as we go along the proof; the main idea is the same.


                                                   183
    Repeating this argument inductively for each index i ∈ P for which yi < xi , we conclude
that for all r ∈ (0, r0 ) and y ∈ BΩ′ (x, r), there exists z ∈ BΩ′ (x, r) ∩ XP such that |x − z| =
|x − y| and h(z) > h(y). It follows that, when P ̸= ∅,

                             (h(y) − h(x))+                      (h(y) − h(x))+
              lim+   sup                    = lim+     sup                      .          (7.39)
             r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)
                    Ω
                                 |x − y|      r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)∩XP
                                                     Ω
                                                                     |x − y|

Combining (7.37), (7.38) and (7.39), we see that it remains to show that

                                (h(y) − h(x))+ ?                 (h(y) − h(x))+
              lim+     sup                     = lim+ sup                       ,          (7.40)
             r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)∩XP
                    Ω
                                    |x − y|      r→0 y∈B + (x,r)     |x − y|
                                                            Ω


again with the LHS replaced by 0 if P = ∅. Note that for each r > 0 it holds by definition
that BΩ′ (x, r) ∩ XP ⊆ BΩ+ (x, r), namely BΩ′ (x, r) ∩ XP = BΩ+ (x, r) ∩ YN . Thus we already
have
                                 (h(y) − h(x))+                    (h(y) − h(x))+
               lim+    sup                      ≤ lim+ sup                        ,
              r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)∩XP
                     Ω
                                     |x − y|       r→0 y∈B + (x,r)     |x − y|
                                                            Ω

which also holds when the LHS is replaced by 0, and it remains to prove the reverse
inequality. Let ε > 0. As before, recalling that ∂i h(x) ≤ 0 for every i ∈ N and using the
fact that h is continuously differentiable, we can let r0 > 0 be small enough so that for all
y ∈ B ◦ (x, r0 ) and every i ∈ N , we have ∂i h(y) ≤ ε. Again since Ω is open, we may also let
r0 be small enough so that B(x, r0 ) ⊂ Ω.
    Now, let r ∈ (0, r0 ) and y ∈ BΩ+ (x, r). Define y P ∈ Rd as follows: yiP := yi for
each i ∈ P , and yjP := xj for each j ∈ N . Then supp(y P − x) ⊆ P by construction,
so y P ∈ XN ∩ YN . We also have y P ⪰ x and |x − y P | ≤ |x − y|, and hence y P ∈
(B + (x, r) ∩ YN ) ∪ {x} = (BΩ′ (x, r) ∩ XP ) ∪ {x}.
    By a standard multivariate version of the mean value theorem, there exists a point z
in the line segment connecting y P and y such that

                               h(y) − h(y P ) = ∇h(z)⊤ (y − y P ) .

By construction, we have supp(y − y P ) ⊆ N . Moreover, since y ∈ BΩ+ (x, r) and hence
y ⪰ x, while yjP = xj for each j ∈ N , we have that y − y P ⪰ ⃗0. Finally, it is clear from the




                                               184
construction of y P that |y − y P | ≤ |x − y|. We conclude that

   h(y) − h(y P ) = ∇h(z)⊤ (y − y P )
                    ≤ ∇+ h(z)⊤ (y − y P )                                           (Since y − y P ⪰ ⃗0)
                      X
                    =    (∂i+ h(z))(yi − yiP )                               (Since supp(y − y P ) ⊆ N )
                        i∈N
                                             !1/2
                         X
                    ≤          (∂i+ h(z))2           |y − y P |           (Cauchy-Schwarz inequality)
                         i∈N
                                    !1/2
                         X
                    ≤          ε2          |x − y|                (Choice of r0 and last observation)
                         i∈N
                       √
                    ≤ ε d|x − y| .

Therefore, when P ̸= ∅ we have
                                                                                       √        +
                        (h(y) − h(x))       +                         h(y P ) − h(x) + ε d|x − y|
        lim+   sup                    ≤ lim+ sup
        r→0 y∈B + (x,r)     |x − y|     r→0 y∈B + (x,r)                          |x − y|
                Ω                                            Ω
                                                   √                           (h(y) − h(x))+
                                                ≤ ε d + lim+           sup                    ,
                                                            r→0 y∈B ′ (x,r)∩XP
                                                                   Ω
                                                                                   |x − y|

the second inequality since |x − y P | ≤ |x − y| and since we showed that, for all r < r0 and
y ∈ BΩ+ (x, r), we have y P ∈ (BΩ′ (x, r) ∩ XP ) ∪ {x}, and moreover (h(y P ) − h(x))+ = 0
when y P = x. Similarly,
                   √       when P = ∅ we have y P = x always, so in this case we obtain
the upper bound ε d, i.e. the last limit superior may indeed be replaced by 0. Since this
inequality holds for every ε > 0, (7.40) follows, and this concludes the proof.


7.4.2     Perturbation argument
We can now obtain the main result, first for C 1 ([0, 1]d ) functions and then for all of
H 1 ((0, 1)d ) by an approximation argument. The key idea of the perturbation argument is
to use the same (mean zero) function h in two different roles: 1) to construct absolutely
continuous probability measures from h and its coordinate-wise monotone equilibrium,
namely dµ = (1 + th) dx and dµ∗ = (1 + th∗ ) dx, for small t > 0; and 2) in the “test
function” −th for weak duality on W22 (µ → µ∗ ) via the directed Hamilton-Jacobi operator.


                                                         185
Theorem 7.133. There exists a universal constant C > 0 such that the following holds.
Define Ω := (0, 1)d , and let h ∈ C 1 (Ω). Then
                                       Z          Z
                                              ∗ 2
                          mono   2
                      dist2 (h) ≤ (h − h ) dx ≤ C    |∇− h|2 dx ,
                                          Ω                     Ω

where h∗ is the coordinate-wise monotone equilibrium of h.

Proof. Note that h∗ is well-defined because C 1 functions are Lipschitz on compact sets.
We first show that we may assume without loss of generality that h is bounded and has
mean zero. For any α > 0 and β ∈ R, we have that αg + β is monotone if and only if g is
monotone, so it follows that

                                distmono
                                    2    (αh + β)2 = α2 distmono
                                                            2    (h)2 .

Moreover, Observation 7.124 gives that (αh + β)∗ = αh∗ + β, and clearly |∇ −         2
                                                                         R (αh + β)| =
  2  − 2
α |∇ h| pointwise. Thus as long as we show the result for h satisfying Ω h dx = 0 and
(say) −0.1 ≤ h ≤ 0.1, then we may write any other function in C 1 (Ω) as αh
                                                                         R + β for some
h satisfying these conditions, and conclude the result. Hence assume that Ω h dx = 0 and
that −0.1 ≤ h ≤ 0.1 pointwise.
   Let t ∈ (0, 1), and define f ∈ C 1 (Ω) byR f := 1 + th. Note that f is Lipschitz and
bounded between 0.9 and 1.1, and it satisfies Ω f dx = 1. Define the absolutely continuous
probability measures dµ := f dx and dµ∗ := f ∗ dx. Theorem 7.4 then implies that, for
some universal constant C > 0,
                        Z                      Z                  Z
          2       ∗           − 2            2     − 2          2              2
      W2 (µ → µ ) ≤ C       ∇ f dx = Ct          ∇ h dx = Ct         ∇+ (−h) dx ,
                            Ω                        Ω                        Ω

the first equality by the definition of f and the fact that t > 0. On the other hand, noting
that −th ∈ C 1 (Ω) and hence −th ∈ Cb (Ω) as well, we have
                     Z               Z
  1    2        ∗
    W2 (µ → µ ) ≥ (−th) dµ − (H  ∗       ⃗ 1 (−th)) dµ                  (Proposition 7.129)
  2
                      ΩZ              Ω       Z
                  = −t h(1 + th)∗ dx − (H        ⃗ 1 (−th))(1 + th) dx (Definition of µ, µ∗ ).
                        Ω                       Ω

Recalling that Ω h dx = 0 and that (1 + th)∗ = 1 + th∗ by Observation 7.124, the first
               R

term in the last line above is
                    Z                 Z                     Z
                               ∗                 ∗
                −t h(1 + th) dx = −t h(1 + th ) dx = −t   2
                                                              hh∗ dx .
                    Ω                           Ω                         Ω


                                                 186
Recalling that 1 + th is bounded between 0.9 and 1.1, the second term is
      Z
   − (H   ⃗ 1 (−th))(1 + th) dx
        Ω      Z
         = − (tH     ⃗ t (−h))(1 + th) dx                               (Lemma 7.130)
                 Ω
                                             !
                 Z
                        H⃗ t (−h) − (−h) − h
         = −t2                                 (1 + th) dx
                   Ω               t
                                         !
                 Z       ⃗ t (−h) − (−h)
                         H
                                                           Z
               2
         = −t                              (1 + th) dx + t h(1 + th) dx
                   Ω             t         | {z }           Ω
                     |          {z       } ≤2
                  ≥0 by Proposition 7.131(c)
                Z ⃗
                   Ht (−h) − (−h)
                                        Z          Z
              2                                  2
        ≥ −2t                     dx + t h dx +t      h2 dx
                 Ω        t
                                        | Ω {z }    Ω
                                                    =0
               Z ⃗
                  Ht (−h) − (−h)
                                         Z
             2                         2
        = −2t                    dx + t     h2 dx .
                Ω        t                Ω

Putting all of the above together, we conclude that
                                                          Z ⃗
                                                             Ht (−h) − (−h)
    Z                                        Z                                     Z
C 2      +       2          2       ∗      2      ∗     2                        2
2
  t                     1
       ∇ (−h) dx ≥ 2 W2 (µ → µ ) ≥ −t           hh dx−2t                    dx+t      h2 dx
     Ω                                        Ω            Ω        t               Ω

and hence, since t > 0,
                                                           Z ⃗
                                                              Ht (−h) − (−h)
         Z           Z        Z
              2         ∗   C                  +             2
             h dx − hh dx ≤ 2                ∇ (−h) dx + 2                   dx .
           Ω            Ω                  Ω                Ω        t
Since this holds for all sufficiently small t > 0, we may pass the inequality to the limit
                              ⃗
superior as t → 0+ . Since Ht (−h)−(−h)
                                   t
                                         is uniformly bounded by Proposition 7.131(c), we
may apply the reverse Fatou lemma and Proposition 7.131(b) to obtain
                                                         Z ⃗
                                                            Ht (−h) − (−h)
Z          Z               Z
    2            ∗       C        +     2
   h dx − hh dx ≤ 2             ∇ (−h) dx + 2 lim sup                        dx
 Ω          Ω               Ω                       t→0+  Ω         t
                           Z
                                        2
                                                  Z          ⃗ t (−h))(x) − (−h)(x)
                                                            (H
                         C        +
                     ≤ 2        ∇ (−h) dx + 2 lim sup                               dx
                            Ω                      Ω t→0+               t
                           Z                    Z                                Z
                                        2                                              2
                         C        +                    +         2           C
                                                                                   ∇− h dx .
                                                                               
                     ≤ 2        ∇ (−h) dx + |∇ (−h)(x)| dx = 1 + 2
                              Ω                          Ω                     Ω


                                                   187
By Observation 7.125, we have that Ω (h∗ )2 dx ≤ Ω h2 dx and hence, since h∗ is monotone,
                                   R              R
                          Z                    Z            Z          Z
                                  ∗ 2
        1
        2
              mono 2    1
          dist2 (h) ≤ 2 (h − h ) dx = 2      1
                                                  h dx + 2 (h ) dx − hh∗ dx
                                                   2      1     ∗ 2

                       Z Ω        Z             Ω         Z Ω           Ω
                            2           ∗             C        − 2
                                                        
                     ≤     h dx − hh dx ≤ 1 + 2               ∇ h dx .
                             Ω            Ω                                Ω

   The following denseness result is an immediate application of [Maz11, Theorem 1, p. 10].

Fact 7.134. Define Ω := (0, 1)d . The space C ∞ (Ω) is dense in H 1 (Ω).

   Thus we may promote the main result to all of H 1 (Ω) by an approximation argument,
which yields the main result.

Theorem 7.1 (Directed Poincaré inequality). There exists a universal constant C > 0
such that, for all f ∈ H 1 ((0, 1)d ),
                                 distmono (f )2 ≤ C E ∥∇− f ∥22 .
                                                              
                                       2                                        (7.1)

Proof. By Fact 7.134, we may find a sequence (fn )n∈N ⊂ C ∞ (Ω) such that fn → f in
H 1 (Ω). Since each fn belongs in particular to C 1 (Ω), Theorem 7.133 gives that, for each
n ∈ N,                                           Z
                                   ∗ 2
                            ∥fn − fn ∥L2 (Ω) ≤ C     |∇− fn |2 dx .
                                                          Ω
Let ε > 0. Since fn → f in H (Ω) implies in particular that fn → f in L2 (Ω), we have
                                    1

that, for all sufficiently large n, ∥f − fn ∥L2 (Ω) ≤ ε and hence, by the triangle inequality,
                                                                          s Z
 distmono
     2    (f ) ≤ ∥f − fn∗ ∥L2 (Ω) ≤ ∥f − fn ∥L2 (Ω) + ∥fn − fn∗ ∥L2 (Ω) ≤ ε +               C        |∇− fn |2 dx .
                                                                                                 Ω
                                                                                                             (7.41)
                             1
Now, since the norm in H (Ω) is given by
                                                          d Z
                                                          X
                             ∥u∥2H 1 (Ω) = ∥u∥2L2 (Ω) +               |∂i u|2 dx ,
                                                          i=1     Ω

the fact that fn → f in H 1 (Ω) implies that ∥f − fn ∥H 1 (Ω) → 0 and hence
                       d Z
                       X                                      d Z
                                                              X
                                              2
             0 = lim             |∂i (f − fn )| dx = lim                   |(∂i f ) − (∂i fn )|2 dx .
                 n→∞         Ω                       n→∞               Ω
                       i=1                                      i=1


                                                  188
Since 0 ≤ |(a ∧ 0) − (b ∧ 0)| ≤ |a − b| for any a, b ∈ R, we conclude that
                                        d Z
                                        X
                               lim                  |(∂i− f ) − (∂i− fn )|2 dx = 0 .                                        (7.42)
                               n→∞              Ω
                                        i=1

Observing that ∂i− f, ∂i− fn ∈ L2 (Ω) for each i ∈ [d] and n ∈ N (because ∂i f, ∂i fn ∈ L2 (Ω)
by the definition of H 1 (Ω), and if u ∈ L2 (Ω) then u ∧ 0 ∈ L2 (Ω)), (7.42) implies that
∂i− fn → ∂i− f in L2 (Ω) for each i ∈ [d], and hence
     Z                   d Z
                         X                                    d Z
                                                              X                                     Z
            −   2
          |∇ f | dx =              |∂i− f |2 dx =       lim                 |∂i− fn |2 dx =   lim           |∇− fn |2 dx .
      Ω                        Ω                       n→∞              Ω                     n→∞       Ω
                         i=1                                  i=1

Thus, for all sufficiently large n we have
                              Z                  Z
                                 |∇ fn | dx ≤ ε + |∇− f |2 dx .
                                    −   2
                                    Ω                                   Ω

Combining with (7.41) we obtain, for all sufficiently large n,
                            s Z           !2         Z
      distmono
          2    (f )2 ≤    ε+ C    −    2       2
                                |∇ fn | dx ≤ 2ε + 2C   |∇− fn |2 dx
                                            Ω                                           Ω
                                               Z                                                  Z
                                                        −
                          2
                    ≤ 2ε + 2C ε +                    |∇ f | dx2                 2
                                                                            = 2ε + 2Cε + 2C                 |∇− f |2 dx .
                                                Ω                                                   Ω

Since this holds for all ε > 0, we conclude that
                                                                  Z
                                    distmono
                                        2    (f )2 ≤ 2C                 |∇− f |2 dx .
                                                                    Ω




                                                            189
Chapter 8

Conclusion

In this thesis, we initiated the study of property testing in the analytic setting, where the
input is a continuous real-valued function and the goal is to test with respect to the Lp
distance. This research direction builds upon the current state of the art in property testing
in two ways: it extends the applicability of that paradigm to settings that are inherently
continuous in nature, and it reveals new conceptual and technical facets of long-studied
problems, hence contributing to a more comprehensive understanding of the mathematical
underpinnings of approximate decision making.
    We took the first steps toward a theory of analytic property testing by focusing on
the fundamental problem of monotonicity testing, and in particular its connection to the
phenomenon of directed isoperimetry. We gave a systematic account of directed isoperime-
try in continuous and discrete domains as captured by (Lp , ℓq )-Poincaré inequalities, and
showed that these inequalities imply efficient monotonicity testers for real-valued func-
tions f : [0, 1]d → R defined on the solid unit cube. While our initial study in Chapter 4,
where we obtained an O(d) query tester, leveraged the intuition from the classic edge tester
[GGLRS00] by defining and analyzing the appropriate continuous analogues
                                                                      √       of the discrete
arguments (namely via monotone rearrangements), our improved O( d) query tester relies
                                                                   e
on a new perspective on directed isoperimetry: its relationship with the convergence prop-
erties of the directed heat equation. We showed that the connection between isoperimetry
and the heat equation, which dates back to the work of Poincaré in mathematical physics
[Poi90], enjoys a natural directed analogue whose convergence properties we studied using
the theories of nonlinear partial differential equations and optimal transport.
   Naturally, there is no lack of open questions and exciting avenues for future research,
as we now outline. We divide our discussion in two parts: questions about monotonicity

                                             190
testing, and proposed directions for analytic property testing.


8.1      Monotonicity testing
Within monotonicity testing, the first open question that emerges from this thesis is that
of lower bounds for Lp monotonicity testing of Lipschitz functions. This thesis gave two
types of lower bounds:

  1. Strong lower bounds for specific classes of testers. In Chapters 4 and 5, we showed
     that the query complexity upper bounds given in Theorems 1.2 and 1.5 are essen-
     tially optimal for the type of tester given by those theorems, √ i.e. partial derivative
     testers and directional derivative testers. In particular, the O( d) bound from The-
                                                                    e
     orem 1.5 cannot be improved by any pair tester, i.e. an algorithm that repeatedly
     samples points x ⪯ y and rejects if f (x) > f (y), or any tester using the directional
     derivative analogue of such a pair test. In the discrete regimes of the Boolean cube
     and hypergrid, the best known monotonicity testers are indeed pair testers [KMS18;
     BCS23a].

  2. Lower bounds for constant dimensiond. In Chapter
                                                     4, we gave lower bounds showing
                                                  d
     that, for each constant d, at least Ω (M/ε) d+1 queries are required to test mono-
      tonicity of M -Lipschitz functions on [0, 1]d , and we gave similar results for hypergrid
      domains. These bounds show that the dependence of our upper bounds on M/ε is
                                                         d
      close to correct. Interestingly, the exponent d+1    in the lower bound cannot be im-
      proved in general, because in Chapter 4 we also gave a nearly-matching upper bound
      for the special case of the line (Theorem 4.4).

   The immediate open problem, then, is to give general lower bounds
                                                               √     in this model
with good dependence on the dimension d. We believe that the d dependence from
Theorem 1.5 is optimal.

Problem 8.1. Give a dΩ(1) lower bound for Lp monotonicity testing of 1-Lipschitz func-
tions f : [0, 1]d → R. As an easier problem, can we show such a bound for nonadaptive
testers?

    We may also ask about tolerant testing [PRR06]. In tolerant testing, we require the
tester to accept not only when the input f is monotone, but also when it is close to a

                                             191
monotone function. A closely related formulation refers to distance approximation: given
an input function f , and approximation parameters α > 0 (corresponding to additive
error) and ν > 1 (corresponding to multiplicative error), a (ν, α)-approximation algorithm
for monotonicity (with respect to some fixed distance metric dist) is an algorithm whose
output εb satisfies, with probability at least 2/3,
                            distmono (f ) − α ≤ εb ≤ ν · distmono (f ) .
Early works on monotonicity testing gave or implied (O(d), α)-approximation algorithms
with poly(d, 1/α) query complexity for Boolean functions on hypergrid domains, as well
as similar bounds with a dependence on log n for real-valued functions on the hypergrid
domains [DGLRRS99; GGLRS00;√FR10]. In more recent progress, [PRW22] extended the
work of [KMS18] to obtain an (O(e d), α)-approximation algorithm with poly(d, 1/α) query
                                           √
complexity, and they showed that the O(  e d) multiplicative factor is essentially optimal.
In the L1 setting, [BRY14a] gave distance approximation algorithms with a purely additive
error guarantee for the cases of the discrete line and the 2-dimensional grid.
    For the special case of Boolean functions f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1}, a simple variant of
the edge tester of [GGLRS00] suffices to obtain an (O(d), α)-approximation: instead of
rejecting whenever a violating edge is observed, compute εb by estimating the fraction
of violating edges in the hypercube. This works thanks to a reverse directed Poincaré
inequality which, together with Theorem 1.1, implies that the (relative Hamming) distance
distmono
    H    (f ) of f to monotonicity and its number V (f ) of violating edges are related by
the inequalities distmono
                      H   (f ) · 2d ≤ V (f ) ≤ distmono
                                                   H    (f ) · d · 2d . Hence a constant-factor
approximation to V (f ) yields an O(d)-approximation to distmono   H   (f ).
    Indeed, since we also showed in Section 6.3 reverse (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequalities for the
hypergrid [n]d up to a factor of d (which is the maximum degree of the directed hypergrid
graph), while our (L1 , ℓ1 )-Poincaré inequality from Theorem 4.2 takes a factor of n, a similar
argument gives an (O(nd), α)-approximation algorithm for the L1 distance to monotonicity
of (ℓ1 , M )-Lipschitz functions f : [n]d → R using poly(n, d, M, 1/α) queries. However, we
do not know how to implement this idea in the continuous case. Hence, we leave the
following open question:

Question 8.2. Is there a poly(d, 1/α)-query (O(d), α)-approximation algorithm for the Lp
distance to monotonicity of 1-Lipschitz functions f : [0, 1]d → R? How about (o(d), α)-
approximation?

   Finally, we may ask about the power of adaptivity for testing monotonicity in the
analytic setting. Indeed, whether adaptivity helps with testing monotonicity of Boolean

                                               192
functions is a notable open question in monotonicity testing – the best known
                                                                           √ 2 tester of
[KMS18] is nonadaptive, and indeed achieves optimal query complexity O( d/ε ) for non-
                                                                         e
                                                                     e 1/3 ) [CWX17]. On
adaptive testers, while the best lower bound for adaptive testers is Ω(d
the other hand, it is known that adaptivity does not help with testing monotonicity of
functions f : [n]d → R with respect to the relative Hamming distance [CS14]. In the
analytic setting, we ask the following question, whose resolution would most likely also
require progress on Problem 8.1.

Question 8.3. Does adaptivity help with Lp monotonicity testing of M -Lipschitz functions
f : [0, 1]d → R?


8.2      Further directions
Expanding our scope from monotonicity testing to the broader landscape of property test-
ing in the analytic setting, there are many interesting directions for future exploration.
Many of the classic properties which have been widely studied by the property testing
community over the past decades also have natural formulations in the analytic setting,
and here we list a few of them. Specifically, we ask about query-efficient property testers
for the following properties in the analytic setting. We believe that some of these properties
may be especially interesting to study in the tolerant regime.


Convexity. Two natural settings for testing convexity of functions are the unit cube
setting f : [0, 1]d → R under the uniform measure, and the setting of functions f : Rd →
R under the Gaussian measure—in particular, the rotation-invariance of the Gaussian
measure seems to be a natural fit for the rotation-invariance of the convexity property.
We remark that, in the discrete setting of functions f : [n]d → R, there is an exponential
Ω((n/d)d/2 ) nonadaptive lower bound for testing convexity with respect to the relative
Hamming distance [BBB20].


Unateness. A function f : [n]d → R is unate if it is either monotone or anti-monotone
along each direction i ∈ [d]. In the case of Boolean or real-valued functions over the
hypergrid [n]d or Boolean cube {0, 1}d , it is known that the query complexity of unateness
testing (with respect to the relative Hamming distance) is polynomial in d, 1/ε, and log n
[CWX17; CW19; BCPRS20].



                                             193
Juntas. A function f : {0, 1}d → {0, 1} on n variables is a k-junta if it depends on at
most k input variables. The query complexity of k-junta testing is Θ(k log k) for constant
proximity parameter ε [Bla09; Sag18]. In another relevant line of work, [DMN21] defined
a rotation-invariant notion of k-juntas, namely linear k-juntas, for the case of Boolean
functions f : Rd → {±1} over Euclidean space endowed with the Gaussian measure. They
showed that the class of linear k-juntas is not testable without further assumptions, but
it becomes testable if one assumes that f satisfies a “bounded surface area” assumption.
Here, we ask about testing k-juntas (or linear k-juntas) of real-valued f : [0, 1]d → R (or
f : Rd → R under the Gaussian measure), under a Lipschitz regularity assumption.


The dynamical approach. Finally, on a more conceptual note, we may ask about
further applications of the dynamical approach embodied by our proof of Theorem 1.4
in Chapter 7. In property testing, the idea of comparing the input object f to some
“ideal” object f ∗ that satisfies the property of interest is very natural, and we showed that
techniques from partial differential equations and optimal transport can be useful tools for
reasoning about this comparison smoothly in time. Therefore, it is plausible that these tools
may have something to say about other property testing problems of continuous nature.
In particular, we could attempt to apply this perspective for testing geometric properties
of sets in Rd , e.g. convexity. Testing convexity of sets S ⊂ Rd with respect to the Gaussian
measure is a notoriously√challenging problem: the best known query complexity upper
bound complexity is 2O( d)·poly(1/ε) [CFSS17], whereas the best known lower bounds are
                          e

poly(d) bounds for either nonadaptive testers, or testers with one-sided error [CDNSW25].
Is there a natural dynamical process by which an initial set S ⊂ Rd converges over time to
a convex set, and could the properties of such a process inspire new testers?




                                             194
References

[AB06]      Charalambos D Aliprantis and Kim C Border. Infinite Dimensional
            Analysis: A Hitchhiker’s Guide. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
[ABFKY23]   Vipul Arora, Arnab Bhattacharyya, Noah Fleming, Esty Kelman, and
            Yuichi Yoshida. “Low Degree Testing over the Reals”. In: Proceedings of
            the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 2023.
[AC84]      Jean-Pierre Aubin and Arrigo Cellina. Differential Inclusions: Set-
            Valued Maps and Viability Theory. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 1984.
[AD04]      Gabriel Acosta and Ricardo Durán. “An optimal Poincaré inequality in
            L1 for convex domains”. In: Proceedings of the American Mathematical
            Society 132.1 (2004), pp. 195–202.
[AFL24]     Tomer Adar, Eldar Fischer, and Amit Levi. “Support Testing in the Huge
            Object Model”. In: Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial
            Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM). 2024.
[AGPRY19]   Maryam Aliakbarpour, Themis Gouleakis, John Peebles, Ronitt Rubin-
            feld, and Anak Yodpinyanee. “Towards Testing Monotonicity of Dis-
            tributions Over General Posets”. In: Proceedings of the Conference on
            Learning Theory (COLT). 2019.
[AGS05]     Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. Gradient Flows
            in Metric Spaces and in the Space of Probability Measures. Birkhäuser
            Basel, 2005.
[AKM25]     Vipul Arora, Esty Kelman, and Uri Meir. “On Optimal Testing of Lin-
            earity”. In: Proceedings of the SIAM Symposium on Simplicity in Algo-
            rithms (SOSA). 2025.
[Bar76]     Viorel Barbu. Nonlinear semigroups and differential equations in Banach
            spaces. Springer Dordrecht, 1976.


                                    195
[BB16]      Aleksandrs Belovs and Eric Blais. “A polynomial lower bound for test-
            ing monotonicity”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on
            Theory of Computing (STOC). 2016.
[BB20]      Eric Blais and Abhinav Bommireddi. “On Testing and Robust
            Characterizations of Convexity”. In: Approximation, Randomization,
            and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
            PROX/RANDOM). 2020.
[BBB20]     Aleksandrs Belovs, Eric Blais, and Abhinav Bommireddi. “Testing con-
            vexity of functions over finite domains”. In: Proceedings of the ACM-
            SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 2020.
[BBBY12]    Maria-Florina Balcan, Eric Blais, Avrim Blum, and Liu Yang. “Active
            Property Testing”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Founda-
            tions of Computer Science (FOCS). 2012.
[BBH24]     Hadley Black, Eric Blais, and Nathaniel Harms. “Testing and Learning
            Convex Sets in the Ternary Hypercube”. In: Proceedings of the Innova-
            tions in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS). 2024.
[BBM12]     Eric Blais, Joshua Brody, and Kevin Matulef. “Property testing lower
            bounds via communication complexity”. In: computational complexity
            21 (2012), pp. 311–358.
[BCGM12]    Jop Briët, Sourav Chakraborty, David Garcı́a-Soriano, and Arie Mat-
            sliah. “Monotonicity testing and shortest-path routing on the cube”. In:
            Combinatorica 32.1 (2012), pp. 35–53.
[BCPRS20]   Roksana Baleshzar, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Ramesh Krishnan S.
            Pallavoor, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and C. Seshadhri. “Optimal Unate-
            ness Testers for Real-Valued Functions: Adaptivity Helps”. In: Theory
            Comput. 16 (2020), pp. 1–36.
[BCS18]     Hadley Black, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and C. Seshadhri. “A
            o(d) · poly log n monotonicity tester for Boolean functions over the hy-
            pergrid [n]d ”. In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
            Algorithms (SODA). 2018.
[BCS20]     Hadley Black, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and C. Seshadhri. “Domain re-
            duction for monotonicity testing: A o(d) tester for Boolean functions in
            d-dimensions”. In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Dis-
            crete Algorithms (SODA). 2020.


                                     196
[BCS23a]     Hadley Black, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and C. Seshadhri. “A d1/2+o(1)
             monotonicity tester for Boolean functions on d-dimensional hypergrids”.
             In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
             Science (FOCS). 2023.
[BCS23b]     Hadley Black, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, and C. Seshadhri. “Directed
             isoperimetric
                 √         theorems for Boolean functions on the hypergrid and an
             O(n
              e    d) monotonicity tester”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT
             Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2023.
[Beb03]      Mario Bebendorf. “A note on the Poincaré inequality for convex do-
             mains”. In: Zeitschrift für Analysis und ihre Anwendungen 22.4 (2003),
             pp. 751–756.
[Bel18]      Aleksandrs Belovs. “Adaptive Lower Bound for Testing Monotonicity on
             the Line”. In: Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Opti-
             mization. Algorithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM). 2018.
[BFFKRW01]   Tugkan Batu, Lance Fortnow, Eldar Fischer, Ravi Kumar, Ronitt Rubin-
             feld, and Patrick White. “Testing Random Variables for Independence
             and Identity”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Foundations
             of Computer Science (FOCS). 2001.
[BFH21]      Eric Blais, Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr, and Nathaniel Harms. “VC dimen-
             sion and distribution-free sample-based testing”. In: Proceedings of the
             ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2021.
[BFLS91]     László Babai, Lance Fortnow, Leonid A. Levin, and Mario Szegedy.
             “Checking Computations in Polylogarithmic Time”. In: Proceedings of
             the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 1991.
[BGL14]      Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, and Michel Ledoux. Analysis and Geom-
             etry of Markov Diffusion Operators. Springer Cham, 2014.
[BH97]       S G Bobkov and C Houdré. “Isoperimetric constants for product prob-
             ability measures”. In: The Annals of Probability 25.1 (1997), pp. 184–
             205.
[BJG98]      AW Bowman, MC Jones, and Irene Gijbels. “Testing monotonicity of
             regression”. In: Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 7.4
             (1998), pp. 489–500.




                                      197
[BKKM23]   Mark Braverman, Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, and Dor Minzer. “Im-
           proved Monotonicity Testers via Hypercube Embeddings”. In: Proceed-
           ings of the Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
           (ITCS). 2023.
[BKR24]    Hadley Black, Iden Kalemaj, and Sofya Raskhodnikova. “Isoperimetric
           inequalities for real-valued functions with applications to monotonicity
           testing”. In: Random Structures & Algorithms (2024).
[BL96]     Dominique Bakry and Michel Ledoux. “Lévy–Gromov’s isoperimetric in-
           equality for an infinite dimensional diffusion generator”. In: Inventiones
           mathematicae 123.2 (1996), pp. 259–281.
[Bla09]    Eric Blais. “Testing juntas nearly optimally”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
           SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2009.
[Bla23]    Hadley Black. “Testing and Learning in High-Dimensions: Monotonicity
           Testing, Directed Isoperimetry, and Convex Sets”. PhD thesis. Univer-
           sity of California, Los Angeles, 2023.
[Bla24]    Hadley Black. “Nearly Optimal Bounds for Sample-Based Testing and
           Learning of k-Monotone Functions”. In: Approximation, Randomiza-
           tion, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
           PROX/RANDOM). 2024.
[BLR90]    Manuel Blum, Michael Luby, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. “Self-
           Testing/Correcting with Applications to Numerical Problems”. In:
           Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
           (STOC). 1990, pp. 73–83.
[BMRR24]   Piotr Berman, Meiram Murzabulatov, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and
           Dragos-Florian Ristache. “Testing Connectedness of Images”. In: Algo-
           rithmica 86.11 (2024), pp. 3496–3517.
[Bob97]    Sergey G Bobkov. “An isoperimetric inequality on the discrete cube, and
           an elementary proof of the isoperimetric inequality in Gauss space”. In:
           The Annals of Probability 25.1 (1997), pp. 206–214.
[Bor75]    Christer Borell. “The Brunn-Minkowski inequality in Gauss space”. In:
           Inventiones mathematicae 30.2 (1975), pp. 207–216.
[Bre11]    Haı̈m Brezis. Functional Analysis, Sobolev Spaces and Partial Differen-
           tial Equations. Springer New York, 2011.



                                    198
[Bre73]     Haı̈m Brezis. Opérateurs maximaux monotones et semi-groupes de con-
            tractions dans les espaces de Hilbert. Elsevier, 1973.
[BRY14a]    Piotr Berman, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Grigory Yaroslavtsev. “Lp -
            Testing”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
            of Computing (STOC). 2014.
[BRY14b]    Eric Blais, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Grigory Yaroslavtsev. “Lower
            bounds for testing properties of functions over hypergrid domains”.
            In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computational Complexity
            (CCC). 2014.
[BS24]      Eric Blais and Cameron Seth. “New Graph and Hypergraph Container
            Lemmas with Applications in Property Testing”. In: Proceedings of the
            ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2024.
[BS88]      Colin Bennett and Robert C Sharpley. Interpolation of operators. Aca-
            demic Press, 1988.
[BV04]      Stephen P Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cam-
            bridge University Press, 2004.
[BY22]      Arnab Bhattacharyya and Yuichi Yoshida. Property Testing - Problems
            and Techniques. Springer, 2022.
[Can22]     Clément L. Canonne. “Topics and Techniques in Distribution Testing:
            A Biased but Representative Sample”. In: Found. Trends Commun. Inf.
            Theory 19.6 (2022), pp. 1032–1198.
[CCRSW25]   Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Xi Chen, Simeon Ristic, C. Seshadhri, and Erik
            Waingarten. “Monotonicity Testing of High-Dimensional Distributions
            with Subcube Conditioning”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Sym-
            posium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2025.
[CDNSW25]   Xi Chen, Anindya De, Shivam Nadimpalli, Rocco A. Servedio, and Erik
            Waingarten. “Lower Bounds for Convexity Testing”. In: Proceedings of
            the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA). 2025.
[CDS20]     Xue Chen, Anindya De, and Rocco A. Servedio. “Testing noisy linear
            functions for sparsity”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium
            on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2020.




                                    199
[CDST15]   Xi Chen, Anindya De, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. “Boolean
           Function Monotonicity Testing Requires (Almost) n1/2 Non-adaptive
           Queries”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
           of Computing (STOC). 2015.
[CFSS17]   Xi Chen, Adam Freilich, Rocco A. Servedio, and Timothy Sun. “Sample-
           Based High-Dimensional Convexity Testing”. In: Approximation, Ran-
           domization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Tech-
           niques (APPROX/RANDOM). 2017.
[Che]      Steve Cheng. Differentiation under the Integral Sign. PlanetMath.
           https://planetmath.org/differentiationundertheintegralsign
           (version: 2024-03-19).
[Che19]    Denis Chetverikov. “Testing regression monotonicity in econometric
           models”. In: Econometric Theory 35.4 (2019), pp. 729–776.
[Chu05]    Fan Chung. “Laplacians and the Cheeger inequality for directed graphs”.
           In: Annals of Combinatorics 9 (2005), pp. 1–19.
[CS13]     Deeparnab Chakrabarty and C. Seshadhri. “Optimal bounds for mono-
           tonicity and Lipschitz testing over hypercubes and hypergrids”. In: Pro-
           ceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
           (STOC). 2013.
[CS14]     Deeparnab Chakrabarty and C. Seshadhri. “An Optimal Lower Bound
           for Monotonicity Testing over Hypergrids”. In: Theory Of Computing
           10.17 (2014), pp. 453–464.
[CS16]     Deeparnab Chakrabarty and C. Seshadhri. “An o(n) Monotonicity
           Tester for Boolean Functions over the Hypercube”. In: SIAM Journal
           on Computing 45.2 (2016), pp. 461–472.
[CS19]     Deeparnab Chakrabarty and C. Seshadhri. “Adaptive Boolean Mono-
           tonicity Testing in Total Influence Time”. In: Proceedings of the Inno-
           vations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS). 2019.
[CST14]    Xi Chen, Rocco A. Servedio, and Li-Yang Tan. “New Algorithms and
           Lower Bounds for Monotonicity Testing”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
           Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2014.
[CT80]     Michael G Crandall and Luc Tartar. “Some relations between nonexpan-
           sive and order preserving mappings”. In: Proceedings of the American
           Mathematical Society 78.3 (1980), pp. 385–390.


                                    200
[CW19]         Xi Chen and Erik Waingarten. “Testing unateness nearly optimally”. In:
               Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
               (STOC). 2019.
[CWX17]        Xi Chen, Erik Waingarten, and Jinyu Xie. “Beyond Talagrand functions:
               new lower bounds for testing monotonicity and unateness”. In: Proceed-
               ings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC).
               2017.
[CWZ21]        Shuyu Cheng, Guoqiang Wu, and Jun Zhu. “On the Convergence of
               Prior-Guided Zeroth-Order Optimization Algorithms”. In: Advances in
               Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), pp. 14620–14631.
[DGLRRS99]     Yevgeniy Dodis, Oded Goldreich, Eric Lehman, Sofya Raskhodnikova,
               Dana Ron, and Alex Samorodnitsky. “Improved testing algorithms for
               monotonicity”. In: RANDOM/APPROX. 1999.
[DK16]         Ilias Diakonikolas and Daniel M. Kane. “A New Approach for Testing
               Properties of Discrete Distributions”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Sym-
               posium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2016.
[DLMORSW07] Ilias Diakonikolas, Homin K. Lee, Kevin Matulef, Krzysztof Onak,
            Ronitt Rubinfeld, Rocco A. Servedio, and Andrew Wan. “Testing for
            Concise Representations”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
            Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2007.
[DMN19]        Anindya De, Elchanan Mossel, and Joe Neeman. “Is your function low
               dimensional?” In: Proceedings of the Conference on Learning Theory
               (COLT). 2019.
[DMN21]        Anindya De, Elchanan Mossel, and Joe Neeman. “Robust testing of low
               dimensional functions”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Sympo-
               sium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2021.
[Dor43]        Robert Dorfman. “The detection of defective members of large popula-
               tions”. In: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 14.4 (1943), pp. 436–
               440.
[DS58]         Nelson Dunford and Jacob T Schwartz. Linear Operators, Part 1: Gen-
               eral Theory. Interscience Publishers, 1958.
[DU77]         J Diestel and J J Uhl Jr. Vector Measures. American Mathematical So-
               ciety, 1977.



                                       201
[EG15]      Lawrence C Evans and Ronald F Gariepy. Measure Theory and Fine
            Properties of Functions, Revised Edition. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2015.
[EKKRV98]   Funda Ergün, Sampath Kannan, S Ravi Kumar, Ronitt Rubinfeld,
            and Mahesh Viswanathan. “Spot-checkers”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
            SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 1998.
[EKLM24]    Ronen Eldan, Guy Kindler, Noam Lifshitz, and Dor Minzer. Isoperimet-
            ric Inequalities Made Simpler. 2024. arXiv: 2204.06686 [math.CO].
[ELR24]     Talya Eden, Reut Levi, and Dana Ron. “Testing Ck -Freeness in
            Bounded-Arboricity Graphs”. In: Proceedings of the International Col-
            loquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP). 2024.
[Eva10]     Lawrence C Evans. Partial Differential Equations. Second Edition.
            American Mathematical Society, 2010.
[Fen]       Feng. Boundedness + convergence in L2loc implies weak convergence?
            Mathematics Stack Exchange. https : / / math . stackexchange . com /
            q/4495940 (version: 2022-07-19).
[Fer23]     Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr. “Directed Poincaré Inequalities and L1 Mono-
            tonicity Testing of Lipschitz Functions”. In: Approximation, Randomiza-
            tion, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques (AP-
            PROX/RANDOM). 2023.
[Fer24]     Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr. “Directed Isoperimetry and Monotonicity Test-
            ing: A Dynamical Approach”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
            on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2024.
[FF25]      Yumou Fei and Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr. On the Spectral Expan-
            sion of Monotone Subsets of the Hypercube. 2025. arXiv: 2505.02685
            [math.PR].
[FH25]      Renato Ferreira Pinto Jr and Nathaniel Harms. “Testing Support Size
            More Efficiently Than Learning Histograms”. In: Proceedings of the
            ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2025.
[Fil91]     James Allen Fill. “Eigenvalue bounds on convergence to stationarity
            for nonreversible Markov chains, with an application to the exclusion
            process”. In: The Annals of Applied Probability (1991), pp. 62–87.
[Fis04]     Eldar Fischer. “On the strength of comparisons in property testing”. In:
            Information and Computation 189.1 (2004), pp. 107–116.


                                     202
[FKG71]      Cees M Fortuin, Pieter W Kasteleyn, and Jean Ginibre. “Correlation in-
             equalities on some partially ordered sets”. In: Communications in Math-
             ematical Physics 22 (1971), pp. 89–103.
[FKRSS04]    Eldar Fischer, Guy Kindler, Dana Ron, Shmuel Safra, and Alex
             Samorodnitsky. “Testing juntas”. In: J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 68.4 (2004),
             pp. 753–787.
[FLNRRS02]   Eldar Fischer, Eric Lehman, Ilan Newman, Sofya Raskhodnikova, Ronitt
             Rubinfeld, and Alex Samorodnitsky. “Monotonicity testing over general
             poset domains”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on
             Theory of Computing (STOC). 2002.
[FN05]       Eldar Fischer and Ilan Newman. “Testing versus estimation of graph
             properties”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
             of Computing (STOC). 2005.
[FR10]       Shahar Fattal and Dana Ron. “Approximating the distance to mono-
             tonicity in high dimensions”. In: ACM Trans. Algorithms 6.3 (2010),
             52:1–52:37.
[FSY21]      Kaito Fujii, Tasuku Soma, and Yuichi Yoshida. “Polynomial-time al-
             gorithms for submodular Laplacian systems”. In: Theoretical Computer
             Science 892 (2021), pp. 170–186.
[FY20]       Noah Fleming and Yuichi Yoshida. “Distribution-Free Testing of Lin-
             ear Functions on Rn ”. In: Proceedings of the Innovations in Theoretical
             Computer Science Conference (ITCS). 2020.
[GGLRS00]    Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, Eric Lehman, Dana Ron, and Alex
             Samorodnitsky. “Testing Monotonicity”. In: Combinatorica 3.20 (2000),
             pp. 301–337.
[GGR98]      Oded Goldreich, Shari Goldwasser, and Dana Ron. “Property testing
             and its connection to learning and approximation”. In: Journal of the
             ACM (JACM) 45.4 (1998), pp. 653–750.
[Gol17]      Oded Goldreich. Introduction to Property Testing. Cambridge University
             Press, 2017.
[Gol97]      Oded Goldreich. “Combinatorial property testing (a survey)”. In: Ran-
             domization Methods in Algorithm Design. Vol. 43. DIMACS Series in
             Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science. 1997, pp. 45–
             59.


                                      203
[GR02]      Oded Goldreich and Dana Ron. “Property Testing in Bounded Degree
            Graphs”. In: Algorithmica 32.2 (2002), pp. 302–343.
[GR11]      Oded Goldreich and Dana Ron. “On Testing Expansion in Bounded-
            Degree Graphs”. In: Studies in Complexity and Cryptography. Miscel-
            lanea on the Interplay between Randomness and Computation. Vol. 6650.
            Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2011, pp. 68–75.
[GR16]      Oded Goldreich and Dana Ron. “On Sample-Based Testers”. In: ACM
            Trans. Comput. Theory 8.2 (2016), 7:1–7:54.
[Gro75]     Leonard Gross. “Logarithmic sobolev inequalities”. In: American Jour-
            nal of Mathematics 97.4 (1975), pp. 1061–1083.
[Han14]     Ramon van Handel. Probability in high dimension (Lecture notes). 2014.
[Har19]     Nathaniel Harms. “Testing Halfspaces over Rotation-Invariant Distribu-
            tions”. In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
            rithms (SODA). 2019.
[HK07]      Shirley Halevy and Eyal Kushilevitz. “Distribution-Free Property-
            Testing”. In: SIAM J. Comput. 37.4 (2007), pp. 1107–1138.
[Hum08]     David Hume. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Original
            work published 1748. Oxford University Press, 2008.
[HY22]      Nathaniel Harms and Yuichi Yoshida. “Downsampling for Testing and
            Learning in Product Distributions”. In: Proceedings of the International
            Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP). 2022.
[IMTY22]    Masahiro Ikeda, Atsushi Miyauchi, Yuuki Takai, and Yuichi Yoshida.
            “Finding Cheeger cuts in hypergraphs via heat equation”. In: Theoretical
            Computer Science 930 (2022), pp. 1–23.
[Kaw85]     Bernhard Kawohl. Rearrangements and convexity of level sets in PDE.
            Vol. 1150. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag Berlin, Hei-
            delberg, 1985.
[KKKMS21]   Esty Kelman, Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Dor Minzer, and Muli Safra.
            “Theorems of KKL, Friedgut, and Talagrand via Random Restrictions
            and Log-Sobolev Inequality”. In: Proceedings of the Innovations in The-
            oretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS). 2021.




                                     204
[KLLR18]   Tsz Chiu Kwok, Lap Chi Lau, Yin Tat Lee, and Akshay Ramachandran.
           “The Paulsen problem, continuous operator scaling, and smoothed anal-
           ysis”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
           Computing (STOC). 2018.
[KLR21]    Tsz Chiu Kwok, Lap Chi Lau, and Akshay Ramachandran. “Spectral
           Analysis of Matrix Scaling and Operator Scaling”. In: SIAM Journal on
           Computing 50.3 (2021), pp. 1034–1102.
[KMS00]    Marcos A. Kiwi, Frédéric Magniez, and Miklos Santha. “Exact and Ap-
           proximate Testing/Correcting of Algebraic Functions: A Survey”. In:
           Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, Advanced Lectures. Vol. 2292.
           Lecture Notes in Computer Science. 2000, pp. 30–83.
[KMS18]    Subhash Khot, Dor Minzer, and Muli Safra. “On monotonicity testing
           and Boolean isoperimetric-type theorems”. In: SIAM Journal on Com-
           puting 47.6 (2018), pp. 2238–2276.
[KN15]     Nikolay Kuznetsov and Alexander Nazarov. “Sharp constants in the
           Poincaré, Steklov and related inequalities (a survey)”. In: Mathematika
           61.2 (2015), pp. 328–344.
[KS08]     Tali Kaufman and Madhu Sudan. “Algebraic property testing: the role of
           invariance”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
           of Computing (STOC). 2008.
[Lat03]    Rafal Latala. On some inequalities for Gaussian measures. 2003. arXiv:
           math/0304343 [math.PR].
[Lau25]    Lap Chi Lau. Lecture Notes for CS 860: Algorithmic Spectral Graph The-
           ory. https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/ ~lapchi/cs860-2025/notes.html.
           University of Waterloo, Cheriton School of Computer Science, 2025.
[Liu20]    Yuan Liu. “The Poincaré inequality and quadratic transportation-
           variance inequalities”. In: Electron. J. Probab. 25.1 (2020), pp. 1–16.
[LP17]     David A Levin and Yuval Peres. Markov chains and mixing times.
           Vol. 107. American Mathematical Soc., 2017.
[LR01]     Eric Lehman and Dana Ron. “On Disjoint Chains of Subsets”. In: J.
           Comb. Theory A 94.2 (2001), pp. 399–404.
[LRV22]    Jane Lange, Ronitt Rubinfeld, and Arsen Vasilyan. “Properly learning
           monotone functions via local correction”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
           Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2022.

                                    205
[LTW23]    Lap Chi Lau, Kam Chuen Tung, and Robert Wang. “Cheeger inequalities
           for directed graphs and hypergraphs using reweighted eigenvalues”. In:
           Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing
           (STOC). 2023.
[LTW24]    Lap Chi Lau, Kam Chuen Tung, and Robert Wang. “Fast algorithms
           for directed graph partitioning using flows and reweighted eigenvalues”.
           In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
           (SODA). 2024.
[LV23]     Jane Lange and Arsen Vasilyan. “Agnostic proper learning of mono-
           tone functions: beyond the black-box correction barrier”. In: Proceedings
           of the IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS).
           2023.
[Mar74]    Grigorii Aleksandrovich Margulis. “Probabilistic characteristics of
           graphs with large connectivity”. In: Problemy Peredachi Informatsii 10.2
           (1974), pp. 101–108.
[Maz11]    Vladimir Maz’ya. Sobolev Spaces with Applications to Elliptic Partial
           Differential Equations. 2nd ed. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[Mik78]    V P Mikhailov. Partial Differential Equations. Mir Publishers, Moscow,
           1978.
[MORS10]   Kevin Matulef, Ryan O’Donnell, Ronitt Rubinfeld, and Rocco A. Serve-
           dio. “Testing Halfspaces”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing 39.5 (2010),
           pp. 2004–2047.
[O’D14]    Ryan O’Donnell. Analysis of Boolean Functions. Cambridge University
           Press, 2014.
[Pis86]    Gilles Pisier. “Probabilistic methods in the geometry of Banach spaces”.
           In: Lecture Notes in Mathematics (1986), pp. 167–241.
[Poi90]    Henri Poincaré. “Sur les équations aux dérivées partielles de la physique
           mathématique”. In: American Journal of Mathematics (1890), pp. 211–
           294.
[PRR06]    Michal Parnas, Dana Ron, and Ronitt Rubinfeld. “Tolerant property
           testing and distance approximation”. In: J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 72.6
           (2006), pp. 1012–1042.




                                     206
[PRV17]   Ramesh Krishnan S Pallavoor, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Nithin Varma.
          “Parameterized property testing of functions”. In: ACM Transactions on
          Computation Theory (TOCT) 9.4 (2017), pp. 1–19.
[PRW22]   Ramesh Krishnan S Pallavoor, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Erik Wain-
          garten. “Approximating the distance to monotonicity of Boolean func-
          tions”. In: Random Structures & Algorithms 60.2 (2022), pp. 233–260.
[PW57]    LE Payne and HF Weinberger. “Lower bounds for vibration frequen-
          cies of elastically supported membranes and plates”. In: Journal of the
          Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics 5.4 (1957), pp. 171–182.
[Ras03]   Sofya Raskhodnikova. “Approximate testing of visual properties”. In:
          Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algo-
          rithms and Techniques (APPROX/RANDOM). 2003.
[Ras99]   Sofya Raskhodnikova. “Monotonicity Testing”. MA thesis. Mas-
          sachusetts Institute of Technology, 1999.
[RS96]    Ronitt Rubinfeld and Madhu Sudan. “Robust characterizations of poly-
          nomials with applications to program testing”. In: SIAM Journal on
          Computing 25.2 (1996), pp. 252–271.
[RS97]    Ran Raz and Shmuel Safra. “A Sub-Constant Error-Probability Low-
          Degree Test, and a Sub-Constant Error-Probability PCP Characteriza-
          tion of NP”. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory
          of Computing (STOC). 1997.
[RV04]    Luis Rademacher and Santosh Vempala. “Testing Geometric Convex-
          ity”. In: FSTTCS: Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical
          Computer Science. 2004.
[RV20]    Ronitt Rubinfeld and Arsen Vasilyan. “Monotone Probability Distribu-
          tions over the Boolean Cube Can Be Learned with Sublinear Samples”.
          In: Proceedings of the Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
          ference (ITCS). 2020.
[Sag18]   Mert Saglam. “Near Log-Convexity of Measured Heat in (Discrete) Time
          and Consequences”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Foun-
          dations of Computer Science (FOCS). 2018.
[San15]   Filippo Santambrogio. Optimal Transport for Applied Mathematicians:
          Calculus of Variations, PDEs, and Modeling. Birkhäuser Cham, 2015.



                                  207
[Set25]   Cameron Seth. “A Tolerant Independent Set Tester”. In: Proceedings of
          the ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC). 2025.
[SS24]    Asaf Shapira and Henrique Stagni. “A Tight Bound for Testing Partition
          Properties”. In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
          Algorithms (SODA). 2024.
[ST78]    Vladimir N Sudakov and Boris S Tsirel’son. “Extremal properties of half-
          spaces for spherically invariant measures”. In: Journal of Soviet Mathe-
          matics 9.1 (1978), pp. 9–18.
[SW20]    Arnab Sharma and Heike Wehrheim. “Higher income, larger loan? Mono-
          tonicity testing of machine learning models”. In: Proceedings of the
          29th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and
          Analysis. 2020.
[Tal93]   Michel Talagrand. “Isoperimetry, logarithmic Sobolev inequalities on the
          discrete cube, and Margulis’ graph connectivity theorem”. In: Geometric
          & Functional Analysis 3.3 (1993), pp. 295–314.
[Tes12]   Gerald Teschl. Ordinary differential equations and dynamical systems.
          Vol. 140. American Mathematical Soc., 2012.
[Tun25]   Kam Chuen Tung. “Reweighted Eigenvalues: A New Approach to Spec-
          tral Theory beyond Undirected Graphs”. PhD thesis. University of Wa-
          terloo, 2025.
[Vil09]   Cédric Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New. Springer Berlin, Hei-
          delberg, 2009.
[VV17a]   Gregory Valiant and Paul Valiant. “An Automatic Inequality Prover and
          Instance Optimal Identity Testing”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing
          46.1 (2017), pp. 429–455.
[VV17b]   Gregory Valiant and Paul Valiant. “Estimating the Unseen: Improved
          Estimators for Entropy and Other Properties”. In: J. ACM 64.6 (2017),
          37:1–37:41.
[Wan05]   Xianfu Wang. “Volumes of generalized unit balls”. In: Mathematics Mag-
          azine 78.5 (2005), pp. 390–395.
[WY19]    Yihong Wu and Pengkun Yang. “Chebyshev polynomials, moment
          matching, and optimal estimation of the unseen”. In: The Annals of
          Statistics 47.2 (2019), pp. 857–883.


                                   208
[Yos16]   Yuichi Yoshida. “Nonlinear Laplacian for digraphs and its applications
          to network analysis”. In: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International
          Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 2016.
[Yos19]   Yuichi Yoshida. “Cheeger inequalities for submodular transformations”.
          In: Proceedings of the ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms
          (SODA). 2019.




                                  209
APPENDICES




             210
Appendix A

Nonadaptive lower bound from prior
work on Hamming testing

We briefly explain how the Ω(d log n) nonadaptive lower bound of [BRY14b] for Hamming
testing monotonicity of functions f : [n]d → R (with sufficiently small constant ε) also
applies to L1 -testing of (ℓ1 , O(1))-Lipschitz functions. The construction of [BRY14b] relies
on two main ingredients: step functions and Walsh functions.
    Let n = 2ℓ for simplicity. For each i ∈ {0, . . . , n} the i-th step function si : [2ℓ ] → [2ℓ−i ]
is given by                                            
                                               x−1
                                    si (x) =              + 1.
                                                 2i
In words, si (x) increases by 1 after every 2i consecutive elements (called a block of size 2i ).
  The Walsh functions are defined as follows. For each i ∈ [ℓ], the function wi : [2ℓ ] →
{±1} is given by
                               wi (x) = (−1)biti (x−1) ,
where the operator biti extracts the i-th bit of its input (indexed from least to most
significant). Then for each S ⊆ [ℓ], the function wS : [2ℓ ] → {±1} is given by
                                              Y
                                     wS (x) =    wi (x) .
                                                  i∈S


  These two types of functions are defined on the line, and they are extended into a
multidimensional construction on the hypergrid as follows. Given a vector i ∈ [ℓ]d , the

                                                 211
step function si : [2ℓ ]d → [d2ℓ ] is given by
                                                               d
                                                               X
                                     si (x1 , . . . , xd ) =         sij (xj ) ,
                                                               j=1

and given a vector S = (S1 , . . . , Sd ) of subsets of [ℓ], the Walsh function wS : [2ℓ ]d → {±1}
is given by
                                                         d
                                                         Y
                                 wS (x1 , . . . , xd ) =   wSj (xj ) .
                                                               j=1

    Then, [BRY14b] use a communication complexity argument (namely a reduction from
the AugmentIndex problem) to show that (nonadaptive) Hamming testing monotonicity
of functions hi,S : [2ℓ ]d → N of the form
                                      hi,S (x) = 2si (x) + wS (x) ,
for appropriate choices of i and S, requires at least Ω(d log n) queries. Therefore, to show
that (nonadaptive) L1 testing monotonicity of (ℓ1 , O(1))-Lipschitz functions also requires
at least this number of queries, it suffices to show that every such function h = hi,S satisfies

   1. h is (ℓ1 , O(1))-Lipschitz; and
   2. If distmono
             H    (h) ≥ ε, then distmono
                                    1    (h) ≳ ε.

    The first property follows from the definitions of the step and Walsh functions: let
x, y ∈ [2ℓ ]d be such that ∥x − y∥1 = 1. Then let j ∈ [d] be the coordinate such that
|xj − yj | = 1 and xk = yk for k ̸= j. Then
          |hi,S (x) − hi,S (y)| ≤ 2 sij (xj ) − sij (yj ) + |wS (x) − wS (y)| ≤ 2 + 2 = 4 ,
the first inequality because x and y agree on every coordinate except for j, and the second
inequality because the step function sij changes by at most 1 on adjacent inputs, and the
Walsh functions only take values ±1. Thus the first property holds.
    As for the second property, note that if distmono      H    (h) ≥ ε, then there exists a matching
of the form (xi , y i )i where for each i we have xi ⪯ y i and h(xi ) > h(y i ) (i.e. xi , y i form a
violating pair), such that at least an ε-fraction of the points [n]d belong to this matching
(see [FLNRRS02]). Now, for each such violating pair xi , y i , it follows that h(xi )−h(y i ) ≥ 1,
since h is integer-valued. Therefore for any monotone function h′ : [n]d → R, it must be
the case that |h(xi ) − h′ (xi )| + |h(y i ) − h′ (y i )| ≥ 1. Since this is true for disjoint pairs xi , y i
covering an ε-fraction of the domain, it follows that E [|h − h′ |] ≥ ε/2 for any monotone
function h′ . Hence distmono
                           1   (h) ≥ ε/2, and we are done.

                                                      212
Appendix B

Missing proofs from Chapter 7

We require the following standard result from convex optimization.

Lemma B.1 (See e.g. [Bre11, Corollary 3.23]). Let E be a reflexive Banach space and
let C ⊆ E be nonempty, closed and convex. Suppose f : C → (−∞, +∞] is convex,
proper, lower semicontinuous, and coercive in the sense that for every sequence (xn )n∈N
in C with ∥xn ∥E → ∞, we have f (xn ) → +∞. Then there exists x∗ ∈ C satisfying
f (x∗ ) = inf x∈C f (x).

Lemma B.2. Define Ω := (0, 1)d . Suppose fn ⇀ f weakly in L2 (Ω), and each fn is mono-
tone nondecreasing (resp. monotone nonincreasing). Then f is monotone nondecreasing
(resp. monotone nonincreasing).

Proof. Recall that for each ε > 0 and g ∈ L2 (Ω), g ε = ηε ∗ g is the mollification of g,
defined on Ωε = (ε, 1 − ε)d .
    Let ε ∈ (0, 1/3). We claim that fnε → f ε pointwise in Ωε . Indeed, fix any x ∈ Ωε and
define ηε,x ∈ C ∞ (Rd ) by ηε,x (y) := ηε (x − y). Since fn ⇀ f weakly in L2 (Ω), we obtain
         Z                                                          Z
 ε
f (x) =     ηε (x−y)f (y) dy = ⟨ηε,x , f ⟩ = lim ⟨ηε,x , fn ⟩ = lim   ηε (x−y)fn (y) dy = lim fnε (x) .
          Ω                                 n→∞              n→∞    Ω                     n→∞


    Now, suppose without loss of generality that each fn is monotone nondecreasing. Let
ε ∈ (0, 1/3). It is immediate that each fnε is also monotone nondecreasing (in Ωε ). Since
fnε → f ε pointwise in Ωε , we conclude that f ε is monotone nondecreasing as well.
   The conclusion follows the fact that f ε → f almost everywhere as ε → 0.

                                              213
Proposition 7.10 (Existence and uniqueness of optimal representation). For all u ∈ U,
R∗ (u) contains exactly one element.

Proof of existence. Let u ∈ U. Let E := L2 (I) ⊕ H 1 (I), where ⊕ denotes the direct sum
of Hilbert spaces, so that E is also a Hilbert space (and hence a reflexive Banach space).
Note that R(u) ⊆ E by definition. Our goal is to show that C = R(u) and f = D− satisfy
the conditions of Lemma B.1.
    It is clear that R(u) is nonempty, because u ∈ U. It is immediate to verify that R(u)
                                                                              (1)   (2) 
is convex as well. We now check that R(u) is closed in E. Let (un , un ) n∈N be any
sequence in R(u) that converges in E to some (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ E; we would like to show that
                                      (1)  (2)                                  (1)
(u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u). First, since (un , un ) → (u(1) , u(2) ) in E, we have un → u(1) in L2 (I)
        (2)
and un → u(2) in H 1 (I) and hence in L2 (I), so that
   ∥u − (u(1) + u(2) )∥L2 (I)
         = lim (u − (u(1)  (2)      (1)  (1)    (2)  (2)
                      n + un )) + (un − u ) + (un − u ) L2 (I)
           n→∞

         ≤ lim u − (u(1)  (2)               (1)
                     n + un ) L2 (I) + lim un − u
                                                 (1)
                                                     L2 (I)
                                                            + lim u(2)
                                                                   n −u
                                                                       (2)
                                                                           L2 (I)
            n→∞                             n→∞                       n→∞
         = 0,
                                                    (1)   (2)                         (1)   (2)
where the last equality used the fact that u = un + un a.e. for every n (since (un , un ) ∈
R(u)) and the two convergence observations above. Thus u = u(1) + u(2) in L2 (I) and
hence almost everywhere. Moreover,
                              R (2)      by Lemma B.2, u(1) is nondecreasing and u(2) is
                                                             (2)
nonincreasing.
    R (2)       Finally, since I un dx = 0 for each n and un → u(2) in L2 (I), it follows
that I u dx = 0 as well. We conclude that (u(1) , u(2) ) ∈ R(u), and thus R(u) is closed.
     Now, clearly D− is proper since it is finitely valued by definition. It is also continuous
                                                         (1) (2)
(and thus lower semicontinuous) because for any (un , un ) → (u(1) , u(2) ) in E, we have
                                                 2               2
 (2)                                         (2)                                    (1)  (2)
                                                     dx → I ∂x u(2) dx, so D− (un , un ) →
                                   R                       R
un → u(2) in H 1 (I) and hence I ∂x un
D− (u(1) , u(2) ). It is also immediate to check that that D− is convex.
   Finally, we need to show that D− is coercive in the sense of Lemma B.1. Let
                                                         2
   (1) (2)                                     (1)  (2)     (1)            (2)
 (un un ) n∈N be a sequence in R(u) such that (un , un ) = ∥un ∥2L2 (I) + ∥un ∥2H 1 (I) →
                                                                  E
                           (2)
∞. We claim that ∥∂x un ∥L2 (I) → ∞. Suppose for a contradiction that this false. There
                                (2)                                   (2)
are two cases. First, suppose ∥un ∥H 1 (I) → ∞. Then necessarily ∥un ∥L2 (I) → ∞, but
            (2)
since each un has mean zero, the Poincaré-Wirtinger inequality gives that
                                                    1 (2)
                                 ∥∂x u(2)
                                      n ∥L2 (I) ≥    ∥u ∥L2 (I)
                                                    C n

                                              214
                                                      (2)
for some constant C > 0. Thus ∥∂x un ∥L2 (I) → ∞, a contradiction. In the second case,
   (2)                                             (1)                              (1)     (2)
∥un ∥H 1 (I) remains bounded, so we must have ∥un ∥L2 (I) → ∞. But since u = un + un in
                                                       (2)           (1)
L2 (I), the reverse triangle inequality implies that ∥un ∥L2 (I) ≥ ∥un ∥L2 (I) − ∥u∥L2 (I) → ∞,
       (2)                                                               (2)
so ∥un ∥L2 (I) → ∞. Then again Poincaré-Wirtinger
                                                      implies that ∥∂x un∥L2 (I) →∞, so the
                                        (1)     (2)                   (2)                        (1)   (2)
claim holds. But since D− un , un  = 21 ∥∂x un ∥2L2 (I) , we have D− un , un → +∞,
so D is coercive. Thus D achieves its minimum on R(u) by Lemma B.1, so R∗ (u) is
     −                   −

nonempty.

Proof of uniqueness. We show uniqueness using strict convexity.                                    Suppose
(u(1) , u(2) ), (v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R∗ (u), and suppose for a contradiction that (u(1) , u(2) ) ̸= (v (1) , v (2) )
in E (in the notation from the previous part of the proof; note that equality in E is
equivalent to equality as tuples in L2 (I) × H 1 (I)).
     We first claim that ∂x u(2) ̸= ∂x v (2) in L2 (I). Indeed, suppose ∂x u(2) = ∂x v (2) in L2 (I).
Note that u(2) ̸= v (2) in L2 (I), because otherwise we would have u(2) = v (2) in H 1 (I)
and u(1) = u − u(2) = u − v (2) = v (1) in L2 (I), and thus (u(1) , u(2) ) = (v (1) , v (2) ) in E,
a contradiction. Now, since ∂x u(2) = ∂x v (2) and u(2) ̸= v (2) in L2 (I), we conclude that
 (2)
u
R (2) = v (2) +          2
              R C (2)in L (I) for some constant C ̸= 0. But this contradicts (2)    the fact that
 I
   u dx = I v dx = 0, which holds by the definition of R(u). Thus ∂x u ̸= ∂x v (2) in
L2 (I).
    Define the function f : L2 (I) → R≥0 by f (w) := 21 ∥w∥2L2 (I) , which is strictly convex,
and note that D− (r(1) , r(2) ) = f (∂x r(2) ) for all r ∈ R(u). Now, the element (z (1) , z (2) ) :=
1
2
  (u(1) , u(2) ) + 21 (v (1) ,v (2) ) is in R(u) by convexity of that set, and satisfies D− (z (1) , z (2) ) =
f 21 ∂x u(2) + 21 ∂x v (2) < 21 f (∂x u(2) ) + 12 f (∂x v (2) ) = 21 D− (u(1) , u(2) ) + 12 D− (v (1) , v (2) ), contra-
dicting the fact that (u(1) , u(2) ), (v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R∗ (u). Thus (u(1) , u(2) ) = (v (1) , v (2) ) in E, as
needed.

Proposition 7.13. The functional E − : L2 (I) → [0, +∞] is convex, proper and lower
semicontinuous.

Proof. Properness is trivial, since e.g. 0 ∈ U and E − (0) = 0. Convexity also follows easily
from the convexity of U and D− .
    It remains to show lower semicontinuity, and since L2 (I) is a metric space, it suffices
to show sequential lower semicontinuity. Let u ∈ L2 (I), and let (un )n∈N be a sequence in
L2 (I) converging to u in L2 (I). We must show that
                                                            ?
                                              E − (u) ≤ lim inf E − (un ) .                                      (B.1)
                                                                n→∞


                                                                215
The only relevant case is when the RHS above is finite, so suppose there exists a subse-
quence (unk )k∈N such that limk→∞ E − (unk ) = A < +∞. By extracting a subsequence if
necessary, we may assume that E − (unk ) < +∞, and thus unk ∈ U, for every k.
                                 
   We claim that (unk ↑, unk ↓) k is bounded as a sequence in L2 (I) ⊕ H 1 (I). First, since
limk→∞ E − (unRk ) = A, we have that I (∂x unk ↓)2 dx k is bounded. Then, since every unk ∈
                                       R             

U and hence I unk ↓ dx = 0, the Poincaré-Wirtinger inequality implies that
                              Z                 Z
                                 (unk ↓) dx ≤ C (∂x unk ↓)2 dx
                                        2
                                 I                    I

for some C > 0, and hence
                             (unk ↓)k is bounded in H 1 (I). Now,
                                                                    since unk → u in L2 (I), we
have that ∥unk ∥L2 (I) k is bounded, and since ∥unk ↓∥L2 (I) k is bounded as a consequence
                                                                                     
of boundedness in H 1 (I), it follows that ∥unk ↑∥L2 (I) k = ∥unk − unk ↓∥L2 (I) k is also
                                                                        
bounded, that is, (unk ↑)k is bounded in L2 (I). Hence (unk ↑, unk ↓) k is bounded in L2 (I)⊕
H 1 (I) as claimed.
                                                                                
    Since L2 (I) ⊕ H 1 (I) is a Hilbert space, we conclude that (unk ↑, unk ↓) k has a weakly
                                                                   
convergent subsequence, which we denote by (unkm ↑, unkm ↓) m . Then there exist v (1) ∈
L2 (I) and v (2) ∈ H 1 (I) such that unkm ↑ ⇀ v (1) weakly in L2 (I) and unkm ↓ ⇀ v (2) weakly
in H 1 (I). So letting v := v (1) + v (2) , we conclude that unkm ⇀ v weakly in L2 (I); indeed,
for every f ∈ L2 (I), we have

 unkm , f = unkm ↑ + unkm ↓, f = unkm ↑, f + unkm ↓, f → v (1) , f + v (2) , f = ⟨v, f ⟩ .

We now claim that v ∈ U. R Indeed, by Lemma B.2, v (1) is nondecreasing and v (2) is
nonincreasing, and moreover I v (2) dx = 0 by weak convergence; hence (v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R(v).
Then, since unkm ⇀ v weakly in L2 (I) and unkm → u in L2 (I), we conclude that u = v,
soRu ∈ U with (v (1) , v (2) ) ∈ R(u). In particular, this means that E − (u) ≤ D− (v (1) , v (2) ) =
1
    (∂ v (2) )2 dx.
2 I x

    Now, the fact that unkm ↓ ⇀ v (2) weakly in H 1 (I) implies that ∥v (2) ∥H 1 (I) ≤
lim inf m→∞ ∥unkm ↓∥H 1 (I) . Moreover, since H 1 (I) embeds compactly into L2 (I) by the
Rellich-Kondrachov theorem (see e.g. [Bre11, Theorem 9.16]), we have that unkm ↓ → v (2)




                                                216
in L2 (I), so ∥unkm ↓∥2L2 (I) → ∥v (2) ∥2L2 (I) . Therefore we obtain
                                 Z
           −          1                                1                                  
  lim inf E (unkm ) = lim inf (∂x unkm ↓)2 dx = lim inf ∥unkm ↓∥2H 1 (I) − ∥unkm ↓∥2L2 (I)
   m→∞                2 m→∞ I                          2 m→∞
                                                  
                        1                              1
                    =      lim inf ∥unkm ↓∥2H 1 (I) − ∥v (2) ∥2L2 (I)
                        2 m→∞                          2
                                                           Z
                      1 
                             (2) 2          (2) 2
                                                        1
                    ≥      ∥v ∥H 1 (I) − ∥v ∥L2 (I) =          (∂x v (2) )2 dx
                      2                                  2 I
                    ≥ E − (u) ,

and thus (B.1) holds.

    The following lemma is essentially standard, and below we present the proof sketched
in [Fen].

Lemma B.3. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be an open set, let u ∈ L2 (Ω) and let (un )n∈N be a bounded
sequence in L2 (Ω) such that un → u in L2loc (Ω). Then un ⇀ u weakly in L2 (Ω).

Proof. It suffices to show that every subsequence (unk )k∈N has a subsequence that weakly
converges to u. Fix any subsequence (unk )k∈N . First, since unk → u in L2loc (Ω), we have
that ⟨unk , ϕ⟩ → ⟨u, ϕ⟩ for all ϕ ∈ Cc∞ (Ω). Moreover, since L2 (Ω) is a Hilbert space and
(unk )k∈N is bounded, let (unkℓ )ℓ∈N be a subsequence such that unkℓ ⇀ w weakly in L2 (Ω)
for some w ∈ L2 (Ω). Now, let v ∈ L2 (Ω). Since Cc∞ (Ω) is dense in L2 (Ω), let (ϕm )m∈N be
a sequence in Cc∞ (Ω) with ϕm → v in L2 (Ω). Then

       ⟨u, v⟩ = lim ⟨u, ϕm ⟩                                      (Since ϕm → v in L2 (Ω))
                 m→∞
               = lim lim ⟨unk , ϕm ⟩                                    (As observed above)
                m→∞ k→∞
                         D           E
               = lim lim unkℓ , ϕm              (Taking subsequence preserves the limit)
                 m→∞ ℓ→∞
               = lim ⟨w, ϕm ⟩                           (Since unkℓ ⇀ w weakly in L2 (Ω))
                 m→∞
               = ⟨w, v⟩                                           (Since ϕm → v in L2 (Ω))
                      D       E
               = lim unkℓ , v                          (Since unkℓ ⇀ w weakly in L2 (Ω)),
                 ℓ→∞

so unkℓ ⇀ u weakly in L2 (Ω) as needed.



                                                 217
Lemma 7.29. Let J ⊂ R be a finite, nonempty open interval. Let f ∈ L2 (J) be nonde-
creasing and let g ∈ H 1 (J) be such that g < 0 in J and g = 0 on ∂J, i.e. the endpoints of
J. Let [a, b] ⊂ J, let δ := f (b) − f (a) and let α := − sup(a,b) g. Then ⟨f, ∂x g⟩L2 (J) ≥ αδ.

   We first give a proof assuming f ∈ L∞ (J), and then generalize to f ∈ L2 (J) via an
approximation argument.

Proof assuming f ∈ L∞ (J). Without loss of generality, we may assume that J = I. Now,
for each sufficiently small ε > 0, recall that Iε = (ε, 1 − ε) and let fε ∈ C ∞ (Iε ) be the
mollification of f . Let fε∗ : I → R be given by
                                    
                                    fε/2 (ε)
                                                  if x ∈ (0, ε)
                             ∗
                           fε (x) := fε/2 (x)      if x ∈ [ε, 1 − ε]
                                    
                                      fε/2 (1 − ε) if x ∈ (1 − ε, 1) .
                                    

Note that each fε∗ ∈ H 1 (I), in particular because the piecewise definition is continuous
and fε/2 is smooth on [ε, 1 − ε]. Also, each fε/2 is nondecreasing and hence so is each fε∗ .
Moreover, fε∗ → f a.e. as ε → 0 since this is true of (fε )ε>0 . Finally, we have fε∗ → f in
L2loc (I) since fε → f in L2loc (Ω), and since ∥fε∗ ∥L∞ (I) ≤ ∥fε/2 ∥L∞ (I) ≤ ∥f ∥L∞ (I) , we have
that (fε∗ )ε>0 is bounded in L2 (I) and Lemma B.3 implies that fε∗ ⇀ f weakly in L2 (I) as
ε → 0.
    Let (an )n∈N , (bn )n∈N be two sequences such that an ↑ a, bn ↓ b, and moreover, for
every n ∈ N, fε∗ (an ) → f (an ) and fε∗ (bn ) → f (bn ) as ε → 0; the existence of such
sequences is guaranteed by the fact that fε∗ → f almost everywhere. For each n ∈ N, let
δn := f (bn ) − f (an ) and αn := − sup(an ,bn ) g. Note that δn ≥ δ because f is nondecreasing
while an ≤ a and b ≤ bn , and that αn → α as n → ∞ by the continuity of g.
   For each ε > 0, integration by parts gives
                                 Z                       Z
                                                  ∗ 1
                    ⟨fε , ∂x g⟩ = fε (∂x g) dx = fε g|0 − (∂x fε∗ )g dx .
                      ∗            ∗
                                      I                          I

Recall that g = 0 on {0, 1}. Moreover, since fε∗ is nondecreasing while g < 0 in I, the
integrand in the RHS above is nonpositive. Hence we can only make the RHS smaller by
restricting the range of integration. Thus, fixing any n ∈ N and using the definition of αn ,
                          Z                     Z
             ∗
          ⟨fε , ∂x g⟩ ≥ −           ∗
                               (∂x fε )g dx ≥ −       (∂x fε∗ )(−αn ) dx = αn fε∗ |bann .
                          (an ,bn )                  (an ,bn )



                                               218
Since fε∗ ⇀ f weakly in L2 (I), we obtain

                    ⟨f, ∂x g⟩ = lim ⟨fε∗ , ∂x g⟩ ≥ lim αn fε∗ |bann = αn δn ≥ αn δ ,
                                  ε→0                       ε→0

the second equality by the choice of sequences (an )n , (bn )n and definition of δn . We conclude
that
                                 ⟨f, ∂x g⟩ ≥ lim αn δ = αδ .
                                                      n→∞


Proof for general f ∈ L2 (J). Again let J = I without loss of generality. We proceed by an
approximation argument. Let (an )n∈N be a strictly decreasing sequence satisfying a1 = a
and an → 0. Similarly, let (bn )n∈N be a strictly increasing sequence satisfying b1 = b and
bn → 1. For each n ∈ N, define fn ∈ L∞ (I) by
                                    
                                    inf [an ,bn ] f if x ∈ (0, an )
                                    
                           fn (x) := f (x)           if x ∈ [an , bn ]
                                    
                                      sup[an ,bn ] f if x ∈ (bn , 1) .
                                    

Note that the infimum and supremum above are finite by virtue of the monotonicity of f
and the observation that each [an , bn ] ⊂ I; thus we indeed have fn ∈ L∞ (I). Moreover,
each fn is nondecreasing and, since an ≤ a < b ≤ bn , we have fn (a) = f (a) and fn (b) =
f (b). Thus the first part implies that ⟨fn , ∂x g⟩ ≥ αδ for α as in that statement and
δ = fn (b) − fn (a) = f (b) − f (a). Finally, we have fn → f in L2 (I); indeed, letting c := a+b
                                                                                              2
for convenience and using the monotonicity of f ,
                                                                                  !2
                           Z                            Z       2
        ∥f − fn ∥2L2 (I) =              f (x) − inf f                 dx +             f (x) − sup f     dx
                             (0,an )            [an ,bn ]                    (bn ,1)         [an ,bn ]
                             Z                                        Z
                                                       2
                       ≤               (f (x) − f (c)) dx +         (f (x) − f (c))2 dx
                          (0,an )                           (bn ,1)
                          h                                                          i
                                  2             2                                  2
                       ≤ 2 ∥f ∥L2 (0,an ) + ∥f ∥L2 (bn ,1) + (an + 1 − bn )f (c) → 0 ,

the last step by the continuity of the functions x → ∥f ∥2L2 (0,x) and x → ∥f ∥2L2 (x,1) and the
fact that an + (1 − bn ) → 0 as n → ∞. Hence ⟨fn , ∂x g⟩ → ⟨f, ∂x g⟩, and the conclusion
follows.

Lemma 7.44 (From “almost Lipschitz” to Lipschitz). Let M ∈ R≥0 and let N ⊂ I be a
measure zero set. Suppose f : I → R satisfies |f (x) − f (y)| ≤ M |x − y| for all x, y ∈ I \ N .
Then there exists a M -Lipschitz function g : I → R such that f = g in I \ N .

                                                       219
Proof. Let f : I → (−∞, +∞] be given by f := f in I \ N and f := +∞ in N . Define
g : I → R by                  (
                               f (x)             if x ∈ I \ N
                      g(x) :=
                               lim inf z→x f (z) otherwise.
Note that g is real-valued because, when x ∈ N , we may find a sequence (zn )n∈N ⊂ I \ N
such that zn → x and then, by the definition of lim inf by subsequential limits and the
assumption on f ,
                                                                         
g(x) = lim inf f (z) ≤ lim f (zn ) = lim f (zn ) ≤ lim f (z1 )+M |zn −z1 | = f (z1 )+M |x−z1 | < +∞ .
         z→x          n→∞          n→∞            n→∞

Clearly g = f in I \ N . We claim that g is M -Lipschitz. By the assumption on f , we
do have |g(x) − g(y)| ≤ M |x − y| for all x, y ∈ I \ N . Now, let x ∈ N and y ∈ I \ N .
By the definition of g, fix a sequence (zn )n∈N ⊂ I \ N such that zn → x and moreover
limn→∞ f (zn ) = g(x). Then

 |g(x) − g(y)| = lim f (zn ) − f (y) = lim |f (zn ) − f (y)| ≤ lim M |zn − y| = M |x − y| ,
                  n→∞                    n→∞                  n→∞

as desired. The case when x, y ∈ N follows by the triangle inequality: suppose x < y
without loss of generality, choose any z ∈ (x, y) \ N , which is possible since N has measure
zero, and use the above to conclude that

    |g(x) − g(y)| ≤ |g(x) − g(z)| + |g(z) − g(y)| ≤ M |x − z| + M |z − y| = M |x − y| .




                                            220
