                                             Deterministic Partially Dynamic Single Source
                                                  Shortest Paths in Weighted Graphs
                                                                          Aaron Bernstein∗

                                                                         November 17, 2021
arXiv:1705.10097v1 [cs.DS] 29 May 2017




                                                                               Abstract
                                                   In this paper we consider the decremental single-source shortest
                                               paths (SSSP) problem, where given a graph G and a source node s the
                                               goal is to maintain shortest distances between s and all other nodes
                                               in G under a sequence of online adversarial edge deletions. In their
                                               seminal work, Even and Shiloach [JACM 1981] presented an exact
                                               solution to the problem in unweighted graphs with only O(mn) total
                                               update time over all edge deletions. Their classic algorithm was the
                                               state of the art for the decremental SSSP problem for three decades,
                                               even when approximate shortest paths are allowed.
                                                   The first improvement over the Even-Shiloach algorithm was given
                                               by Bernstein and Roditty [SODA 2011], who for the case of an un-
                                               weighted and undirected graph presented a (1 + )-approximate algo-
                                               rithm with constant query time and a total update time of O(n2+o(1) ).
                                               This work triggered a series of new results, culminating in a recent
                                               breakthrough of Henzinger, Krinninger and Nanongkai [FOCS 14], who
                                               presented a (1 + )-approximate algorithm for undirected weighted
                                               graphs whose total update time is near linear: O(m1+o(1) log(W )),
                                               where W is the ratio of the heaviest to the lightest edge weight in the
                                               graph. In this paper they posed as a major open problem the question
                                               of derandomizing their result.
                                                   Until very recently, all known improvements over the Even-Shiloach
                                               algorithm were randomized and required the assumption of a non-
                                               adaptive adversary. In STOC 2016, Bernstein and Chechik showed the
                                               first deterministic algorithm to go beyond O(mn) total update time:
                                               the algorithm is also (1 + )-approximate, and has total update time
                                               Õ(n2 ). In SODA 2017, the same authors presented an algorithm with
                                               total update time Õ(mn3/4 ). However, both algorithms are restricted
                                               to undirected, unweighted graphs. We present the first deterministic
                                               algorithm for weighted undirected graphs to go beyond the O(mn)
                                               bound. The total update time is Õ(n2 log(W )).
                                            ∗
                                              Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Berlin. Supported in part by the
                                         Einstein Grant at TU Berlin. bernstei@gmail.com




                                                                                    1
1    Introduction
The objective of dynamic graph algorithms is to handle an online sequence of
update operations while maintaining a desirable functionality on the graph,
e.g., the ability to answer shortest path queries. An update operation may
involve a deletion or insertion of an edge or a node, or a change in an edge’s
weight. In case the algorithm can handle only deletions and weight increases
it is called decremental, if it can handle only insertions and weight decreases
it is called incremental, and if it can handle both it is called fully dynamic.
     In this paper we consider the problem of (approximate) single source
shortest paths (SSSP) in unweighted undirected graphs, in the decremental
setting. Specifically, given an undirected graph G with positive weights and
a source node s, our algorithm needs to preform the following operations: 1)
Delete(e) – delete the edge e from the graph 2) Increase-Weight(e) – increase
the weight of e 3) Distance(v) – return the distance between s and v, i.e.,
dist(s, v), in the current graph G.
     Fully dynamic shortest paths has a very clear motivation, as computing
shortest paths in a graph is one of the fundamental problems of graph
algorithms, and many shortest path applications must deal with a graph that
is changing over time. The incremental setting is somewhat more restricted,
but is applicable to any setting in which the network is only expanding. The
decremental setting is often very important from a theoretical perspective,
as decremental shortest paths (and decremental single source shortest paths
especially) are used as a building block in a very large variety of fully dynamic
shortest paths algorithms; see e.g. [16, 17, 3, 2, 20, 1] to name just a few.
Decremental shortest paths can also have applications to non-dynamic graph
problems; see e.g. Madry’s paper on efficiently computing multicommodity
flows [18].
     We say that an algorithm has an approximation guarantee of α if its
output to the query Distance(v) is never smaller than the actual shortest
distance and is not more than α times the shortest distance. Dynamic
algorithms are typically judged by two parameters: the time it takes the
algorithm to adapt to an update (the Delete or Increase-Weight operation),
and the time to process a query (the Distance operation). Typically one
tries to keep the query time small (polylog or constant), while getting the
update time as low as possible. All the algorithms discussed in this paper
have constant query time, unless noted otherwise. In the decremental setting,
which is the focus of this paper, one usually considers the aggregate sum of
update times over the entire sequence of deletions, which is referred to as
the total update time.

Related Work: The most naive solution to dynamic SSSP is to simply
invoke a static SSSP algorithm after every deletion, which requires Õ(m) time,
using e.g. Dijkstra’s algorithm. (The Õ notation suppresses polylogarithmic

                                       2
factors.) For unweighted graphs, since there can be a total of m deletions,
the total update time for the naive implementation is thus Ω(m2 ).
    For fully dynamic SSSP, nothing better than the trivial O(m) time per
update is known. That is, we do not know how to do better than reconstruct-
ing from scratch after every edge update. For this reason, researchers have
turned to the decremental (or incremental) case in search of a better solution.
The first improvement stems all the way back to 1981, when Even and
Shiloach [8] showed how to achieve total update time O(mn) in unweighted
undirected graphs. A similar result was independently found by Dinitz [7].
This was later generalized to directed graphs by Henzinger and King [9].
This O(mn) total update time bound is still the state of art, and there are
conditional lower bounds [19, 15] showing that it is in fact optimal up to log
factors. (The reductions are to boolean matrix multiplication and the online
matrix-vector conjecture respectively).
    These lower bounds motivated the study of the approximate version
of this problem. In 2011, Bernstein and Roditty [6] presented the first
algorithm to go beyond the O(mn) bound of Even and Shiloach [8]: they
presented a (1 + )-approximate decremental
                                      √        SSSP algorithm for undirected
unweighted graphs with O(n2+O(1/ log n) ) = O(n2+o(1) ) total update time.
Henzinger, Krinninger and Nanongkai [13] later improved the total update
time to O(n1.8+o(1) + m1+o(1) ), and soon after the same authors [11] achieved
a close to optimal total update time of O(m1+o(1) log W ) in undirected
weighted graphs, where W is the largest weight in the graph (assuming
the minimum edge weight is 1). The same authors also showed that one
can go beyond O(mn) total update time bound in directed graphs (with a
(1 + ) approximation) [12, 14], although the state of art is still only a small
improvement: total update time O(mn0.9+o(1) log W ).
    However, every single one of these improvements over the O(mn) bound
relies on randomization, and has to make the additional assumption of a
non-adaptive adversary. In particular, they all assume that the updates
of the adversary are completely independent from the shortest paths or
distances returned to the user, i.e. that the updates are fixed in advance.
This makes these algorithms unsuitable for many settings, and also prevents
us from using them as a black box data structure. For this reason, it is
highly desirable to have deterministic algorithms for the problem.
    Very recently, in STOC 2016, Bernstein and Chechik presented the first
deterministic algorithm to go beyond O(mn) total update time, again with
a (1 + ) approximation. The total update time is Õ(n2 ) [4]. They followed
this up with a second deterministic algorithm [5] that has total update
             √
time Õ(n1.5 m) = Õ(mn3/4 ). Both algorithms rely on the same basic
technique, so this is currently the only know technique for deterministically
breaking through the O(mn) barrier. However, both results above were
limited to undirected, unweighted graphs. In this paper, we show that this
core technique can also be applied to weighted graphs.

                                       3
Our Results:

Theorem 1.1 Let G be an undirected graph with positive edge weights subject
to a sequence of edge deletions and weight increases, let s be a fixed source, and
let W be the ratio between the largest and smallest edge weights in the graph.
there exists a deterministic algorithm that maintains (1 + )-approximate
distances from s to every vertex in total update time O(m log2 (n) log(nW ) +
n2 log(n) log(nW )−2 ). The query time is O(1). (Like most decremental
shortest paths algorithms, our result can very easily be extended with the same
update time to the incremental case, where the update sequence contains edge
insertions and weight increases.)
     (Technical Note: In weighted graphs the number of updates can be very
large – i.e. if each update just increases some edge weight by some small  –
and so in addition to the total update time above, the algorithm necessarily
requires an additional O(1) per update. This O(1) factor is present in all
dynamic algorithms, and is typically omitted.)
     Our algorithm does not match the randomized state of the art of
Õ(m1+o(1) log(W )) [11], but it is optimal up to log factors for dense graphs,
and is the first deterministic algorithm to go beyond the O(mn) barrier in
weighted graphs. The algorithm is also much simpler than the randomized
algorithm for weighted graphs , and it does not incur the extra no(1) factor
present in the randomized algorithms. Thus, our algorithm is in fact faster
than all existing randomized √ algorithms for the problem in dense weighted
                         2−1/ log(n)
graphs where m = Ω(n                 ).
     As a final remark, we note that all previous deterministic algorithms to
go beyond the O(mn) bound [4, 5] have the strange drawback that there is no
obvious way to return an approximate path, only a distance. Our algorithm
unfortunately shares this drawback. The reason is that whereas in other
dynamic shortest path algorithms the distance returned corresponds to some
path in the graph, our distance involves an additive error that is bounded
through a structural claim about the non-existence of certain paths, but does
not itself correspond to an actual path (see Lemma 4.4 in [4], Lemma 5.3 in
[5], and Lemma 3.4 in our paper.)

Preliminaries: In our model, an undirected weighted graph is subject to
deletions and weight increases. All weights in the original graph are positive.
Let G = (V, E) always refer to the current versions of the graph. Let m refer
to the number of edges in the original graph, and n to the number of vertices.
Let w(u, v) refer to the weight of edge (u, v). Let us assume for simplicity
that the minimum weighted in the original graph is at least 1, and note that
since edge weights only increase, this will be true of all version of the graph.
Let W be the largest edge weight to ever appear in the graph. For any
pair of vertices u, v, let π(u, v) be the shortest u − v path in G (ties can be


                                        4
broken arbitrarily), and let dist(u, v) be the length of π(u, v). Let s be the
fixed source from which our algorithm must maintain approximate distances,
and let  refer to our approximation parameter; when the adversary queries
the distance to a vertex v, the algorithm’s guarantee is to return a distance
dist0 (v) such that dist(s, v) ≤ dist0 (s, v) ≤ (1 + O())dist(s, v). Note that
the (1 + O()) approximation factor can always be reduced to (1 + ) without
affecting the asymptotic running time by simply starting with a suitably
smaller 0 .
    Given any two sets S, T we define the set difference S \ T to contain all
elements s such that s ∈ S but s ∈ / T . We will measure the update time of
the dynamic subroutines used by our algorithm in terms of their total update
time over the entire sequence of edge changes. Note that although edges in
the main graph G are only being deleted, there may be edge insertions into
the auxiliary graphs used by the algorithm.


2    High Level Overview
Our algorithm extends the techniques in the STOC 2016 paper of Bernstein
and Chechik [4] from unweighted to weighted graphs. We now briefly sum-
marize their approach for unweighted graphs, aiming in this overview for
total update time Õ(n2.5 ) instead of Õ(n2 ). We start with the well known
fact that the classic Even and Shiloach algorithm has total update time
                                                       √
O(n2.5 ) [8] if we only care about distances less than n. So the hard case
is long distances in a dense graph. The key observation of [4] is that these
two problematic poles cannot coexist. In particular, Bernstein and Chechik
                                                   √
showed that any shortest path contains at most 3 n vertices of degree more
      √
than n. The basic reason is that if we look at every third high-degree
vertex on the shortest path, then these vertices must have mutually disjoint
neighborhoods, since otherwise there would be a shorter path between them
of length 2; the claim then follows because each high-degree vertex has at
      √
least n neighbors, and there are only n vertices in total. Thus, Bernstein
and Chechik show that the total contribution of high-degree vertices to the
shortest path is small. They then argue that this allows us to effectively
                                  √
”ignore” all vertices of degree ≥ n, at the cost of an additive error of only
    √
O( n). (we do not go into details of this ignoring here.) This completed
                                                 √
their result because for distances less than O( n−1 ) the classic Even and
Shiloach has total update time O(n2.5 −1 ), whereas for longer distances we
                   √
can afford the O( n) additive error from ignoring high degree vertices (it is
subsumed into the (1 + ) multiplicative error), so the resulting graph only
O(n1.5 ) edges.
     This technique has no easy extension to weighted graphs via scaling. To
                                                   √
see this, say there were two edge weights, 1 and n, and that every vertex
                                                √                  √
had very few incident edges of weight 1, but n edges of weight n. Then


                                      5
it is easy to see that distances in the graph could still be as large as n (as
             √
opposed to n in the unweighted case). But we cannot scale weights down,
or use some sort of hop-distance technique found elsewhere in the literature,
because although the heavy edges are the ones that cause the graph to be
dense, the shortest path could still contain many edges of weight 1. There is
thus no way in a weighted graph to ignore high-degree vertices.
     To overcome this, we switch focus to a notion of degree that considers
edge weights. In particular, note that in the example above, although the
graph was dense, the total number of edges of weight 1 was small. The first
step in our result is to formalize this observation, and show that although
we cannot simply ignore vertices of high degree, for any vertex v we can
ignore its low-weight incident edges if there are many of them. The proof
of this is similar to the proof that we can afford to ignore dense vertices in
unweighted graphs, but because we have to deal with many edge different
weights at once, the analysis is more sophisticated.
     The problem is that on its own ignoring large neighborhoods of low-weight
edges doesn’t help: the result is a graph that is guaranteed to only have a
small number of low-weight edges (and a medium number of medium-weight
edges), but the graph can still be very dense with high-weight edges. To
overcome this, we develop a variation on the standard Even and Shiloach
algorithm [8] which is more efficient at dealing with heavy edges but incurs
a (1 + ) approximation. The basic intuition is as follows, though the details
are somewhat complex. The classic algorithm guarantees that we only touch
an edge (u, v) when the distance dist(s, u) or dist(s, v) increases. But if
(u, v) has high weight, and dist(s, u) only increases by 1, then the distance
increase is insignificant with respect to the total weight on (u, v), and so we
can afford to ignore it. The number of times we touch edge (u, v) thus ends
up being proportional to −1 /w(u, v).
     All in all, our algorithm is based on the framework of Bernstein and
Chechik for unweighted graphs [4], but requires significant modifications both
to the high-level orientation (we need a new notion of sparsity that depends
on edge weights), as well as to the technical details. The basic approach
introduced in [4] of ignoring certain classes of dense vertices has proved quite
versatile and powerful (see the two very different applications of it in [4]
and [5]), and is currently the only known approach for going beyond O(mn)
deterministically, so our extension to weighted graphs might be useful in
further applications of this approach. Also, our extension of the classic Even
and Shiloach algorithm is presented in extreme generality, and might prove
useful in other dynamic shortest path problems where one has a graph that
has more edges of high weight than of low weight.




                                       6
3    The Threshold Graph
In our algorithm, each vertex will have a weight cutoff, denoted cut-off(v),
and will end up ”ignoring” the edges below that cutoff. As described in the
high-level overview above, the required degree to ignore edges goes up as the
edge weights go up.

Definition 3.1 Let the level of edge (u, v) be level(u, v) = blog(w(u, v))c.
For any vertex v, let I(v) contain all edges incident to v (I for incident), and
let Ii (v) contain all edges incident to v of level i or less. Now, for any positive
threshold τ (not necessarily integral), and any vertex v, we define cut-offτ (v)
to be the maximum index i such that Ii (v) contains at least τ 2i edges; if
no such index exists, cut-offτ (v) is set to 0. We say that an edge (u, v) is
τ -heavy if level(u, v) ≤ cut-offτ (u) OR level(u, v) ≤ cut-offτ (v); we say
that it is τ -light otherwise. Let heavy(τ ) be the set of all τ -heavy edges in G,
and let light(τ ) be the set of all τ -light edges in G. Let G[heavy(τ )] be the
graph (V, heavy(τ )). Note that the levels, cut-offs, heaviness, and lightness
are always defined with respect to the main graph G, never with respect to
auxiliary graphs. Since τ is usually clear from context, we often just write
cut-off(v), heavy, and light.

Definition 3.2 Given a graph G = (V, E) with |V | = n and |E| = m, and
a positive threshold τ , define the threshold graph Gτ = (Vτ , Eτ ) as follows

    • Vτ contains every vertex v ∈ V .

    • Vτ also contains an additional vertex c for each connected component
      C in the graph G[heavy(τ )] = (V, heavy(τ ))

    • Eτ contains all edges in light(τ ), with their original weights.

    • For every vertex v ∈ V , Eτ contains an edge from v to c of weight
      1/2, where c is the component vertex in Vτ \ V that corresponds to the
      component C in G[heavy(τ )] that contains v.

For any pair of vertices s, t ∈ V define πτ (s, t) to be the shortest path from s
to t in Gτ , and define distτ (s, t) to be the weight of this path.

Lemma 3.3 For any i, Gτ contains at most n edges of weight 1/2 that are
not in E (one per vertex in V ), as well at most O(n · τ · 2i ) edges at level i.
Proof: An edge (u, v) ∈ E of level i is only in Eτ if (u, v) is τ -light, i.e. if
cut-off(u) < i AND cut-off(v) < i. But a vertex with cut-off less than i
has by definition less than 2i τ incident edges of level i.                    2
   The following Lemma is the weighted analogue of Lemma 4.4 in [4], but
the most direct extension of that proof to the weighted case would analyze
each of the log(W ) edge levels separately, and thus multiply the error by

                                         7
log(W ), eventually leading to a log3 (W ) factor in the total running time
of the algorithm. To avoid this extra error, we need a somewhat more
sophisticated analysis than in Lemma 4.4 of [4]

Lemma 3.4 For any graph G = (V, E), any positive integer threshold τ ,
and any pair of vertices s, t ∈ V :
                                                               14n
                  distτ (s, t) ≤ dist(s, t) < distτ (s, t) +
                                                                τ
.
Proof: It is not hard to see that we have distτ (s, t) ≤ dist(s,T       t). Simply
consider the shortest s−t path π(s, t) ∈ G. All the edges in π(s, t) light(τ )
are also in Gτ . Otherwise, for any τ -heavy edge (u, v) on π(s, t), recall that
the weight w(u, v) in G is always at least 1, and note that because edge (u, v)
is τ -heavy, the vertices u and v must be in the same connected component
in G[heavy(τ )], and so there is a path of length 1 from u to v in Gτ : the
edge of weight 1/2 from u to the component vertex c, and then a second
edge from c to v.
     We now prove that dist(s, t) ≤ distτ (s, t) + 14n     τ . Let πτ (s, t) be the
                                                         ∗
shortest s − t path in Gτ . Consider the edge set E ⊆ E which contains all
the τ -light edges of πτ (s, t) (theseSedges are also
                                                   T in E), and all τ -heavy edges
in E. That is, E ∗ = heavy(τ ) (light(τ ) πτ (s, t)). Let G∗ = (V, E ∗ ).
We first observe that there exists an s − t path in G∗ . We construct this path
by following πτ (s, t). πτ (s, t) contains τ -light edges, which are by definition
in G∗ , as well as subpaths of length 2 of the form (v, c) ◦ (c, w), where v and
w are in the same connected component C in G[heavy(τ )]. But since v and
w are in the same connected component, there is a path of only heavy edges
connecting them, and all heavy edges are in G∗ .
     Now, let π ∗ (s, t) be the shortest s − t path in G∗ . Let dist∗ (s, t) be the
length of π ∗ (s, t). Since G∗ is a subgraph of G, we know that dist(s, t) ≤
dist∗ (s, t). We now show that
                                                         14n
                         dist∗ (s, t) < distτ (s, t) +                          (1)
                                                          τ
which will complete the proof of the lemma.
    We prove Equation 1 by showing that all the heavy edges on π ∗ (s, t) have
total weight at most 14n                                   ∗
                         τ : since all the light edges on π (s, t) are by definition
also on πτ (s, t), this proves the equation.
    Let VH∗ be the set of vertices on π ∗ (s, t) that are incident to at least
one heavy edge on π ∗ (s, t). Now, for any vertex v ∈ VH∗ , let ball(v)
contain v and all vertices u ∈ V , such that there is an edge (u, v) with
level(u, v) ≤ cut-off(v). Note that by definition of cut-off(v), we have
|ball(v)| ≥ 2cut-off(v) τ .


                                         8
    Now, let P be an ordering of the vertices in π ∗ (s, t) in non-increasing
order of cut-off: so if i < j then cut-off(P [i]) ≥ cut-off(P [j]). We will now
construct a set IV of independent vertices in VH∗ as follows. We start with
IV empty. Now, go through the vertices in VH∗ according to their order in
P (so in non-increasing order of cut-off), and for each v do the following: if
ball(v) is disjoint from ball(u) for every u ∈ IV, add v to IV. Clearly if
v and w are independent then ball(v) and ball(w) are disjoint. But then
recalling that for any v, |ball(v)| ≥ 2cut-off(v) τ , and that the total number
of vertices in the graph is n, we have

                                   2cut-off(v) ≤ n/τ
                             X
                                                                              (2)
                            v∈IV

    We will end up showing that each independent vertex v is ”responsible”
for at most 14 · 2cut-off(v) weight from heavy edges on π ∗ (s, t), which will
complete our proof. We say that a non-independent vertex u belongs to
independent vertex v if cut-off(v) ≥ cut-off(u) and ball(u) and ball(v)
are non-disjoint. By our independence construction, every non-independent
vertex u belongs to one or more independent vertices.

Claim 3.5 If v is independent, and u belongs to v, then the distance from v
to u along π ∗ (s, t) is at most 4 · 2cut-off(v) .
Proof: Say, for contradiction, that this was not the case.       T Then, since
u belongs to v, there must be some vertex z ∈ ball(v) ball(u). But
by definition of ball we have level(v, z) ≤ cut-off(v) and level(u, z) ≤
cut-off(u) ≤ cut-off(v), so by definition of level there is a path from u to v
through z of weight at most 4 · 2cut-off(v) , which contradicts π ∗ (s, t) being
the shortest path in G∗ .                                                       2
     Now, given any τ -heavy edge (x, y), let the dominant endpoint of (x, y)
be the endpoint that comes earlier in P : so in particular, if x is dominant
then cut-off(x) ≥ cut-off(y). We say that a τ -heavy edge (x, y) belongs to
independent vertex v if the dominant endpoint of (x, y) belongs to v. Note
that every τ -heavy edge in π ∗ (s, t) belongs to at least one independent vertex.
We now show that if v is independent, then the total weight of τ -heavy edges
that belong to v is at most 14 · 2cut-off(v) . Otherwise (for contradiction),
at least half that weight would come before or after v, so w.l.o.g, let us say
that there is at least 7 · 2cut-off(v) weight of edges that belong to v and
come after v on π ∗ (s, t) – i.e., are closer to t than v is. Let us consider the
τ -heavy edge (x, y) that belongs to v and is closest to t, and say that y is
closer to t than x. Note that the distance from v to y along π ∗ (s, t) is at
least 7 · 2cut-off(v) , so by Claim 3.5, y cannot belong to v. Thus, since edge
(x, y) belongs to v, x must be the dominant endpoint and belong to v. But if
x belongs to v and dominates y then cut-off(y) ≤ cut-off(x) ≤ cut-off(v),
and the only way edge (x, y) could be τ -heavy is if level(x, y) ≤ cut-off(v),

                                        9
so w(x, y) ≤ 2 · 2cut-off(v) , so the distance from v to x along π ∗ (s, t) is
still at least 7 · 2cut-off(v) − 2 · 2cut-off(v) = 5 · 2cut-off(v) , which again
contradicts Claim 3.5. Thus, the total weight of heavy edges on π ∗ (s, t)
is at most 14 v∈IV 2cut-off(v) , which combined with Equation 2 proves
                P
Equation 1, which proves the lemma.                                           2
     Maintaining the threshold graph Gτ as G changes is easy, because the
only hard part is maintaining the connected components C in G[heavy(τ )],
and dynamic connectivity in undirected graphs is a well-studied problem
that admits deterministic O(log2 (n)) update time. The details are essentially
identical to those for unweighted graphs (see Lemmas 4.5 and 4.6 in [4]), so
we omit the proofs of the following two lemmas.

Lemma 3.6 Given a graph G subject to a decremental update sequence,
and a positive integer threshold τ , we can maintain the graph Gτ in total
time O(m log2 (n)). Moreover, the total number of edges of weight 1/2 ever
inserted into the graph is O(n log(n)), and the total number of edges (u, v)
that have level(u, v) = i when inserted is at most nτ 2i .

Lemma 3.7 Given a graph G subject to a decremental update sequence, a
positive integer threshold τ , and a pair of vertices u, v in G, the distance
distτ (u, v) in Gτ never decreases as the graph G changes.


4    An Extension of the Even and Shiloach Algo-
     rithm
In the paper of Bernstein and Chechik for unweighted graphs [4], the threshold
graph ended up being sparse, and so it was easy to efficiently compute
distances within it using the standard Even and Shiloach algorithm with
total update time O(mn) [8]. In our paper, however, the threshold graph
is only sparse with respect to low-weight edges; that is, because heaviness
and lightness is defined in terms of edge weights, the threshold graph can
have many edge of high weight. We now present a modification of the Even
and Shiloach algorithm that can deal more efficiently with edges of high
weight, which makes it perfectly suited to our threshold graph, which has
mostly high-weight edges. Like the standard Even and Shiloach algorithm,
our extension runs up to a certain depth bound d.

Definition 4.1 Given any number d, the function boundd (x) is equal to x
if x ≤ d, and to ∞ otherwise.
    Note that to apply to the threshold-graph Gτ , the algorithm must be able
to handle insertions, as long as they do not change distances. (See Lemmas
3.6, 3.7). To this end we need the following definition:


                                      10
Definition 4.2 Let G = (V, E) be a graph with positive weights ≥ 1, subject
a dynamic update sequence of insertions, deletions, and weight-increases. In
such a context, let A contain the set of ALL edges (u, v) to appear in G at
any point during the update sequence (A for all): if an edge (u, v) is deleted
and then inserted again, we consider this as two separate edges in A. For
every edge (u, v) ∈ A, let wo (u, v) (o for original) be the weight of (u, v)
when it first appears in A (this might be in the original graph itself ), and let
levelo (u, v) = blog(wo (u, v))c.

Lemma 4.3 Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph with positive integer
edge weights, s a fixed source, and d ≥ 1 a depth bound. Say that G is subject
to a dynamic sequence of edge insertions, deletions, and weight increases,
with the property that distances in G never decrease as a result of an update.
Then, there exists an algorithm WSES(G, s, d) (stands for weight-sensitive
Even and Shiloach) that maintains approximate distances dist0 (s, v) with
                  0
dist(s, v) ≤ dist
              P (s, v) ≤dboundd (dist(s, v))(1 + ), and has total update
time O(nd + (u,v)∈A wo (u,v) ).
Proof: Throughout the proof of this lemma, we will often rely on the
following function:

Definition 4.4 Given any positive real numbers β and x, let roundβ (x) be
the smallest number y > x that is an integer multiple of β.
    Our algorithm WSES follows the basic procedure of the classic Even
and Shiloach algorithm [8] (denoted ES), with a few modifications. For this
reason we can describe many of the guarantees of ES without looking under
the hood for exactly how they are implemented, since we keep exactly the
same implementation. We only modify the classic algorithm in a few key
points. Recall the definition of A and wo (u, v) from Definition 4.2. Since
weights only increase, we always have w(u, v) ≥ wo (u, v).
    The ES algorithm maintains for each vertex v a distance label δ(v) with
the property that dist(s, v) = δ(v). In particular, it maintains the invariant
that δ(s) = 0, and that if (u, v) ∈ E, then δ(v) ≤ δ(u) + w(u, v). Our
algorithm will also maintain a label δ(v) for every v, but since we only need
an approximation, we guarantee a weaker invariant:

Invariant 4.5 (Approximation) We always have δ(s) = 0. If p is the
parent of v in the tree then δ(v) ≥ δ(p) + w(p, v). Also, for all (u, v) ∈ E,
δ(v) ≤ δ(u) + w(u, v) + wo (u, v).
Approximation Analysis: We now show that as long as the Approximation
Invariant is preserved, we always have dist(s, v) ≤ δ(v) ≤ (1 + )dist(s, v).
The fact that δ(v) ≥ dist(s, v) follows trivially for the same reason as in
classic ES. To prove the other side, consider the shortest path π(s, v) in G.
Let the vertices in π(s, v) be s0 , s1 , ..., sq = v. We show by induction that

                                       11
δ(si ) ≤ (1+)dist(s, si ). The claim is trivially true for i = 0 because δ(s) = 0
at all times. Now, say the claim is true for si , and note that dist(s, si+1 ) =
dist(s, si ) + w(si , si+1 ). Now, by the Approximation Invariant, we have
δ(si+1 ) ≤ δ(si )+w(si , si+1 )+wo (si , si+1 ) ≤ δ(si )+(1+)w(si , si+1 ) (the last
step follows from w(u, v) ≥ wo (u, v)). But then by the induction hypothesis
we have δ(si+1 ) ≤ (1 + )(dist(s, si ) + w(si , si+1 )) = (1 + )dist(s, si+1 ).
    We must now show how to efficiently maintain the Approximation Invari-
ant. The classic ES algorithm does O(1) time per update for basic setup,
and otherwise all the work comes from charging constant time operations
to various edges (u, v) and vertices v. The update time invariant in classic
ES is as follows: we only charge vertex v when δ(v) increases, and we only
charge edge (u, v) when δ(u) or δ(v) increases. Since weights are positive
integers, every δ(u) must increase by at least 1, and since we only go up
to distance d, each δ(v) increases at most d times, which yields O(md). To
improve upon this, our algorithm maintains a slightly different update time
invariant

Invariant 4.6 (Update-Time) A vertex v is only charged when δ(v) in-
creases. An edge (u, v) is only charged when either roundwo (u,v) (δ(u)) or
roundwo (u,v) (δ(v)) increases.
    Since for any β, roundβ (δ(v)) can increase at most d/β before it exceeds
d, it is clear that the Update-Time Invariant guarantees the total update
bound of the lemma.
Maintaining the Two Invariants: Now, let us recall how the standard
ES algorithm works. This algorithm only handles deletions, so that is what
we focus on first: we later show how to extend our algorithm to handle weight-
increases and insertions that do not change distances. We will emphasize the
parts of classic ES that we will later change in our modified algorithm. First
off, each vertex v always maintains label information about its neighbors:
so in particular, for each edge (u, v), vertex v stores a copy δv (u) = δ(u)
(first-difference). The algorithm maintains a shortest path tree T from
the root s. We say an edge (u, v) is a tree edge if (u, v) ∈ T , and a non-tree
edge if (u, v) ∈ E \ T . Whenever a non-tree edge is deleted, shortest distances
do not change, so the algorithm does not have to do much. Now, consider the
deletion of a tree edge (u, v) where u is the parent of v in T . The algorithm
checks in constant time, by cleverly storing local label information δv (z), if v
has another edge to a vertex z with δ(v) = δv (z) + w(z, v). If yes, v can be
reconnected without a label increase, the edge (z, v) is added to the tree and
all distance labels remain the same so we are done. If not, label δ(v) must
increase, which in turn affects of the children of v, so The algorithm then
examines all the children of v and checks if they can be attached to the tree
without increasing their distance in a similar manner. (second-difference)
Some vertices will fail to be reattached with the same label, so the algorithm


                                         12
keeps a list of all vertices that need to be re-attached at a higher label. Each
time the algorithm discovers that a label δ(v) must increase, it increases it
by 1 (which is the most optimistic new label it can get) and returns it to the
needs-reattachment list in at attempt to reattach v with this higher label.
The algorithm examines the vertices in the list in an increasing order of their
label. Note that the label of a vertex may be increased many times as a result
of an update. Whenever the label δ(v) of a vertex v changes, the algorithm
must adjust δu (v) for every edge (u, v) in the graph. (third-difference.)
     Note that the algorithm above fails to satisfy the Update-Time Invariant,
because although a vertex v is only charged when δ(v) increases (otherwise
the search stops at v and can be charged to the edge that led to v), edge
(u, v) is charged whenever δ(u) or δ(v) increase even just by 1. In particular,
the invariant is not preserved because of the work in second-difference
and third-difference. The changes we implement are simple. We start
with first-difference: each vertex v will still store local label information
δv (u), but now it might be slightly inaccurate. In particular, we always have

Invariant 4.7 (Local-Information) δ(u) ≤ δv (u) ≤ roundwo (u,v) (δ(u)).
    A vertex v will now choose its parent based on the slightly inaccurate
local labels δu (v) instead of the true label δ(u). Let p(v) be the parent of v
in the tree.

Invariant 4.8 (Parent-Choice)
p(v) = argmaxu∈neighbors(v) {δv (u) + w(u, v)} and δ(v) = δv (p(v)) +
w(p(v), v).
    The Parent-Choice and Local-Information invariants combined clearly
guarantee the Approximation Invariant. We must now show how to maintain
these efficiently. This leads us to third-difference: when δ(v) changes,
we only update δu (v) for every vertex u when roundwo (u,v) (δ(v)) increases.
This ensures that we satisfy the Update-Time Invariant for this step of
the algorithm, while still ensuring that all local information adheres to the
Local-Information Invariant.
    Note that to implement third-difference in the above paragraph
while maintaining the Update-Time invariant, we need a data structure for
every vertex v, such that whenever δ(v) increases, the data structure returns
all vertices u for which roundwo (u,v) (δ(v)) increased. This is easy to do
because wo (u, v) is completely fixed for each edge, i.e. it does not change
as the graph changes. Each vertex v will have d buckets, where bucket i
contains all edges (u, v) such that roundwo (u,v) (i − 1) < roundwo (u,v) (i).
This initialization requires O(nd) time to create d buckets for vertex, and
then each edge (u, v) is placed
                              P in d/wo (u,  v) buckets for vertices u and v,
                                           d
leading to total time O(nd + (u,v)∈A wo (u,v) ), as desired. Once the buckets



                                      13
are initialized, whenever δ(v) increases from i to j, δ(v) simply notifies all
edges in buckets i + 1, i + 2, ..., j
    The last violation of the Update-Time Invariant was in second-difference.
When δ(v) changes, instead of processing all children u, we only need to pro-
cess those for which δu (v) changes. But in our modified algorithm this only
occurs when roundwo (u,v) (δ(v)) increases, in keeping with the Update-Time
Invariant.
    We have thus shown how to modify classical ES in a way that maintains
the Approximation Invariant and the Update-Time Invariant while processing
deletions. Increase-Weight(u, v) is processed in the same way: if (u, v) was
not a tree edge we do nothing, and otherwise if u was the parent of v, then
some invariants will be violated for v, and we fix these in exactly the same
way as for a deletion.
    We now turn to processing insertions. In classical ES, it is trivial to
process an insertion of (u, v) that does decrease distances because the distance
labels do not change, so we just spend O(1) time fixing update δv (u) and
δu (v). In our algorithm, however, a strange difficulty arises: because our
labels are approximate, even if the insertion of (u, v) does not decrease
distances, it might nonetheless violate the Approximation Invariant: say that
dist(u) = dist(v) = 1000 but δ(v) = 1000(1 + ) while δ(u) = 1000 and we
insert and edge of weight 1. In this case we cannot afford to decrease δ(v)
because our update time analysis relied on non-decreasing labels. But note
that although v now violates the Approximation Invariant, δ(v) is still a
(1 + ) approximation to dist(s, v), because dist(s, v) never decreases. We
thus rely on the idea used in the ”Monotone” ES tree of Henzinger et al.
[10]: we simply never decrease distance labels. More formally, our distance
labels will satisfy the following relaxed Approximation Invariant: after every
update, for every vertex v, either δ(v) satisfies the standard Approximation
Invariant, or δ(v) = δ old (v), where δ old (v) was the distance label before
the update. By an induction on time, it is easy to see that with this relaxed
Approximation Invariant, we still always have that δ(v) ≤ (1 + )dist(s, v).
If δ(v) satisfies the approximation invariant, the proof is the same as in
the Approximation Analysis above. Otherwise, we have δ(v) = δ old (v), in
which case by our time induction we have δ old (v) ≤ (1 + )distold (s, v),
and since our updates are guaranteed not to decrease distances, we have
distold (s, v) ≤ dist(s, v) and we are done.                                  2


5    The decremental SSSP algorithm
We now put together all our ingredients to proving the main Theorem 1.1.

Lemma 5.1 For any threshold τ , and depth bound d = n−1 τ −1 , we can
maintain approximate distances dist0τ (s, v) in total time O(m log2 (n) +


                                     14
n2 log(n)−2 ), with the property that dist0τ (s, v) ≤ (1+)boundd (distτ (s, v))+
d
Proof: First we use Lemma 3.6 to maintain the threshold graph Gτ in
O(m log2 (n)) total update time. Then, setting β = 2n          d
                                                                  , for each edge
(u, v) ∈ Gτ , we round the edge weight w(u, v) up to the nearest multiple of β.
It is easy to see that since every shortest path in the graph contains at most n
edges, this weight change incurs an additive error of at most nβ = d/2. Since
all edge weights are now multiple of β, we can divide all edge weights by factor
of β without changing shortest paths, which results in a scaled graph Gsτ
with integral weights for which we have to maintain shortest distances up to
depth ds = d/β = 2n−1 . We now run WSES(Gsτ , s, ds ) in the scaled graph,
and then scale the resulting distances back up by β. Since WSES is a (1 + )
approximation, we get: dist0τ (s, v) ≤ (1 + )boundd (distτ (s, v) + d/2) ≤
(1 + )boundd distτ (s, v) + d.
                                                                                     s
     Recall that the total update time of WSES(Gsτ , s, ds ) is O(nds + (u,v)∈A wod(u,v) ).
                                                                        P

We know that O(nds ) = O(n2 −1 ). Now, Gsτ contains two types of edges:
edges between a vertex v ∈ V and a component vertex c ∈ Vτ \ C, and
τ -light edges from the original graph. By Lemma 3.6, the total number of
component edges ever inserted is O(n log(n)), and because of our scaling
they all have weight at least 1, so their total contribution to the sum is at
most n log(n)−1 · ds = O(n2 log(n)−2 ). For edges of the original graph,
let us look at the contribution of all edges (u, v) with levelo (u, v) = i. By
Lemmas 3.3 and 3.6, the total number of such edges is at most O(nτ 2i ).
Each such edge has wo (u, v) ≥ 2i , which has been scaled down by β in Gsτ ,
                        s
and so contributes d2βi = 2di to the sum. Thus in total we have that each
level i contributes a total of O(nτ d−1 ) = O(n2 −2 ).
     We complete the proof by arguing that there are only log(n) contributing
levels. For simplicity, let us look at the graph Gτ before scaling. First off,
edges of weight more than d = n−1 /τ can be ignored, since we do not care
about distances greater than d (we are working with boundd ). Secondly,
from the definition of cut-off(v), an edge (u, v) of weight less than 1/(2τ ) will
always be heavy and so never appear in Gτ : if 2τ w(u, v) ≤ 2level(u,v) τ < 1,
then cut-off(u) and cut-off(v) are always at least as large as level(u, v), so
(u, v) will remain heavy. Thus, the only edges that appear in our graph have
weight between 1/(2τ ) and n/(τ ), which corresponds to log(n/) = O(log(n))
different levels of edge weights.                                              2

Lemma 5.2 For any distance bound d, with total update time O(m log2 (n) +
n2 log(n)−2 ) we can maintain approximate distances distd (s, v) to all ver-
tices v such that
dist(s, v) ≤ distd (s, v) ≤ boundd (dist(s, v)) + 15d
Proof: Set τ = n/(d). By Lemma 5.1, in total update time O(m log2 (n) +
n2 log(n)−2 ) we can maintain values dist0τ (s, v) with distτ (s, v) ≤ dist0τ (s, v) ≤

                                        15
(1 + )boundd (distτ (s, v)) + d. Now, By Lemma 3.4 we have dist(s, v) −
14n/τ ≤ distτ (s, v) ≤ dist(s, v). Plugging in our value τ = n/(d) we
get dist(s, v) − 14d ≤ distτ (s, v) ≤ dist(s, v). Thus, we have dist(s, v) −
14d ≤ dist0τ (s, v) ≤ boundd (dist(s, v)) + d. If we return distd (s, v) =
dist0τ (s, v) + 14d, we get the bound in the lemma.                            2
    It is now easy to prove our main Theorem 1.1. Observe that the maximum
distance we could possibly see is nW . Thus, for each i = 0, 1, 2, 3...dlog(nW )e,
we use Lemma 5.2 to maintain δi (v) = dist2i (s, v). By Lemma 5.2, the total
update time is the desired O(m log2 (n) log(nW ) + n2 log(n) log(nW )−2 ).
We then output as our final answer: dist0 (v) = mini {δi (v)}. Since for each
i we have δi ≥ dist(v), we have dist0 (v) ≥ dist(s, v). We now need to
show that dist0 (v) ≤ (1 + O())dist(s, v). It is not hard to see that for
i = dlog(dist(s, v))e, we end up with δi (v) ≤ dist(s, v) + 30dist(s, v), as
desired.


6    Conclusions
In this paper we presented the first deterministic decremental SSSP algorithm
for weighted undirected graphs that goes beyond the Even-Shiloach bound
of O(mn) total update time. Previously such a result was only known for
unweighted undirected graphs. The two main open questions are further
improving this total update time, and going beyond O(mn) deterministically
for directed graphs. Finally, we recall from the introduction that all existing
deterministic o(mn) results including ours are only able to return approximate
shortest distances, not the paths themselves.




                                       16
References
[1] Ittai Abraham, Shiri Chechik, and Kunal Talwar. Fully dynamic all-
    pairs shortest paths: Breaking the o(n) barrier. In Approximation,
    Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Tech-
    niques, APPROX/RANDOM 2014, September 4-6, 2014, Barcelona,
    Spain, pages 1–16, 2014.

[2] Surender Baswana, Ramesh Hariharan, and Sandeep Sen. Maintaining
    all-pairs approximate shortest paths under deletion of edges. In Pro-
    ceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
    Algorithms, SODA, pages 394–403. Society for Industrial and Applied
    Mathematics, 2003.

[3] Aaron Bernstein. Fully dynamic (2 + epsilon) approximate all-pairs
    shortest paths with fast query and close to linear update time. In
    Proceedings of the 50th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of
    Computer Science, FOCS, pages 693–702, 2009.

[4] Aaron Bernstein and Shiri Chechik. Deterministic decremental single
    source shortest paths: beyond the o(mn) bound. In Proceedings of the
    48th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages
    389–397, 2016.

[5] Aaron Bernstein and Shiri Chechik. Deterministic partially dynamic
    single source shortest paths for sparse graphs. In Proceedings of the
    Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
    SODA 2017, Barcelona, Spain, Hotel Porta Fira, January 16-19, pages
    453–469, 2017.

[6] Aaron Bernstein and Liam Roditty. Improved dynamic algorithms for
    maintaining approximate shortest paths under deletions. In Proceed-
    ings of the Twenty-Second Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete
    Algorithms, SODA, pages 1355–1365, 2011.

[7] Yefim Dinitz. Dinitz’ algorithm: The original version and even’s version.
    In Theoretical Computer Science, Essays in Memory of Shimon Even,
    pages 218–240, 2006.

[8] Shimon Even and Yossi Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem.
    Journal of the ACM, 28(1):1–4, 1981.

[9] Monika Henzinger and Valerie King. Fully dynamic biconnectivity
    and transitive closure. In 36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
    Computer Science, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 23-25 October 1995, pages
    664–672, 1995.


                                    17
[10] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai. Dy-
     namic approximate all-pairs shortest paths: Breaking the o(mn) barrier
     and derandomization. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Symposium on
     Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pages 538–547, 2013.
[11] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai.
     Decremental single-source shortest paths on undirected graphs in near-
     linear total update time. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Symposium
     on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pages 146–155, 2014.
[12] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai.
     Sublinear-time decremental algorithms for single-source reachability and
     shortest paths on directed graphs. In Proceedings of the 46th Annual
     ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 674–683,
     2014.
[13] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai. A
     subquadratic-time algorithm for decremental single-source shortest paths.
     In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
     Discrete Algorithms, SODA, pages 1053–1072, 2014.
[14] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, and Danupon Nanongkai. Im-
     proved algorithms for decremental single-source reachability on directed
     graphs. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Colloquium, ICALP,
     pages 725–736, 2015.
[15] Monika Henzinger, Sebastian Krinninger, Danupon Nanongkai, and
     Thatchaphol Saranurak. Unifying and strengthening hardness for dy-
     namic problems via the online matrix-vector multiplication conjecture.
     In Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM on Symposium on
     Theory of Computing (STOC), pages 21–30, 2015.
[16] Monika Rauch Henzinger and Valerie King. Maintaining minimum
     spanning forests in dynamic graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 31(2):364–374,
     2001.
[17] Valerie King. Fully dynamic algorithms for maintaining all-pairs shortest
     paths and transitive closure in digraphs. In Proceedings of the 40th
     Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pages
     81–91, 1999.
[18] Aleksander Madry. Faster approximation schemes for fractional multi-
     commodity flow problems via dynamic graph algorithms. In Proceedings
     of the 42nd ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2010,
     Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 5-8 June 2010, pages 121–130, 2010.
[19] Liam Roditty and Uri Zwick. On dynamic shortest paths problems.
     Algorithmica, 61(2):389–401, 2011.

                                     18
[20] Liam Roditty and Uri Zwick. Dynamic approximate all-pairs shortest
     paths in undirected graphs. SIAM J. Comput., 41(3):670–683, 2012.




                                  19
